<|startoftext|>
In the U.K., checking your HIV status is now nearly as easy as taking a pregnancy test. BioSure UK has begun selling a $45 take-home HIV test that lets customers prick their fingers, smear the blood on a testing stick, and get their HIV results within 15 minutes.

BioSure’s test goes beyond any of the at-home tests available on the U.S. market, which are either not as fast or not as accurate. When asked if any test similar to BioSure’s new take-home test was in development, Tara Goodin, a press officer for the Food and Drug Administration, said: “The FDA cannot confirm the existence of or comment on any current/pending product applications.”

The FDA has approved two take-home HIV tests, but neither has all the strengths of the BioSure test. The Home Access HIV-1 Test System lets patients collect blood at home, but it must then be sent to a clinic for testing. (Users get their results by calling the company.) OraQuick, on the other hand, is an oral-based at-home test that does let users see their results immediately, but it has an 8.3 percent chance of a false negative. (In contrast, BioSure’s blood test has a much lower 0.2 percent chance that a person who is really HIV positive will test negative.)

Both countries have tried to make it easier to be tested. The United Kingdom’s National Health Service offers free HIV testing. In the United States, the Affordable Care Act designates HIV testing as a preventive service, meaning that all insurers must cover it without charging a co-pay.

But if the goal is to let patients test as accurately as possible at home, the United States is falling behind.

The two countries have roughly comparable rates of undetected HIV infections, although they use different methods to make those estimates. In the U.K., Public Health England, a division of the Department of Health, began testing anonymized blood samples that had been collected for other reasons. It adjusted the raw data to mirror the demographics of the U.K. as a whole and estimated that in 2012, 22 percent of all residents with HIV were undiagnosed.

The United States, meanwhile, uses new later-stage HIV cases to estimate who must have been infected but undiagnosed four years earlier. In a 2012 study, researchers estimated that in 2008, approximately 20 percent of all HIV-positive people in the United State were undiagnosed.

That suggests that both countries still face serious gaps in diagnosis. The British test will probably make it easier for people to be screened for the first time and will allow people to re-screen themselves more frequently. (There is a lag of about three months between initial HIV infection and the point at which it is detectable.)

A sizable fraction of the undiagnosed may be people who have been tested, just not recently enough. In a 2008 study of British men who frequented commercial gay venues, 42 percent of the men who tested positive for HIV had never been diagnosed with HIV. This wasn’t because they had never been screened; 81 percent of the undiagnosed men had been tested for HIV previously. Sixty-two percent of these previously screened men erroneously believed themselves to be HIV-negative.

Adopting some version of the British at-home test could help Americans who have already been tested keep up their screening schedule. There’s a benefit in regular screening, even for patients who don’t wind up connecting with a doctor.

In a small British study of 98 gay and bisexual men who were newly diagnosed as HIV-positive, the use of condoms after the diagnosis doubled relative to the rates of use pre-diagnosis (31 percent to 61 percent of respondents). And because the incidence of other sexually transmitted infections declined for these men, after the diagnosis, the scientists had reason to believe the self-reports of condom usage were accurate.

The U.K.’s new at-home HIV test won’t reach all the undiagnosed or guarantee that the people who test positive wind up receiving the care they need from a doctor, but letting people check their status quickly and accurately is likely to produce cascading positive effects, as HIV-positive people find it easier to seek care for themselves, warn past partners about exposure, and reduce risk for future partners. America needs to catch up.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story lists the test cost of $45. However, the story would have offered a more complete picture of cost if it had estimated the annual cost of regular screening and provided costs for other tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Of the many embarrassing health statistics in this country, the huge number of unwanted pregnancies is perhaps the easiest to rectify. Nearly half the pregnancies among American women are unintended — unwanted now or within the next two years. And among sexually active teenagers and young adults, the rate of unplanned pregnancy is even higher.

Fully 43 percent of these pregnancies follow incorrect or inconsistent uses of contraception. Of course, some couples fail to use any contraception, but others rely on contraceptive methods that have significant failure rates even when properly used.

These facts prompted a committee of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists this month to urge its members to introduce women of all ages to the most effective and underused methods of reversible contraception: IUDs and hormonal implants. Once inserted, these long-acting methods remove the risk of patient error when a sexually active woman wishes to avoid pregnancy. Their effectiveness rivals that of sterilization.

In a 2012 study of 7,486 women aged 14 to 45, long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARCs, were shown to be 20 times as effective in preventing pregnancy than the pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring. The risk of an unwanted pregnancy with these other methods was especially high among women under 21, whose rate of unintended pregnancy was nearly double that among older women.

Yet fewer than 10 percent of sexually active women currently rely on long-acting reversible contraception, and a major reason is doctors’ reluctance to recommend them. Only about half of obstetrician-gynecologists offer the implant, the committee said, and many physicians use “overly restrictive criteria” when deciding whether to recommend an IUD, especially for adolescents and women who have not yet been pregnant.

Greater LARC use can reduce birthrates among adolescents and, for women of all ages, a reliance upon abortion to prevent unwanted births, the experts wrote in the October issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

Furthermore, the higher upfront costs of LARC methods are no longer an impediment for women with insurance obtained through the Affordable Care Act. Megan L. Kavanaugh, a senior research scientist at the Guttmacher Institute, which studies reproductive health, said in an interview that “all new insurance plans obtained through the act’s exchanges fully cover all contraceptive methods without any co-payments or other out-of-pocket costs.” Title X family planning clinics and Planned Parenthood clinics are more likely than other sources to offer LARC methods, she said.

In a paper published two years ago, European experts predicted that “after decades of dominance by ‘the Pill,’ it is likely that in the future, long-acting reversible contraceptives will become the first-line contraceptive option, owing to their superior contraceptive effectiveness in real-life use, cost effectiveness as well as their established safety profile.”

Here is a summary of the advantages of LARCs, listed by the committee:

■ They are independent of the sex act and do not depend on the user’s motivation and reliability.

■ Compared with other reversible methods, they are more effective and have higher rates of continued use and user satisfaction.

■ There is no need to get frequent supplies and no additional costs once they are inserted, making them highly cost effective.

■ There are few contraindications for their use, and fertility returns quickly after removal.

Furthermore, the committee stated, “almost all women are appropriate candidates” for the LARC methods currently available. They are an implant that slowly releases the hormone etonogestrel over a period of three years, and four IUDs: the copper T that can be used for up to 10 years, and three IUDs containing the hormone levonorgestrel (two approved for use up to three years, and one approved for up to five years).

In real-world use, these methods are associated with a one-year pregnancy rate of less than one per 100 women. In contrast, women using the pill, patch or vaginal ring face an annual pregnancy risk of 9 percent; the diaphragm is associated with a 12 percent pregnancy rate, and with condoms, cervical caps and sponges, the rate is 18 percent.

“While there is no one best contraceptive method for every woman or every couple, women should have access to all methods and should know how effective the LARCs are,” Dr. Kavanaugh said.

The etonogestrel implant is a small plastic rod resembling a matchstick that is inserted under the skin in the upper arm. The hormone, a form of progesterone, prevents ovulation and thickens the cervical mucus, making it harder for sperm to reach and fertilize an egg. Though the implant can remain in place and effective for three years, it can also be removed sooner if, for example, a woman decides she wants to become pregnant. Typically with the implant, menstrual bleeding diminishes, and after a year, one woman in three stops having periods. However, some women develop longer, heavier periods, and some have increased spotting between periods.

Likewise with the hormonal IUDs. Levonorgestrel, also a progesterone, changes the cervical mucus, blocking the transport of sperm and fertilization of an egg. It also suppresses growth of the uterine lining and thus reduces cramping and heavy menstrual bleeding. Women using it report a significant reduction in menstrual blood loss.

The copper IUD does not contain hormones. Rather, the copper is toxic to sperm, preventing them from fertilizing an egg. Because it also prevents a fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus, the copper IUD can serve as emergency contraception for up to five days following unprotected intercourse.

Both the implant and IUD can be used by women who are breast-feeding, as well as those who cannot take estrogen. There are few contraindications; nearly all women are eligible for an implant or IUD, according to guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Unlike early IUDs no longer in use, “modern IUDs do not carry an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease after the first 20 days following insertion,” Dr. Brooke Winner and her colleagues wrote in The New England Journal of Medicine. With both implants and IUDs, fertility returns quickly as soon as the devices are removed.

Common side effects include irregular bleeding during the first few months following the insertion of an implant or IUD. The latter is also associated with some cramping at the time of insertion.
• The More We Learn on Nutrition, the More We Ignore
• Ask Well: Catching Up on Lost Sleep

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We applaud the way this story examines what may be the “under use” of devices and clearly explains some of the nuance about up-front costs versus the long-term cost of contraception. Bravo for pointing out that the Affordable Care Act now covers these devices, which at one time may have seemed “too expensive” for some patients.
We think it would have been even better if the story had a few actual figures in it – to demonstrate this. For example, one website from Planned Parenthood explains the cost for the copper IUD this way:
“The cost for the medical exam, the IUD, the insertion of the IUD and follow-up visits to your health care provider can range from $500 to $900. That cost pays for protection that can last more than a decade.”
As the story points out – that cost will not fall to an individual patient who is covered under the ACA. But the old prejudices about cost may be part of the reason for the gap in popularity.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bariatric surgery -- the stomach-shrinking operation performed to treat obesity -- works, and it is becoming safer all the time. But there's a catch often not understood by those who undergo the procedure: Once they lose the weight the surgery helps them lose, there may be more surgery to come -- surgery that is costlier and riskier and that requires a longer recovery time than the original operation.

The reason: excess skin. An obese person who loses weight quickly will lose the fat but not the skin that once enveloped the fat. The arms, thighs, abdomen, breasts, all lose texture and sag.

"It's as if a very, very large person all of a sudden had all the air let out, as if [he] were a doll," says Richard A. D'Amico, chief of the Department of Plastic Surgery at Englewood Hospital and Medical Center in Englewood, N.J.

The solution: plastic surgery to remove the extra skin, a set of procedures known as body contouring.

As bariatric surgery has grown more common (some 144,000 such procedures were performed in the United States in 2004, more than double the number in 2002), D'Amico says, patients seeking body contouring have "started to show up in plastic surgeons' offices in large numbers." Last year more than 68,000 patients underwent body contouring after bariatric surgery, 77 percent more than five years ago, according to the American Society of Plastic Surgeons.

Barbara Baez of Fort Worth was part of that increase. Within a year of having weight loss surgery in 2003, she lost about 150 pounds; her blood pressure dropped to normal levels and the swelling in her legs decreased. She felt healthier and began exercising more. Friends told her she looked great. But, she says, "nobody saw what was underneath."

Her abdomen drooped so much that it got the way of her workouts. "Exercise was a problem because you have this bouncing skin, and it's uncomfortable."

Intense discomfort that interferes with activity is a common problem after bariatric surgery, says plastic surgeon Sarah Holland, an instructor at Columbia University Medical Center in New York -- and it can be almost constant. The skin, she says, "has been irreparably damaged by the stretch [and it] doesn't shrink down like the rest of the body does. So it just hangs." In addition, she says, "Their clothes don't fit very well because there's no place to put the extra skin."

Many patients get chronic infections from skin rubbing against skin, and develop open wounds in the folds of flesh.

From the skin rubbing together against her thighs, she developed bacterial and fungal infections. "I would have bandages on me all the time. It was very painful. Just walking was painful. I had hygiene problems." Eventually, Baez says, "I realized that I would need to have the skin removed."

Her doctors never warned her this might be necessary, she says. That's not uncommon, says D'Amico. There are no guidelines requiring bariatric surgeons to warn their patients, although recently professional societies of plastic surgeons and bariatric surgeons have begun holding seminars to discuss the idea.

Baez waited about a year before she started searching for a plastic surgeon. That should be the norm, says Holland. Patients should be at a stable weight for at least a month, she adds, to make sure that they've "lost all the weight they're going to lose."

While the surgical techniques used in contouring operations have been around for decades, bariatric patients present "a unique challenge" to plastic surgeons, says D'Amico. "Contouring the low abdomen in somebody who has lost 250 pounds is a bigger technical effort than doing a tummy tuck on a 130-pound woman who's just had a couple of pregnancies."

Body contouring operations are often longer and more complex than bariatric surgery, involving potentially more blood loss and shifts of fluids, and a painful healing period that can extend over weeks or months. Like all major surgery, it also carries risks of infection and problems with anesthesia.

"It's a radical procedure," warns Baez, who had her contouring work done last August. "It was much more invasive than my initial surgery."

The American Society of Plastic Surgery (ASPS) has formed a task force -- D'Amico is a co-chair -- to alert doctors to the higher risks involved and teach them new techniques. "It's been a hot topic at all the national conferences over the last couple of years," says Holland.

Some body contouring patients may require several procedures -- one for the thighs, one for the arms and so on. To manage pain and prevent long periods under anesthesia, most patients have the procedures done in stages over a series of weeks or months.

Because the surgery is still relatively new, there are few studies of complication rates. A small study published in January in the Annals of Plastic Surgery showed 27 percent of patients in one practice had complications including wound infections, fluid collections called seromas, collections of blood under the skin called hematomas and death of fat cells. To help prevent seromas, special tubes are left inside the body, connected to small plastic drains on the outside. The tubes may have to remain in place for as long as three weeks.

Some contouring doesn't work so well the first time around. Gavin Dry, a Seattle plastic surgeon wrote last month in a Plastic Surgery newsletter, "I have seen a dramatic increase in the number of [surgical] revisions required by massive-weight-loss patients." He blamed the rise in do-over surgeries on increased demand for body contouring procedures and surgeons who "lack adequate experience."

Body contouring also leaves long, visible scars: hip to hip, knee to groin, elbow to armpit. "There's no way to cut out skin without leaving a scar," Holland says. "We can work on improving the scars, improving healing, but we can't eliminate the scars."

After a long and painful recovery, Baez was left with what she describes as "huge scars" on her thighs, extending from "three inches above the knee all the way to the groin, underneath the buttocks, and the front as well." It's a trade-off, she says. "You trade the scars for the better quality of life."

Baez says she couldn't appreciate how much skin was removed from her thighs because, even weeks after the surgery, the scars were "so red, so puffy -- it was not a pretty outcome."

The cost of contouring can run into the tens of thousands of dollars, depending on how many procedures are needed. Most insurers pay for bariatric surgery, but they often consider contouring to be cosmetic, rather than medically necessary, and thus not covered under their policies.

"We spend ridiculous amounts of time trying to get this surgery approved by insurance companies," says Holland. Only about 25 percent of the cases her department submits get approved.

Baez was initially turned down by her insurer, despite her recurrent infections and open wounds. Baez appealed. "I knew I had a medical problem," she says, along with plenty of pictures to prove it and a thick medical file. Ultimately, she won her case. "Be prepared for a battle," she advises, and "document, document, document."

Seven weeks after surgery, Baez concluded the pain and effort had been worth the result: an end to the recurrent skin infections in her thighs and abdominal folds. Six months out, she remains pleased with her flatter stomach and her better quality of life. She still recalls her reaction when her doctor showed her before-and-after pictures and photos of the skin that had been removed from her stomach. "Did I really have that much skin?" ·

Ranit Mishori, a family medicine resident at Georgetown University/Providence Hospital, wrote recently for the Health section about the growth in the use of cochlear implants. Comments: health@washpost.com.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The costs of contouring are presented as tens of thousands of dollars; in addition, mention is made that they are not necessarily covered by insurers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Gentle Cesarean: More Like A Birth Than An Operation

There are many reasons women need cesareans. Sometimes the situation is truly life-threatening. But often the problem is that labor simply isn't progressing. That was the case for Valerie Echo Duckett, 35, who lives in Columbus, Ohio. After receiving an epidural for pain, Duckett's contractions stopped. By late evening she was told she'd need a C-section to deliver her son, Avery. Duckett says she has vague memories of being wheeled into the operating room, strapped down and shaking from cold.

"They were covering me up with warm blankets,"she says. "I kind of slept in and out of it." Her only memory of meeting her newborn son for the first time was from some pictures her husband took.

This is the experience many women have. The cesarean section is the most common surgery in America — about 1 in 3 babies is delivered this way. But for many women, being told they need a C-section is unpleasant news. Duckett says she felt like she missed out on a pivotal moment in her pregnancy.

"It took me a long time even to be able to say that I gave birth to Avery," she says. "I felt like I didn't earn the right to say I gave birth to him, like it was taken from me somehow, like I hadn't done what I was supposed to do."

Duckett's reaction to her C-section is unfortunately a common one, says Betsey Snow, head of Family and Child Services at Anne Arundel Medical Center, a community hospital in Annapolis, Md.

"I hear a lot of moms say, 'I'm disappointed I had to have a C-section.' A lot of women felt like they failed because they couldn't do a vaginal delivery," says Snow.

Now some hospitals are offering small but significant changes to the procedure to make it seem more like a birth than major surgery.

In a typical C-section, a closed curtain shields the sterile operating field. Mothers don't see the procedure and their babies are immediately whisked away for pediatric care — a separation that can last for close to half an hour. Kristen Caminiti, of Crofton, Md., knows this routine well. Her first two sons were born by traditional cesarean. She was happy with their births because, she says, it was all she knew. Then, just a few weeks into her third pregnancy, Caminiti, who is 33, saw a post on Facebook about family-centered cesarean techniques catching on in England.

"I clicked on the link and thought, 'I want that,' " she says.

The techniques are relatively easy and the main goals simple: Let moms see their babies being born if they want and put newborns immediately on the mother's chest for skin-to-skin contact. This helps stimulate bonding and breast feeding. Caminiti asked her obstetrician, Dr. Marcus Penn, if he'd allow her to have this kind of birth. He said yes.

When Caminiti told Penn what she wanted, his first thought was it wouldn't be that difficult to do. "I didn't see anything that would be terribly out of the norm," he says. "It would be different from the way we usually do it, but nothing terrible that anyone would say we shouldn't try that."

Family-centered cesareans are a relatively new idea in the U.S., and many doctors and hospitals have no experience with them. Penn and the staff at Anne Arundel Medical Center quickly realized the procedure would require some changes, including adding a nurse and bringing the neonatal team into the operating room.

And there were a bunch of little adjustments, such as moving the EKG monitors from their usual location on top of the mother's chest to her side. This allows the delivery team to place the newborn baby immediately on the mother's chest. In addition, Penn says, the mother's hands were not strapped down and the intravenous line was put in her nondominant hand so she could hold the baby.

At the beginning of October, Caminiti underwent her C-section. She was alert, her head was up and the drape lowered so she could watch the delivery of her son, Connor. Caminiti's husband, Matt, recorded the event. After Connor was out, with umbilical cord still attached, he was placed right on Caminiti's chest.

"It was the most amazing and grace-filled experience to finally have that moment of having my baby be placed on my chest," Caminiti says. "He was screaming and then I remember that when I started to talk to him he stopped. It was awesome."

And the baby stayed with her for the rest of the procedure.

Changes like this can make a big difference, says Dr. William Camann, the director of obstetric anesthesiology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and one of the pioneers of the procedure in the U.S. At Brigham and Women's, their version of the family-centered cesarean is called the gentle cesarean. Moms who opt for it can view the birth through a clear plastic drape, and immediate skin-to-skin contact follows.

Camann says the gentle C-section is not a replacement for a vaginal birth; it's just a way to improve the surgical experience. "No one is trying to advocate for C-sections. We really don't want to increase the cesarean rate, we just want to make it better for those who have to have it," he says.

So why has the procedure been slow to catch on? Hospitals aren't charging more for it — so cost doesn't seem to be a major factor. What's lacking are clinical studies. Without hard scientific data on outcomes and other concerns like infection control, many hospitals may be wary of changing their routines. Betsey Snow of Anne Arundel Medical Center says the family-centered C-section represents a cultural shift, and her hospital is helping break new ground by adopting it.

"It is the first time we have really done anything innovative or creative with changing the C-section procedure in years," she says.

Kristen Caminiti says her hope is that these innovations become routine. She says she'd like nothing more than to know that other women having C-sections are able to have the same amazing experience she had.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story said hospitals aren’t charging more for the family-centered cesarean. We’ll judge this nod in the direction of costs to be sufficient for a satisfactory rating, but ideally we’d like to see a dollar estimate for what a traditional cesarean costs. In addition, we’d note that the family-centered cesarean does involve some additional resource costs — for example, extra nursing staff and the logistics of getting the neonatal team into the operating room — that should be considered, even if these are not currently reflected in typical hospital charges.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Peramivir is given intravenously, making it usable by hospitalized patients who are too ill to take two approved flu drugs that work against the virus in similar ways — Tamiflu by Roche, which is typically given as a pill, or Relenza from GlaxoSmithKline, which is inhaled.

Late Thursday, the government announced orders for intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, which are much cheaper — a development that could force shares of BioCryst to give up some of their gains on Friday.

Peramivir, still being tested in clinical trials, is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for general use. But on Oct. 23, the F.D.A. granted authority for the drug to be used in emergencies for patients hospitalized with H1N1 flu who cannot take or do not benefit from Tamiflu or Relenza.

Before that, peramivir had been available only through a more cumbersome “compassionate use” procedure. Of the 32 patients who received the drug that way, 29 were still alive, BioCryst said in late October.

Although there are still questions about peramivir’s true effectiveness, some critics say the government moved too slowly to make the drug available, and that even now, access is too restricted. For each patient, doctors must call an 800 number or fill out a form on a Web site run by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The drug is then sent overnight from a central stockpile.

“If you have a critically ill patient, to delay therapy, it’s just incomprehensible to me,” said Dr. Richard Whitley, a professor at the University of Alabama and the president of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. He said the drug should be distributed so that hospitals could have it in stock.

But Dr. Nicole Lurie, assistant secretary for preparedness and response at the Department of Health and Human Services, said the limited supplies made more general distribution impossible. Some doctors said they were satisfied with the existing system.

“I think it’s fairly accessible,” said Dr. Thomas M. File Jr., chief of infectious diseases at Summa Health System in Akron, Ohio, who has treated a pregnant woman with peramivir. Some of the push to make the drug more widely available is coming from investors in BioCryst, including Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, the prominent Silicon Valley venture capital firm. John Doerr, the company’s technology guru, was in Washington this week making the case for greater availability of peramivir, according to a person who met with him there.

Other investors — both supporters of BioCryst stock and those betting the price will fall — have commented at government meetings on flu preparations, often without revealing their financial interests.

Anecdotes like Ms. Gurno’s aside, the efficacy of peramivir is still in question, according to the government. While some clinical trials showed the drug had an effect in resolving flu symptoms, others did not show statistically significant differences between peramivir and either a placebo or Tamiflu.

The question for both investors and federal authorities is how much more of the drug BioCryst can sell. So far, the order has been far less than some investors had hoped, though the price of the order announced Thursday was higher than expected.

Dr. Lurie, the federal official, said there had been 237 requests to use the drug since the emergency use authorization was granted nearly two weeks ago. Many doctors want to provide the treatment for 10 days instead of the recommended 5, she said, so the 10,000 courses the government ordered might actually treat as few as 5,000 patients.

The government has the right to buy up to 30,000 more treatment courses at the same price.

BioCryst says it will have perhaps 40,000 more treatment courses available within a few weeks, and a total of 120,000 by the end of the year. It also says it has signed up partners to try to win sales in Brazil, Mexico, Israel and China.

“We’re getting a lot of interest from countries outside the United States,” Jon P. Stonehouse, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview Thursday.

Shionogi, a Japanese drug company with licensing rights from BioCryst, ran its own clinical trials and this week applied for approval to sell the drug in Japan as a treatment for everyday flu, in competition with Tamiflu.

But in the United States, BioCryst plans to try to win approval for treatment only of hospitalized patients. It is now beginning phase 3 trials — the last stage before seeking F.D.A. approval.

Virtually all the money to develop the drug comes from $180 million in grants from the Department of Health and Human Services. Yet the company gets to keep as profit anything it makes from selling the drug to the federal government or to other governments. Mr. Stonehouse defended the price of the drug, saying it would save the health system money by getting patients out of intensive care earlier. “The cost of being in the I.C.U. and on a ventilator is extremely high,” he said.

But peramivir will soon have competition. The federal government said late Thursday that it had also ordered 10,000 treatment courses each of intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, with options to buy 30,000 more courses of each.

Those drugs could not be used, however, until they received emergency use authorizations from the F.D.A.

The government is paying an average of only $450 a course for those other drugs — only one-fifth of what it is paying for peramivir.

Right now, Dr. Lurie said, peramivir is the only drug that can be used intravenously so the government had to pay a high price. “I would say that one of the things that happens in the market when you have competition is that the price drops.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The story says the federal government is paying about $2,250 per patient for a standard 5-day treatment course. It also notes that the approved alternative treatments are less expensive.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Health.com) -- The makers of POM Wonderful pomegranate juice say that the drink improves blood flow and heart health, prevents and treats prostate cancer, and works 40 percent as well as Viagra (whatever that means). All for about four bucks a bottle.

Those impressive claims helped the company rack up $91 million in sales in 2009. They also earned the disapproval of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Last month, the agency sued POM Wonderful for making "false and unsubstantiated" health claims, and is asking the company to remove the claims from its ads.

A 100 percent juice drink that contains antioxidants (and no added sugar), POM is just one of many beverages that bill themselves as promoting better health. VitaminWater, kombucha tea, coconut water, and various brands of juice drinks made from acai, goji berry, and mangosteen have all used health claims in their marketing -- and some, like POM, have been the subject of scrutiny and legal action.

The FTC, along with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), has been cracking down on food and beverage makers for allegedly overselling the health benefits of their products. In 2009 alone, the FDA warned 17 companies that they were providing misleading nutritional information on their packaging or making overly specific health claims.

Health.com: 25 diet-busting foods you should never eat

Not all of the products were drinks, but "the beverage category stands out," says Bruce Silverglade, director of legal affairs at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group based in Washington, D.C. "At first blush it seems that beverage products are certainly a large proportion of food products that make bogus health-related claims."

Drinks such as POM have become increasingly popular with consumers in recent years, thanks in part to public health campaigns against soda that have been prompted by the obesity epidemic. "The trend is away from traditional soda pop [toward] products claiming to provide magical health benefits," Silverglade says.

Are the health claims true? Yes and no. The federal government doesn't require companies to vet health claims with the agency before plastering them on product packaging (as long as the claims are accompanied by a disclaimer about their uncertainty). But that doesn't mean the claims are invented -- most are based in research.

The research is often funded by the manufacturers, however, and industry-funded research can be prone to bias. A 2007 study found that research on health drinks that was funded entirely by beverage companies was between four and eight times more likely to find a favorable result than research with no industry support.

"If a cell phone company told you they tested all the models and their model came out the best, would you believe it? Probably not," says Dr. Lenard Lesser, M.D., one of the co-authors of that study and a researcher at UCLA. "The same is true with nutrition research, but the stakes are higher because we're putting our bodies at risk."

Where's the line between research and marketing?

However far-fetched the claims may sound, POM is standing behind them. (Two weeks before the FTC publicly announced its lawsuit, POM preemptively sued the FTC, claiming that preapproval of ads featuring health claims violates the company's right to free speech.)

But are shoppers really convinced that POM can unclog their arteries, cure cancer, and lead to hotter sex?

There seem to be more than a few believers out there. "

I started drinking POM after reading the studies two years ago, my triglycerides were almost 1000!," one of POM Wonderful's 12,000 fans breathlessly posted on Facebook after the FTC announced its lawsuit. "Working out everyday, drinking POM, and eating healthy, they are now less than 400. Forget what the Feds say! I believe!!!" (A triglycerides level of 400 is still nearly three times higher than what's considered normal.)

Most health beverage drinkers aren't as enthusiastic as the realtor from Alaska who posted the above testimonial. Quinton Ma, a 22-year-old marketing coordinator at Gawker Media, in New York City, started to drink VitaminWater as a middle schooler because it seemed like a healthy alternative to soda.

"I figured that if they were selling something that I could get extra vitamins from, it couldn't hurt to drink," Ma says. "Once I learned they were really just cleverly marketed sugar waters, I stopped."

Health.com: You are what you drink

But the fact is, even when people don't buy the health claims they often still buy the beverage. That's the paradox of products such as POM, Silverglade says: The health claims on these products strain the imagination, yet studies have repeatedly shown that health claims sell food.

That's because these claims -- however improbable they may seem -- distract shoppers from the real nutritional information and hook consumers with buzzwords like "antioxidant."

This phenomenon is known as a "health halo," an aura of healthfulness attached to a product based on labels like "low-fat" "all-natural" or "made with whole grains" that seduces consumers into overeating. According to a study by the FTC, this halo effect can even lead people to overlook warning statements -- about the high sodium content of a product, for example.

"A healthy halo develops around products like these," says Frances Largeman-Roth, R.D., Health magazine's senior food and nutrition editor. "The health-conscious consumer incorporates them into their lifestyle, thinking that they're doing a world of good for themselves."

The makers of POM Wonderful have spent $34 million on scientific research on POM products and pomegranates. According to the FTC's complaint, the studies POM has funded do not substantiate the company's claims, and a closer look at the research seems to bear that out.

One of the most prominent claims, that POM can decrease arterial plaque by 30 percent, was taken from a single pilot study that included just 19 people and was funded by the makers of POM. Another claim, that POM drinkers experience a 17 percent improvement in blood flow, was taken from another POM-funded study that included just 45 people and only lasted for three months.

"These days it's possible for a food company to pay just about anybody to conduct a study," says Silverglade.

Michael Aviram, Ds.C., a cholesterol researcher at Rambam Medical Center, in Haifa, Israel, defended his studies on pomegranates -- many of them funded by POM -- by noting that they were published in "very prestigious peer reviewed journals," including the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and Atherosclerosis. Dr. Harley Liker, M.D., a physician at UCLA Medical Center who has also led research funded by POM, directed all inquiries to a POM spokesman.

"A grocery store is a designed marketing environment to get people to buy things," says Lesser. "Lots of products are going to try to use health claims from research, often from their own industry, [just] to sell a product."

Health.com: 14 health products you probably don't need

Iffy health claims don't mean that products like pomegranate juice should be avoided at all costs, says Keri Gans, R.D., a spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association. As long as consumers limit themselves to 8-ounce servings and products with no added sugar, juice can be an excellent source of vitamins and other nutrients, Gans says. But it's "not going to solve any of your health issues," she adds.

The bottom line is that consumers shouldn't believe everything they read on labels. "If they focus on consuming an overall well-balanced diet, they might not need to focus so much on finding a product that makes false promises," Gans says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says a bottle of POM costs $4, meeting our standard for a satisfactory. It could have specified that the $4 cost refers to 16 oz bottle and not a larger package. There also is no information about how often you’d need to drink the juice to obtain the claimed benefits, so we don’t know if people are supposed to drink a bottle a day or a bottle a week — which would make a big difference on the cost front. (The latter problem may not be the fault of the article, as a quick perusal of the POM website turned up no specific information about serving recommendations from the manufacturer.) .
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 1, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A drug widely used to treat high blood sugar in type 2 diabetics may hold some promise in the prevention of tobacco-induced lung cancer, according to extremely preliminary findings in a mouse study.

In the September issue of Cancer Prevention Research, researchers report that metformin was associated with a substantial reduction (up to 73 percent) in the number of tumors mice developed when they were given a common carcinogen found in tobacco.

Despite the fact that there have been no randomized controlled trials on whether metformin really can prevent cancer, researchers expressed excitement both over this animal study and previous epidemiological evidence pointing to this possibility.

Metformin (originally marketed as Glucophage, though it is now available as an inexpensive generic) has been in use for more than two decades and is currently prescribed to 40 million Americans.

"This is a very safe agent and has been around for a while," said Cancer Prevention Research editor-in-chief Dr. Scott Lippman, chair of thoracic head and neck medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, at a Wednesday news conference.

"The evidence in diabetic humans is very convincing and very strong," added Dr. Phillip Dennis, a senior investigator with the U.S. National Cancer Institute and senior author on the lung cancer paper. "Almost every epidemiological study I can think of found a decreased cancer incidence in diabetics taking metformin. The reduction is real and ranges from 30 to 70 percent."

The researchers thought metformin's possible cancer-lowering properties suggested the need for clinical trials to investigate whether the drug might help prevent tumors in smokers at high risk of developing cancer. Others believed that the finding might influence the choice of drugs in people with diabetes.

"All other things being equal, many diabetics face a choice of oral agents, and early evidence that metformin may have an effect on the oncology side may increasingly play a role in decision-making," said Dr. Michael Pollack, professor of medicine and oncology at McGill University in Montreal. "We can't ignore this, but we can't say we have FDA [U.S. Food and Drug Administration] approval for metformin for cancer indications."

Metformin was developed from the French lilac plant, known in the Middle Ages to control excess urination, a symptom of uncontrolled diabetes. The drug was approved by the FDA in the mid-1990s.

The study by Dennis and colleagues looked at mice that had been genetically engineered to be susceptible to lung tumors.

Mice taking metformin in their drinking water had 34 percent fewer tumors than those not taking metformin. And when the drug was administered by injection, the improvement seen was 73 percent.

Dennis stated that a likely mechanism of action resides in the liver "and specifically the hormones [including insulin] that are released." Insulin may have a relationship with cancer.

"It's most likely that metformin is working by reducing insulin and IGF1 [insulin-like growth factor] levels in the body," said Lewis Cantley, director of the Cancer Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, and co-author of an accompanying perspective piece.

It's also possible, however, that metformin is working more directly on the tumor process, the researchers said.

A second study, this one a randomized controlled trial involving a very small number of humans (23), found that patients with an early form of colorectal cancer who were treated with metformin did see a decrease in possible cancer-related growth, compared with participants not taking the drug.

"These patients were not diabetic, so they didn't necessarily have high insulin levels to begin with but lower insulin levels," Cantley explained.

This adds credence to the idea that metformin's value is in its ability to lower overall insulin levels in the body, Cantley said.

At this point, no one knows if metformin is safe in non-diabetic populations but some clinical trials are starting to look at the issue, Lippman said.

And, pointed out Dr. Lucas Wong, associate professor of internal medicine at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine and co-director of the Gastrointestinal Cancer Program at Scott & White in Temple, Texas, while the new research is "interesting and thought-provoking, what's proven in humans is totally another level."

The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more on metformin.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that "Metformin (originally marketed as Glucophage, though it is now available as an inexpensive generic) has been in use for more than two decades and is currently prescribed to 40 million Americans." Good enough to get a satisfactory score. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Double chin got you down? There's now a shot for that.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a new treatment for adults with "moderate-to-severe fat" below the chin, known as submental fat. The drug, Kybella, is a form of synthetically derived deoxycholic acid, which the body produces naturally to help absorb fats.

Kybella is aimed at destroying fat cells when injected in the area below the chin, while leaving surrounding tissue essentially unaffected. The FDA warned, however, that the treatment also has the potential to kill other types of cells, such as skin cells, if injected improperly.

Patients can receive as many as 50 injections of the drug in a single treatment, the agency said, with up to six treatments administered no less than a month apart. That might seem like a lot of pain for the pleasure of a slimmed-down chin, but currently patients looking to part with their double chins must have fat removed through more invasive means, such as liposuction.

[More women want big butts and the stats don't lie]

The market for the new drug could be a big one.

According to a survey last year by the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery, nearly 70 percent of respondents listed "excess fat under the chin/neck" as a key concern about their appearance. And Americans repeatedly have demonstrated a willingness to shell out money for aesthetic treatments intended to improve their appearance, if not their overall health. A top example: Annual sales of the anti-wrinkle drug Botox have surged to $2 billion in recent years.

Keith Leonard, chief executive of Kythera, the California-based firm that developed Kybella, said at a conference last month that he believes the new treatment "can drive a very large market and leave very satisfied patients."

The FDA said Kybella demonstrated safety and efficacy in two clinical trials involving more than 1,000 adults. A reduction in chin fat was "observed more frequently" in patients receiving the treatment than in those who got a placebo.

[Seriously, why does anyone under 18 still have access to a tanning bed?]

That said, the agency warned Wednesday that the new drug can cause serious side effects, including trouble swallowing or nerve damage to the jaw that can result in an uneven smile or muscle weakness in the face. The most common side effects included swelling, bruising, pain, numbness, redness and areas of hardness in the vicinity of the injection. FDA officials said Kybella should be administered only by a "licensed health care professional," and shouldn't be injected anywhere other than below the chin.

A Kythera representative said Wednesday that the new treatment likely won't be available until June, as it must train doctors to administer Kybella, and that the company would not have more details about the potential cost of the drug until after its launch.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that the company would not discuss the “potential cost” of the drug until after its launch next month, and that the sales of the anti-wrinkle drug Botox exceed $2 billion per year. That’s enough for a Satisfactory rating. The story could have further informed readers by noting that insurers won’t pick up the tab.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This story is part of an occasional series.

As more women postpone motherhood into their 30s, even 40s, they're hitting that age-old constraint: the biological clock. Now, technology is dangling the possibility that women can stop that clock, at least for a while.

In a Manhattan office building on a recent evening, two dozen women — all in their 30s and 40s — sit in folding chairs, balancing cellphones and glasses of wine. They're gathered for a seminar called "Take Control of Your Fertility."

Dr. Alan Copperman of Reproductive Medicine Associates of New York wastes no time laying out this harsh reality: By the time a woman hits her 40s, 90 percent of her eggs are abnormal. The chances of a typical 40-year-old getting pregnant in any given month? Ten percent. Unless, that is, she gets pregnant with her younger eggs — eggs she had frozen years before.

Copperman explains the procedure, introduces someone who has gone through it and takes a flurry of questions.

Afterward, women crowd a counter to set up appointments with Copperman's clinic, which offers egg freezing. Sally Montgomery is among the youngest here, and the most upbeat. Her mom had trouble conceiving, so she wants to be proactive.

"I'm 31, your typical New Yorker," she says. "I'm single, I'm bouncing around, and I'd like the opportunity to have a family, so I just figured, 'Why not?' I don't think it's a guarantee, but it's a nice insurance policy, and I think it takes some of the pressure off."

Others, though, slip out quietly. One 40-year-old says she wishes she'd learned about egg freezing earlier. Esther Montoro, a 37-year-old photographer, looks a little stunned.

"I think it's fantastic," she says, "but I think it's so incredibly expensive."

The whole process — a week of hormones, plus the procedure to collect the eggs — runs $12,000 to $14,000. And because it takes 10 to 20 eggs for a reasonable shot at success, some may need to do this several times. Plus, there are annual storage fees. Then, when you're ready to use your eggs, you'll need in vitro fertilization, another pricey procedure. All told, costs can easily exceed $40,000, money Montoro doesn't have.

"I guess there's a big assumption that most women that need to do this [are] career, successful, rich women," she says. "And I'm not!"

In his office later, Copperman empathizes and says he hopes the procedure eventually becomes easier and cheaper. Still, he says, freezing eggs offers many women the biggest game changer since the birth control pill 50 years ago.

"Women began to have reproductive choices," he says. "They got to decide when not to get pregnant. This technology has the potential to help women decide when they can get pregnant."

Clinics in the U.S. have long frozen fertilized eggs, or embryos. But eggs alone are more delicate and prone to damage. Over the years, egg freezing has been offered mainly to cancer patients facing radiation, but success rates were pretty dismal. Of late, though, the technology has exploded thanks to scientific leaps, including a flash-freeze method called vitrification.

In Copperman's lab, you can hear the sizzle as a tiny tube is plunged into liquid nitrogen.

"Snap freeze, snap thaw," he says. "And what's really impressive is that when it comes out, it comes out looking just like it went in."

Ironically, much of this research was pioneered in Italy and Spain, where Catholic influence discouraged the creation of too many embryos, leaving fertility researchers with unused eggs instead.

With the better survival rate from vitrification and other new freezing methods, more and more clinics are now offering what they call "fertility preservation." Meanwhile, the early adopters are starting to come back and use their eggs.

In a New York high rise, 8-month-old Camden squeals in delight as she bounces in her walker. She's here thanks to eggs her mom froze several years ago.

"My best friend and I made a pact together that at age 38, if we were both still single, we were going to have a child on our own," says Robyn Ross.

When that time came, Ross decided she wasn't ready for single motherhood. Instead, she froze 14 eggs. Within a year, she fell in love and soon got married.

Her husband, Mark Cohen, says he wasn't at all put off by the fact that his new love had her eggs in the freezer. As it turned out, his sperm was weakened by earlier cancer treatment, so conceiving their baby in a lab was the perfect solution.

"And this is our miracle baby," Cohen says, planting a kiss on Camden. "We are one little happy family."

Ross has already evangelized to her younger sister.

"I made her promise me that if she's still single by the age of 32, she would freeze her eggs," she says. "The younger the better."

Now, before you run out to a fertility clinic, there is a big note of caution. The Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology, which sets industry guidelines, still considers egg freezing experimental.

"If the question were just, 'Does egg freezing and thawing work to achieve a pregnancy?' I think we're close," says Dr. Eric Widra, a member of the society's executive council.

But only 1,000 to 2,000 babies in the world have been born using frozen eggs. So far, they're fine — no abnormalities. Still, Widra would like a larger-scale, longer-term track record. It's not clear when — or if — a big-scale study might happen. But Widra says women need to understand that success rates will never be 100 percent.

"It's an insurance policy that you may or may not actually ever need," he says. "And it's an insurance policy that if you do need, may not pay out."

And yet, even Widra agrees that egg freezing has appeal if it can help avoid the anguish of infertility. At Shady Grove Fertility, the Washington, D.C., clinic where he practices, he offers it to his own patients.

The Challenge Of Setting An Age Limit

It's quite a concept: Put your eggs in deep freeze and disconnect from that nagging biological clock. But, until when? How old is too old to use your younger eggs?

"There should be guidelines, I think, that are more clearly defined," says Dr. Geoffrey Sher, who heads the Sher Institutes for Reproductive Medicine and is based in Las Vegas.

He says many clinics suggest a cutoff of 50, the average age of menopause. After that, pregnancy can be riskier, and the large age gap raises complicated social issues. But the limit is tricky to impose. Sher remembers one couple who wanted to use donor eggs to conceive. The husband was 45, his wife, 55. Sher hesitated.

"And she said, 'That's discriminatory. If my husband was my age and I was his age, you wouldn't hesitate.' And she had a point," Sher says.

The woman was healthy. And the uterus doesn't decline like eggs do; in some cases, it can actually be coaxed back into working order. Sher's ethics board said OK.

"And she went ahead and had a baby at 57 years of age without any problems whatsoever," Sher says. "I get a postcard from them at Christmas every year."

The bigger challenge, Sher and others say, is reaching out to younger women — getting them to take action before it's too late. They envision a time when society considers freezing eggs an act not of desperation but of empowerment.

This story was produced for broadcast by Marisa Penaloza.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story includes the high price tag for freezing eggs and the possibility that a family may need more than a single “freezing.” The story quotes about $40,000 for a safe number of eggs in storage and seems to imply that price includes the in- vitro fertilization required. But we wish they had done a better itemizing more ofl the costs of a high-tech pregnancy, including the possible higher risk of twins and pre-term delivery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctor Challenges Cause Of MS And Treatment

One day 7 years ago, after a long walk with his dog along the Hudson River in Manhattan, Marc Stecker noticed he was limping. Not long after, he was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.

"Fast forward now, and my entire right side is pretty much paralyzed and my left side is weakening," Stecker says.

Stecker is now confined to a wheelchair, from where he writes a blog about his disease, called Wheelchair Kamikaze.

More than a year ago, Stecker started writing about a theory Italian physician Paolo Zamboni proposed in 2008 called chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency, or CCSVI.

It's been thought that multiple sclerosis is caused by a misguided immune system that attacks the nerves of the brain and spinal cord and can lead to muscle weakness, paralysis and death. However, Zamboni suggests that the disease instead is the result of blocked blood veins — leading to inflammation, which, in turn, causes the immune system to attack nerves in the brain and spinal cord.

Zamboni proposed that treating it may be as simple as opening them up. Stecker was hopeful.

"Because my disease is so aggressive, I have been very willing to be equally aggressive in trying to combat it," Stecker says.

To clear the veins, his doctor tried opening them with a tiny balloon. Zamboni calls it "the liberation procedure" but it is actually a common technique known as angioplasty when it's used to open clogged arteries — not veins.

"At first, I was very skeptical. But anecdotal reports started coming through of almost miraculous results from it.…So, I decided, you know, hey it was worth a shot," Stecker says.

But it didn't work. Although the doctor who treated him in New York found a significant blockage, he was unable to correct it, Stecker says.

Still, some would say Stecker was lucky. Many desperate patients have spent their life savings flying overseas to have the procedure, only to have it fail a few months later. Others elect to have tiny metal tubes, known as "stents," placed in the veins to hold them open and have suffered serious complications, including life-threatening blood clots. Several patients have even died as a result.

Stecker says if he had it to do over again, he would have waited for more research. But he says he was eager to try something that offered him the first real glimmer of hope for a cure.

"CCSVI equals hope and a lot of MS patients just are completely devoid of hope," Stecker says. "People don't want to have MS. They want to go back to who they used to be. You know, along comes this theory that offers an easy-to-understand solution, so it's very, very, very seductive."

It's so seductive, in fact, that Canadians and Americans with MS have been flocking overseas to get the "liberation procedure." Something that many researchers find very troubling. Robert Zivadinov of the Buffalo Neuroimaging Analysis Center in New York says that not only is the procedure unsafe and costly to many patients, it is impeding necessary research.

"Even if the treatment is not useful for patients with MS, I don't think that we can abandon the idea of vascular involvement in MS," Zivadinov says. "And I think this merits very detailed understanding of what is going on."

What is going on is still a bit of a mystery. Critics argue that although Zamboni's original research suggests a vascular cause for MS, other studies don't. These discrepancies, and growing public controversy, prompted the National Multiple Sclerosis Society in the U.S. and the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada to take Zamboni's claims seriously. They funded a number of independent studies to investigate the relationship between CCSVI and MS.

Robert Fox, a neurologist at the Cleveland Clinic, currently oversees one of the studies funded by an MS Society grant. He says part of the confusion comes from variations in how CCSVI is measured.

"That's absolutely one of the potential problems in the previous studies: Are the techs who got negative results, did they just not know how to do the ultrasound in the way that Dr. Zamboni described doing the ultrasound? And that's a very important issue," Fox says.

Fox says he sent his technicians to a special training to learn how to properly measure the veins because it's not something most technicians ever do.

Meanwhile in Buffalo, Zivadinov says his research on CCSVI already shows a clear picture emerging.

"CCSVI is not the cause of MS but might be a consequence or a contributing factor to progression, and I think that has to be studied," Zivadinov says.

Studying how the vascular system is involved in neurologic disease is an entirely new concept, Zivadinov says. One that may have an impact beyond any single disease.

"What professor Zamboni discovered in terms of veins is something much bigger than multiple sclerosis," Zivadinov says. "We need to understand the role of the venous system in the pathology of central nervous diseases and aging."

Zamboni himself says that even if it turns out he's wrong, coming to a greater understanding of the disease would be the big reward — both for him and thousands of MS patients.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that some patients have flown to Europe and spent their life savings on the procedure, and an expert calls the procedure “costly to patients.” So we can probably assume that the procedure is unlikely to be covered by major insurers or Medicare (who would cover those with chronic disability), and that the costs will run into the tens of thousands of dollars or more. This is important information for the typical patient who isn’t wealthy enough to carry this kind of cost burden. The story could have been more explicit about all of this and provided more specifics about the financial aspects of the procedure. However, we think the main point to convey here is that the surgery is expensive and patients will have to pay their own way. The story does this — though barely — so we’ll award a satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You might not want to rush into knee surgery. Physical therapy can be just as good for a common injury and at far less cost and risk, the most rigorous study to compare these treatments concludes.

Therapy didn't always help and some people wound up having surgery for the problem, called a torn meniscus. But those who stuck with therapy had improved as much six months and one year later as those who had arthroscopic surgery right away, researchers found.

"Both are very good choices. It would be quite reasonable to try physical therapy first because the chances are quite good that you'll do quite well," said one study leader, Dr. Jeffrey Katz, a joint specialist at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

He was to discuss the study Tuesday at an American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons conference in Chicago. Results were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine.

A meniscus is one of the crescent-shaped cartilage discs that cushion the knee. About one-third of people over 50 have a tear in one, and arthritis makes this more likely. Usually the tear doesn't cause symptoms but it can be painful.

When that happens, it's tough to tell if the pain is from the tear or the arthritis — or whether surgery is needed or will help. Knee surgery for a torn meniscus is done about half a million times each year in the U.S.

The new federally funded study compared surgery with a less drastic option. Researchers at seven major universities and orthopedic surgery centers around the U.S. assigned 351 people with arthritis and meniscus tears to get either surgery or physical therapy. The therapy was nine sessions on average plus exercises to do at home, which experts say is key to success.

After six months, both groups had similar rates of functional improvement. Pain scores also were similar.

Thirty percent of patients assigned to physical therapy wound up having surgery before the six months was up, often because they felt therapy wasn't helping them. Yet they ended up the same as those who got surgery right away, as well as the rest of the physical therapy group who stuck with it and averted an operation.

"There are patients who would like to get better in a 'fix me' approach" and surgery may be best for them, said Elena Losina, another study leader from Brigham and Women's Hospital.

However, an Australian preventive medicine expert contends that the study's results should change practice. Therapy "is a reasonable first strategy, with surgery reserved for the minority who don't have improvement," Rachelle Buchbinder of Monash University in Melbourne wrote in a commentary in the medical journal.

As it is now, "millions of people are being exposed to potential risks associated with a treatment that may or may not offer specific benefit, and the costs are substantial," she wrote.

Surgery costs about $5,000, compared with $1,000 to $2,000 for a typical course of physical therapy, Katz said.

One study participant — Bob O'Keefe, 68, of suburban Boston — was glad to avoid surgery for his meniscus injury three years ago.

"I felt better within two weeks" on physical therapy, he said. "My knee is virtually normal today." He still does the recommended exercises several times a week.

Robert Dvorkin had both treatments for injuries on each knee several years apart. Dvorkin, 56, director of operations at the Coalition for the Homeless in New York City, had surgery followed by physical therapy for a tear in his right knee and said it was months before he felt no pain.

Then, several years ago, he hurt his left knee while exercising. "I had been doing some stretching and doing some push-ups and I just felt it go 'pop.'" he recalls. "I was limping. It was extremely painful."

An imaging test showed a less severe tear and a different surgeon recommended physical therapy. Dvorkin said it worked like a charm — he avoided surgery and recovered faster than from his first injury. The treatment involved two to three hour-long sessions a week, including strengthening exercises, balancing and massage. He said the sessions weren't that painful and his knee felt better after each one.

"Within a month I was healed," Dvorkin said. "I was completely back to normal."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story included researcher estimates: “Surgery costs about $5,000, compared with $1,000 to $2,000 for a typical course of physical therapy.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Eric Rowe turned 50, the question was not whether the Washington lawyer would be screened for colon cancer, but how. His wife had undergone a colonoscopy, the gold-standard exam that costs about $1,500, but Rowe's internist recommended an alternative that was less invasive and expensive: a virtual colonoscopy, which uses three-dimensional images from a CT scan to detect benign polyps or cancers.

"It sounded good to me," said Rowe, pleased that he could schedule the $800 procedure for 7:45 a.m. at a downtown medical building. Unlike standard colonoscopy, generally performed under anesthesia, in which a long, flexible scope is inserted into the rectum and snaked through the large intestine to find and snip out polyps, the new procedure doesn't require a ride home or a day off. Rowe planned to be at his desk an hour or so later.

Invented 16 years ago by a radiologist who got the idea while playing video games on a flight simulator during advanced training at Johns Hopkins, virtual colonoscopy has become an increasingly popular alternative to standard, or optical, colonoscopy, which is typically performed by a gastroenterologist. Initially regarded as a high-tech novelty, the new procedure has in recent months received key endorsements as a first-line screening test from influential medical groups, notably the American Cancer Society, after several large studies found it to be effective at finding large polyps.

Like other mass screening tests including mammography, the overarching question is whether the benefits of virtual colonoscopy outweigh the risks.

Its supporters, many of them radiologists who read CT scans, tout virtual colonoscopy as a more palatable alternative that has the potential to boost low rates of screening. One of the most common and deadliest malignancies, colon cancer can be prevented -- or even cured -- if detected early. Currently about half of Americans over 50 are screened for the disease; some shun traditional colonoscopy, which is the only way to remove polyps, because of its invasive nature.

"This is a really good test that's going to find way more cancer than optical colonoscopy," said Mark Klein of Washington Radiology Associates, who has performed more than 1,200 virtual colonoscopies since 2002, Rowe's among them. "Is it perfect? No. But no test is."

The prospects for significant expansion of the procedure, which is covered by a growing number of insurance companies, have collided with a large and unexpected roadblock. In February, officials at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced a preliminary decision not to cover the procedure as a mass screening test for Medicare recipients.

CMS officials, who are scheduled to issue their final ruling May 12, cited reservations expressed by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of health experts, and concluded that there is insufficient evidence that virtual colonoscopy would benefit Medicare recipients. CMS cited concerns about radiation exposure and the number of patients who would require follow-up colonoscopies to remove polyps, as well as the inability of CT scans to reliably detect small or flat growths.

Medicare's decision has sparked a furious lobbying campaign. More than 40 members of Congress have signed letters urging federal officials to reconsider, and the dispute has split doctors in the same specialty: the American Gastroenterological Association favors Medicare coverage, while the American College of Gastroenterology does not.

In many ways, the debate mirrors some of the complexities inherent in overhauling health care, a top priority of the Obama administration. At issue is whether virtual colonoscopy will enhance quality or whether it is, in the words of one physician blogger, "a proxy for high-tech excesses."

"CMS made the right decision," said John Petrini, a Santa Barbara, Calif., gastroenterologist who heads the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. Why, he asks, should patients undergo two tests when one is sufficient?

Klein disagrees. "They got it completely wrong," he said. "Some people will die from that decision, completely unnecessarily," because they won't get a standard colonoscopy.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story describes the cost of virtual colonoscopy compared to standard colonoscopy, although it isn’t clear that $1500 versus $800 is accurate in all settings and also does not include the fact that 20% will require a follow-up colonoscopy. The story also mentions the crucial issue of insurance coverage. While more insurance companies are starting to cover the procedure, many do not. The recent CMS decision not to cover it has been highly influential.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO --- Soon you can seek mental health advice on your smartphone as quickly as finding a good restaurant.

A novel suite of 13 speedy mini-apps called IntelliCare resulted in participants reporting significantly less depression and anxiety by using the apps on their smartphones up to four times a day, reports a new Northwestern Medicine study.

The apps offer exercises to de-stress, reduce self-criticism and worrying, methods to help your life feel more meaningful, mantras to highlight your strengths, strategies for a good night's sleep and more.

Most apps designed for mental health typically offer a single strategy to feel better or provide too many features that make them difficult to navigate. Users may get bored or overwhelmed and may stop using the apps after a few weeks.

But participants robustly used the IntelliCare interactive apps as many as four times daily -- or an average of 195 times -- for eight weeks of the study. They spent an average of one minute using each app, with longer times for apps with relaxation videos.

The 96 participants who completed the research study reported that they experienced about a 50 percent decrease in the severity of depressive and anxiety symptoms. The short-term study-related reductions are comparable to results expected in clinical practice using psychotherapy or with that seen using antidepressant medication.

The study will be published Jan. 5 in the Journal of Medical Internet Research.

"We designed these apps so they fit easily into people's lives and could be used as simply as apps to find a restaurant or directions," said lead study author David Mohr, professor of preventive medicine and director of the Center for Behavioral Intervention Technologies at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine.

"Some of the participants kept using them after the study because they felt that the apps helped them feel better," Mohr said. "There were many apps to try during the study, so there was a sense of novelty."

Participants had access to the 13 IntelliCare apps from Google Play and received eight weeks of coaching for the use of IntelliCare. Coaching included an initial phone call plus two or more text messages per week over the eight weeks. In the study, 105 participants were enrolled and 96 of them completed the study.

The preliminary study did not include a control arm, so it's possible that some people who enrolled in the trial would have improved anyway, partly because they may have been motivated to try something new, Mohr said. He now has launched a larger trial, recruiting 300 participants, with a control arm.

Some of the IntelliCare apps include:
• Daily Feats: designed to motivate you to add worthwhile and rewarding activities into your day to increase your overall satisfaction in life.
• Purple Chill: designed to help you unwind with audio recordings that guide you through exercises to de-stress and worry less.
• Slumber Time: designed to ease you into a good night's rest.
• My Mantra: designed to help you create motivating mantras to highlight your strengths and values.

"Using digital tools for mental health is emerging as an important part of our future," Mohr said. "These are designed to help the millions of people who want support but can't get to a therapist's office."

More than 20 percent of Americans have significant symptoms of depression or anxiety each year, but only around 20 percent of people with a mental health problem get adequate treatment.

The IntelliCare algorithm recommends new apps each week to keep the experience fresh, provide new opportunities for learning skills and avoid user boredom. Although the apps are not validated, each one was designed by Northwestern clinicians and based on validated techniques used by therapists.

IntelliCare is a national research study. Individuals can download the apps free with no financial obligation. But Northwestern researchers hope participants will provide confidential feedback, via four weekly questions, that will be used to further develop the system. The data will help the system make even better recommendations and provide more personalized treatment.

People also may enroll in a study in which they will be paid to provide even more feedback. Some also will have access to an IntelliCare coach via text messaging and phone calls, who are available to support them in using the apps.

"We now have evidence these approaches will likely work," Mohr said. "They are designed to teach many of the same skills therapists teach patients. Different apps are expected to work for different people. The goal is to find what's right for you."

Other Northwestern authors include Kate Tomasino, Emily Lattie, Hannah Palac, Mary J Kwasny, Kenneth Weingardt, Leland R Bardsley, Lauren Caccamo, Colleen Stiles-Shields and Stephen Schueller. Rebecca Rossom, a researcher with HealthPartners Institute, also was a study co-author.

The study was supported by grant R01 MH100482 from the National Institute of Mental Health of the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that there is no cost associated with downloading the Intellicare apps. But because Intellicare is part of “a national research study” the researchers request that users provide “confidential feedback” weekly to help them further develop the system. Some people may not be comfortable sharing personal data over the internet, with good reason.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every year, many U.S. women get the grim news that they have breast cancer. In 2013 alone, according to the American Cancer Society, more than 230,000 were given that diagnosis. Each one very likely came as a devastating blow, both to the patient and to her family.

But what if some of these cases are preventable? What if there was a medication that could at least reduce a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer?

The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial published results in 1998 indicating that women who took one of those drugs, tamoxifen, were half as likely to develop breast cancer as similar women who did not take the drug.

Other medications, including raloxifene and a class of drugs called aromatese inhibitors, do much the same thing, though the Food and Drug Administration has not yet approved aromatese inhibitors for this use. Studies estimate that more than 2 million American women at high risk for breast cancer could benefit from taking a preventive drug.

But few women are opting for this protection, which goes by the name chemoprevention. A 2010 study found “exceptionally low” rates of usage.

In part this may be because many doctors are not even discussing this option with their patients. A small 2014 study in the Journal of Women’s Health found that only 13 percent of internal medicine, family medicine and gynecology physicians reported having recommended or prescribed these medications to women who might benefit from them.

The “low uptake of these medications is a missed opportunity,” says Heidi Nelson, a professor of medical informatics and clinical epidemiology at the Oregon Health & Science University in Portland. “Many high-risk women . . . could reduce their risks for invasive cancer by approximately 30 to 50 percent.” On the other hand, these drugs don’t suit everyone, and they are not without risks of their own. Because some of the side effects are serious — such as blood clots in the legs and in the lungs, and, in the case of tamoxifen, uterine cancer — only women who are deemed to be at high risk for the disease should consider them. But there are conflicting views on who meets that “high risk” definition

Chemoprevention should not be confused with chemotherapy. Although both involve taking drugs, chemoprevention medications are taken with the goal of avoiding breast cancer altogether and the subsequent need for chemotherapy later.

And they work on the body differently. Chemotherapy kills off cells, healthy ones as well as cancercous ones. The chemoprevention drugs, by contrast, work by blocking estrogen, a hormone known to promote the growth of cancer cells in breast tissue. Chemoprevention drugs are called SERMs, or selective estrogen receptor modulators, and two have been approved specifically for breast cancer prevention: tamoxifen, which was developed to treat breast cancer after its onset and only later was found to have a preventive benefit, and raloxifene, which was designed to treat osteoporosis.

A 2013 study in the Lancet analyzed data for more than 80,000 women taking tamoxifen or other SERM drugs. The researchers found an overall 38 percent reduction in new cases of breast cancer 10 years after women took these drugs compared with women who took a placebo. The effect was even larger during the first five years of the study.

Investigators working for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent group of scientists and clinicians funded by the government, echoed these results. After looking at multiple trials of tamoxifen and raloxifene, the task force noted that these drugs reduced new cases of breast cancer significantly: from 23 cases per 1,000 women in the control groups to 16 cases per 1,000 women in the treatment groups.

Nelson, one of the lead authors of the analysis, is “confident” that these results show a true benefit. Others are more cautious.

Kenneth Lin, a family physician at Georgetown University who worked on developing the task force’s SERM guidelines, notes that while SERMs may have reduced new cases, they “have not been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality in any study or meta-analysis.” One possible explanation, he says, is that “these drugs are effective at preventing nonlethal cancers rather than the more serious ones.”

Not used enough?

Given that these drugs seem to offer some protection, why are they not in widespread use? Serious side effects is one reason. Beyond blood clots and uterine cancer, other known reactions to the drugs include strokes, cataracts, bone pain, hot flashes, nausea and vaginal dryness.

For some women, the risk of such side effects may be worth taking, depending on their particular odds of developing breast cancer. Those odds can be figured by using a commonly used calculator, often called the Gail model, that estimates a woman’s chances of having breast cancer in a five-year period and over a lifetime.

But this is where it gets more complicated. While many experts agree that women at high risk should consider the medications, they do not agree on what Gail score should trigger that consideration.

The studies that served as the basis for the FDA approval of the drugs, along with recently released guidelines from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), set the threshold at a five-year Gail score of 1.67 percent.

The Preventive Services Task Force, however, recommended a threshold of 3 percent. At that point, the panel said, women “are likely to have more benefit than harm from using tamoxifen or raloxifene.”

ASCO’s lower cutoff worries some experts. “At the 1.67 percent high-risk threshold,” Georgetown’s Lin says, “every woman age 62 and older would be [considered] high-risk.” That might lead to a situation in which millions of women would be encouraged, unnecessarily,to consider this therapy, along with its potential harmful effects.

Kala Visvanathan, the lead author of the ASCO recommendations and a faculty member at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said the cutoffs provide only a rough estimate of risk.

It is important to realize, she adds, that “as the risk increases, the benefits tend to be greater. This is an evolving field, and our goal is to better discern who is at high and low risk of breast cancer and develop a greater range of prevention strategies.”

An individual risk analysis should prompt conversation between doctor and patient about the potential benefits and the risk of the therapy.

Both the ASCO and the task force guidelines recommend such a conversation. “The discussion should include the specific risks and benefits associated with each chemopreventive agent,” according to ASCO.

The task force similarly recommends that “clinicians engage in a shared, informed decision making” with women and said that clinicians “should offer to prescribe” these drugs. Many risk factors increase a woman’s chances of having side effects. These factors include older age, obesity, having a history of a blood clot, history of any cancer, immobility, history of certain autoimmune conditions, history of using estrogen or oral contraceptives and history of some form of heart disease.

Insured women with a high risk for breast cancer and a low risk for side effects who try this therapy will not incur out-of-pocket costs, because this treatment was included in the Affordable Care Act as mandated, no-charge preventive care.

So what should a woman do?

Most important, become familiar with your family history, know your risk factors and discuss them with your primary-care physician. Age and family history cannot be controlled, but lifestyle changes — including eating a healthful diet, exercising, not smoking and not overconsuming alcohol — are eminently doable and can reduce your risk. These basic tenets of leading a healthy lifestyle have been shown to be important factors in breast cancer prevention.

Visvanathan and her colleagues are hopeful that more women will be aware of this option.

“A discussion on the use of preventive agents needs to become part of routine care in women at high risk,” she says. “We should begin to implement preventive strategies based on what we already know.”

Mishori is an associate professor of family medicine at the Georgetown University School of Medicine and director of the Health & Media fellowship. Seliby is a family physician and the Health & Media fellow at Georgetown University School of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that these drugs are “covered” by the Affordable Care Act, and that “women with a high risk for breast cancer and a low risk for side effects who try this therapy will not incur out-of-pocket costs.” We’ll call this nod in the direction of costs sufficient for a satisfactory rating, but the story does not discuss these drugs’ prices or the cost of repeated office visits to monitor their side effects. There was an opportunity here for a rich discussion about incurring some upfront cost for a potential for downstream cost savings in terms of lower cancer rates and reduced need for treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Oct. 28, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A new noninvasive test to detect pre-cancerous polyps and colon tumors appears to be more accurate than current noninvasive tests such as the fecal occult blood test, Mayo clinic researchers say.

The search for a highly accurate, noninvasive alternative to invasive screens such as colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy is a "Holy Grail" of colon cancer research.

In a preliminary trial, the new test was able to identify 64 percent of pre-cancerous polyps and 85 percent of full-blown cancers, the researchers reported.

Dr. Floriano Marchetti, an assistant professor of clinical surgery in the division of colon and rectal surgery at University of Miami Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, said the new test could be an important adjunct to colon cancer screening if it proves itself in further study.

"Obviously, these findings need to be replicated on a larger scale," he said. "Hopefully, this is a good start for a more reliable test."

Dr. Durado Brooks, director of colorectal cancer at the American Cancer Society, agreed. "These findings are interesting," he said. "They will be more interesting if we ever get this kind of data in a screening population."

"There are 150,000 new cases of colon cancer each year in the United States, treated at an estimated cost of $14 billion," noted Dr. David A. Ahlquist, professor of medicine and a consultant in gastroenterology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

"The dream is to eradicate colon cancer altogether and the most realistic approach to getting there is screening," he said. "And screening not only in a way that would not only detect cancer, but pre-cancer. Our test takes us closer to that dream."

Ahlquist was scheduled to present the findings of the study Thursday in Philadelphia at a meeting on colorectal cancer sponsored by the American Association for Cancer Research.

The new technology, called the Cologuard sDNA test, works by identifying specific altered DNA in cells shed by pre-cancerous or cancerous polyps into the patient's stool.

If a DNA abnormality is found, a colonoscopy would still be needed to confirm the results, just as happens now after a positive fecal occult blood test (FOBT) result.

To see whether the test was effective, Ahlquist's team tried it out on more than 1,100 frozen stool samples from patients with and without colorectal cancer.

The test was able to detect 85.3 percent of colorectal cancers and 63.8 percent of polyps bigger than 1 centimeter. Polyps this size are considered pre-cancers and most likely to progress to cancer, Ahlquist said.

The sensitivity of the test is much better than what has been seen in other stool screening tests, the ACS' Brooks added. "But, showing that in a small group of samples is very different from demonstrating that in a population where only a small number of individuals are going to have polyps of that size. Then we will know if this is a big step forward," he said.

According to Ahlquist, Cologuard is the first noninvasive test to detect pre-cancerous polyps, he added.

In addition, the test is the only one that is able to identify cancer in all locations throughout the colon, something which other tests either can't or don't do well, Ahlquist said.

One more advantage: patients do not need to do any special preparation before taking the test, something that other tests require, he added.

Ahlquist noted that the test still needs to be refined. "We learned there are still some bugs and we can make the test even better," he said.

Cologuard is not yet available for sale. Clinical trials comparing the test with colonoscopy are slated to start next year. Ahlquist hopes that the test will be approved and available within two years.

Ahlquist noted that the cost of the test has not yet been established. It is expected to cost more than a fecal occult blood test, but far less than a colonoscopy. A fecal occult blood test can cost as little as $23 while a colonoscopy can total $700.

Another benefit is that it would probably need to be done once every three years, while the fecal occult blood test is usually done yearly. Savings over time on a more accurate test done fewer times could justify the higher cost of the Cologuard test, Ahlquist said.

In two other presentations at the meeting, researchers have linked key gene variants to the risk for colon cancer and also to the prognosis of the disease.

In one study, researchers found that people who have long telomeres, the small strips of DNA that cover the ends of chromosomes, have a 30 percent increased risk of developing colon cancer.

"Even for people their age, their telomeres were longer than you'd expect for healthy people," lead researcher Dr. Lisa A. Boardman, an associate professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic, said in a statement. "This suggests that there may be two different mechanisms that affect telomere length and that set up susceptibility to cancer," she said.

In the other study, a research team led by Kim M. Smits, a molecular biologist and epidemiologist in the GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology at Maastricht University Medical Center in the Netherlands, uncovered a surprise when it came to a gene variant on the KRAS gene called the G variant. This variant, long linked to poorer outcomes in advanced colorectal cancer, actually predicted a better prognosis in early-stage colon cancer.

"You would intuitively think that the G variant would be associated with a poorer prognosis, as it is in late-stage colorectal cancer, but that is not the case," Smits said in a statement.

Experts point out that studies presented at scientific meetings do not have to pass the rigorous peer review of studies published in reputable journals.

For more information on colon cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: A hesitant satisfactory score.  The story stated, “the cost of the test has not yet been established. It is expected to cost more than a fecal occult blood test, but far less than a colonoscopy. A fecal occult blood test can cost as little as $23 while a colonoscopy can total $700.”  It is expected by whom to cost in that range?  What’s the source? (Reuters reported a $300-400 cost estimate from the company.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Spring has barely sprung, but in most of the country, spring allergy season — triggered by the first stirrings of tree pollen — is well under way.

You can tell by the sniffles and sneezes of the afflicted. But you can also tell by the ads: TV spots selling remedies for drippy, congested noses, itchy eyes and other symptoms are in heavy rotation.

New this year: ads for Flonase, a nasal steroid spray from GlaxoSmithKline that just became available over the counter. It joins Sanofi's Nasacort, a spray in the same class that went from prescription to over-the-counter status a year ago. And they both sit on store shelves next to antihistamines such as Claritin, Allegra and Zyrtec that were prescription drugs just a few years ago. Older over-the-counter antihistamines, such as Benadryl, and decongestants, such as Sudafed and Afrin, remain available as well.

Don't expect the ads to help you sort out what might work best for you. Here's what some top allergists say you need to know about these non-prescription options.

Believe (some of) the hype about the newly-accessible steroid nasal sprays.

These drugs work by fighting inflammation and they are in the "single most effective drug class" for treating nasal allergies, according to the American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Other expert groups have made similar statements. "These are first-line treatments" that can prevent allergy symptoms, not just treat them, says Jackie Eghrari-Sabet, an allergist in Gaithersburg, Md.

But that does not mean they work for everyone, says James Sublett, a Louisville allergist and president of the allergy group. People with mild to moderate symptoms have the best chance of full relief, he says.

Possible side effects include nasal irritation and nose bleeds. Labels caution that some children using the sprays may experience slower growth, so a doctor should be consulted if a child needs them for more than two months.

When prescription drugs are first available over the counter, most consumers end up paying more, because their insurers no longer cover the cost. The non-prescription steroid nasal sprays are selling for about $17 to $23 for a one-month supply (at the typical two-squirts per nostril adult starting dose). Worth knowing: so far, insurers have continued to pay for similar prescription sprays, Eghrari-Sabet says. The various sprays have never been studied head to head, so it's impossible to say whether they vary in effectiveness, she says.

There's a right way to use these sprays.

They should be used daily during your vulnerable season or seasons, ideally starting before symptoms do, Eghrari-Sabet says. The idea is "to turn an army of inflammatory cells around before they recruit more soldiers," she says.

It's also important to administer the sprays correctly, so that they end up inside your nasal passages, not just your nose, where they might cause irritation, Sublett says. Packages contain instructions, and Sublett has an added tip: bend over and look at your toes while holding the bottle up and squirting.

These drugs target histamine. That's a chemical your body releases, causing sneezing, a runny nose and itchy eyes, when you come in contact with allergy-triggering substances. Antihistamines work faster than the steroid sprays, which can take a week or so to reach full effectiveness. They also can be cheaper, because they are available in store-brand versions. For example, Walmart sells Equate loratadine tablets (the same active ingredient as Claritin) for about $7 for 60 24-hour doses

Antihistamines make perfect sense for someone who suffers a few sneezy days each season and doesn't want to use a spray for weeks or months, Eghrari-Sabet says. Look for one that does not make you sleepy, Sublett says. It's a myth, he adds, that older, sedating antihistamines, such as Benadryl, are extra effective against nasal allergies.

Decongestants such as Sudafed work by shrinking swollen blood vessels in the nose. They can raise blood pressure and cause jitters, and some people are more susceptible than others. Some decongestant sprays such as Afrin — unlike the steroid nasal sprays — can be used for just few days at a time, because they otherwise cause rebound symptoms.

So use these medications sparingly, Sublett says.

Keep your medical providers in the loop.

Over-the-counter treatments should not take the place of professional care — especially if you have never been formally diagnosed with allergies, if you have additional medical problems or if your symptoms persist or worsen, Eghrari-Sabet and Sublett say. An allergist can test you to find out what's causing your symptoms and offer additional treatments. Those include allergy shots and, for a few patients who qualify, newer immunotherapy pills that desensitize people to grass and ragweed pollens.

Also important to remember: While medications can be helpful, the first rule of allergy control is to avoid the substances that make you sniffle and sneeze. If you are allergic to mold spores or to pollen from trees, grasses or ragweed, that means knowing when levels are high (by checking pollen.com or the National Allergy Bureau) and then taking steps such as these recommended by the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and & Immunology:
• Keep windows closed at home and in your car.
• Use air conditioning if possible.
• Try to stay indoors, and avoid mowing lawns or raking leaves.
• If you need to be outside for a long period, wear a pollen mask.
• After time outside, take a shower, shampoo your hair and change clothes.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story goes above and beyond our standard here. There is a whole section on costs, which tells consumers to “expect to pay more.” Insurers will no longer cover the cost, the article says, so expect to shell out $17 to $23 for a one-month supply of non-prescription steroid nasal spray. The story also discusses the costs of antihistamines and says store-brand versions are a cheaper alternative to steroid sprays. An example is Walmart’s Equate loratadine tablets, which cost $7 for 60 24-hour doses.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a step toward developing a blood test that would detect eight common cancers, possibly even before symptoms appear.

As they report Thursday in the journal Science, they're hoping their idea would eventually lead to a $500 test that can screen for cancer and identify people with the disease when it's in its earliest stages and more treatable.

But they have a long way to go.

There have been many attempts over the decades to develop blood tests to screen for cancers. Some look for proteins in the blood that appear with cancer. Others more recently have focused on DNA from tumors. But these methods alone don't give reliable results.

So Nickolas Papadopoulos, a professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, collaborated with many colleagues at the medical school to develop a new approach. It combines two methods into one test.

Their experimental test, dubbed CancerSEEK, focuses on eight major cancers: lung, breast, colon, pancreas, liver, stomach, ovary and esophagus.

"We selected those eight cancers based on how frequent they are, also [because] a lot of them do not have any screening modality right now," Papadopoulos says.

The researchers looked at 1,005 people who had been diagnosed with these cancers. The blood test found signs of cancer in about 70 percent of them.

They also looked at 812 people without cancer diagnoses and found just seven of them — less than 1 percent — apparently had a false reading that found cancer. A low false-positive rate is critical for any test that could be used widely to screen people for cancer.

Of course, the ultimate goal of this test is to find cancer in people who haven't already been diagnosed. And that percentage could well be lower than the 70 percent average. For example, the test was successful only about 40 percent of the time in the patients the researchers studied with the earliest stage 1 cancers.

Though 40 percent success would be far from ideal, "we still think this is a very important milestone in detecting cancers in asymptomatic people," Papadopoulos says. "That could save their life."

"I am incredibly excited by this new paper," says Joshua Schiffman, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Huntsman Cancer Center at the University of Utah who was not involved in the study. "This is the paper that's going to set the field in motion."

But Schiffman points out that there are many issues to work out – even assuming the test proves reliable among people who have not been previously diagnosed with cancer. For instance, if the success rate is around 40 percent at detecting cancer, that means it misses cancers more often than it finds it.

"The thing we worry about quite often is ... if we have a test result that is negative we don't want to give false reassurance to the patient," he says. He is concerned that patients will think to themselves, "Even though I have this weird stomach pain that won't go away, I know it's not cancer. I'm not going to go to the doctor because the CancerSEEK test told me it was negative," Schiffman says. "And that would be a terrible thing."

Another problem is that the test results find signs of cancer, but often fail to pinpoint which part of the body is affected. "That's a tremendous problem that has to be overcome," he says.

"We've come about one step in a thousand-mile journey," says Vinay Prasad, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Oregon Health and Science University who was not involved in the study.

First, he notes, the Hopkins team will need to demonstrate that the test will be useful in patients without symptoms. Then the researchers will need to show that the rate of false alarms remains very low, otherwise people will be sent on needless and expensive medical odysseys.

And for the test to be useful, "you've got to find cancer that's going to otherwise be lethal, and not cancer that would otherwise be destined to do nothing," Prasad says.

That's been a huge problem with previous cancer screening tests, especially for prostate cancer and breast cancer, and has led to pointless and potentially dangerous treatments, he says.

An effective screening test would hold lots of potential for cancer patients, Prasad says.

"We want this to be true, we hope that this is true, but we have learned through 30, 40, 50 years of cancer screening that we have to do the right studies at the outset to know that it's true," Prasad says.

The scientists at Hopkins have already launched their next study, which could involve tens of thousands of apparently healthy volunteers who are enrolled in the Geisinger Health Plan in Pennsylvania. Their experience will help answer the next big question, which is whether CancerSEEK will pick up cancer in people who don't have symptoms.

If that multiyear experiment succeeds, the researchers will still have to demonstrate that the test improves and extends the lives of cancer patients.

Papadopoulos is less concerned that the test could detect cancers that might not in fact benefit from treatment.

"In a personal level, I do want to know," he says. "That doesn't mean I have to go and have a surgery. However, I still think this is very useful information, knowing that something is happening and follow it up."

As for the cost of the test, Papadopoulos says the research team has tried hard to make it affordable. They're hoping to make it economical, so that each test could cost about $500. But he says Johns Hopkins holds the patent and has not licensed it as yet to a company that would ultimately set the price.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story makes it clear that cost of the test is currently speculative (“could cost about $500”) and goes even further to caution that: “Johns Hopkins holds the patent and has not licensed it as yet to a company that would ultimately set the price.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“We were hoping for a very different story,” said Dr. Gregory N. Connolly, director of Harvard’s Center for Global Tobacco Control and a co-author of the study. “I ran a treatment program for years, and we invested” millions in treatment services.

Doctors who treat smokers said that the study findings were not unexpected, given the haphazard way many smokers used the products. “Patient compliance is a very big issue,” said Dr. Richard Hurt, director of the Nicotine Dependence Center at the , who was not involved in the study.

Dr. Hurt said products like nicotine gum and patches “are absolutely essential, but we use them in combinations and doses that match treatment to what the individual patient needs,” unlike smokers who are self-treating.

The products have been controversial since at least 2002, when researchers at the , reported from a large survey that they appeared to offer no benefit. The study did not follow people over time. A government-appointed panel that included nicotine replacement as part of federal guidelines for treatment also came under fire, because panel members had gotten payments from the product manufacturers.

“Some studies have questioned these treatments, but the bulk of clinical trials have unequivocally endorsed them,” said Dr. Michael Fiore, director of the ’s Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention and the chairman of the panel that wrote the guidelines. Dr. Fiore, who has reported receiving payments from drug makers, said that “there are millions of smokers out there desperate to quit, and it would be a tragedy if they felt, because of one study, that this option is ineffective.”

In the new study, conducted in , the researchers followed a representative sample of 1,916 adults, including 787 people who said at the start of the study that they had recently quit smoking. They interviewed the participants three times, about once every two years during the 2000s, asking the smokers and quitters about their use of gum, patches and other such products, their periods of not and their relapses.

At each stage, about one-third of the people trying to quit had relapsed, the study found. The use of replacement products made no difference, whether they were taken for the recommended two-month period (they usually were not), or with the guidance of a cessation counselor.

One subgroup, heavy smokers (defined as those who had their first cigarette within a half-hour of waking up) who used replacement products without counseling, was twice as likely to relapse as heavy smokers who did not use them.

“Our study essentially shows that what happens in the real world is very different” from what happens in clinical trials, said Hillel R. Alpert of Harvard, a co-author with Dr. Connolly and Lois Biener of the , .

The researchers argue that while nicotine replacement appears to help people quit, it is not enough to prevent relapse in the longer run. Motivation matters a lot; so does a person’s social environment, the amount of support from friends and family, and the rules enforced at the workplace. Media campaigns, increased tobacco and tightening of smoking laws have all had an effect as well.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: All three stories at least mentioned the total amount of money being spent on nicotine replacement products or the growth in that spending. None of the stories actually explained how much these products cost or compared them to the costs of cigarettes. The cost of an 8-week regimen of nicotine patches is $160-200.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About 28 million Americans have sleep apnea, which causes repeated awakenings and pauses in breathing during the night, sometimes resulting in loud snoring and gasps for air. For decades, the standard treatment has been “continuous positive airway pressure.” A mask worn at night pushes air into the nasal passages, enabling easier breathing. C.P.A.P. reduces and in some cases completely prevents episodes of apnea.

But the mask is like something from a bad science fiction movie: big, bulky and obtrusive. Many patients simply refuse to wear it or rip it off while asleep. Studies show that about half of all people prescribed C.P.A.P. machines stop using them in one to three weeks.

“For a lot of people out there, the C.P.A.P. machine turns into a doorstop,” said Dr. Joseph Golish, the former chief of sleep medicine at the Cleveland Clinic and now a professor with the MetroHealth System in Cleveland. “C.P.A.P. is very effective in the sleep lab. But when people go home, there’s a good chance they won’t use it, and the success rate of an unused C.P.A.P. machine is absolutely zero.”

Now an alternative form of C.P.A.P. is gaining popularity: a patch that fits over the nostrils. Called Provent, the patch holds two small plugs, one for each nostril, that create just enough air pressure to keep the airways open at night. It is far less intrusive than the traditional C.P.A.P. machine. It is also more expensive, and it doesn’t work for every patient.

Approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2008, Provent has spread mostly by word of mouth. But it has caught on fast. Its manufacturer, Ventus Medical, says it has shipped one million of the devices in the past 12 months, up from a half million total in the two years prior. Doctors say it has given them a new weapon in the battle against sleep apnea, and many patients who struggled with C.P.A.P. call it a godsend.

Bob Bleck, who owns a computer networking firm in Ohio, struggled with poor sleep and chronic fatigue for decades. But it was only a year and a half ago that he finally went to a sleep clinic, prodded by his wife, who worried about his heavy snoring.

The diagnosis was severe sleep apnea. Tests showed that in a typical night, Mr. Bleck, 47, awoke or stopped breathing 42 times an hour.

His doctor prescribed a C.P.A.P. machine, and Mr. Bleck hated it.

“I had this constricted feeling,” he said. “It would be incorporated into these dreams where I was tied up, like in the movie ‘Alien.’ It was more difficult to sleep with that thing on than to just get through the night with the apnea.”

Mr. Bleck got rid of the machine after he discovered Provent. “After I started using it, I noticed a difference right away,” he said. “My symptoms subsided dramatically.”

Provent works like a traditional C.P.A.P. machine but is only a fraction of the size. When people with apnea fall asleep, their throat muscles collapse, constricting the airway and causing the body to fight for air. C.P.A.P. machines use mild air pressure to keep the airway from constricting.

Provent does too, but in a different way. The device contains two pinhole-size valves, one over each nostril. The valves let air in easily — most people breathe through their nostrils while asleep — but there is resistance as the user exhales. That resistance creates a backpressure in the airways, dilating the muscles that would otherwise collapse in the middle of the night. In the morning, the patch is removed; a new one is used every night.

Last year, in a large study of 250 apnea sufferers published in the medical journal Sleep and subsidized by Ventus, researchers found that those who used Provent devices over a three-month period saw their apnea episodes fall sharply, compared with people who were given a sham, or placebo, device. A follow-up study tracked people over the course of a year and had similar results.

But not everyone finds that Provent alleviates their apnea. In interviews, sleep specialists said that a third or more of patients do not end up using it.

“It works like a champ in some people and doesn’t work on other people,” said Dr. Nancy Appelblatt, an ear, nose and throat surgeon in Sacramento who has prescribed it to about 100 patients. “All sleep apnea is not created equal.”

Some people, for example, breathe through the mouth at night, not the nostrils. In those people, Provent typically doesn’t work. Nor will it work very well in someone who has severe nasal allergies and has a blocked nose at night, said one of the leaders of the Provent studies, Dr. Meir H. Kryger, a professor at Yale Medical School and founder of the National Sleep Foundation.

Unlike C.P.A.P., Provent is not covered by Medicare and most major insurers, though some doctors say they expect that will change in the near future. In the meantime, a 30-day supply of the patches costs $65 to $80.

Dr. Lee A. Surkin, a cardiologist and sleep medicine specialist in Greenville, N.C., said patients typically start with a 10-day trial pack that costs $27.50. He has prescribed Provent to about 300 of his patients.

“The No. 1 reason people don’t continue it is the out-of-pocket expense,” he said.

For now, Dr. Kryger and others say that C.P.A.P. will continue to be the gold standard, and certainly the first option for patients with severe apnea. But for the roughly 50 percent of patients in whom C.P.A.P. fails, Provent may be a reliable alternative.

Dr. Surkin said some patients use C.P.A.P. at home, but take their pocket-size Provent patches with them when they travel to avoid the hassle of lugging a machine through airports.

“To me, it’s a miracle,” said Joyce Nemoga, 64. Ms. Nemoga, who lives in Baldwin Harbor, N.Y., has moderate apnea that caused her to snore and gasp in her sleep. She tried C.P.A.P. but could not sleep comfortably with the device.

“Every time you turn over, you have to take the hose with you,” she said. “I tried it for six months, and I don’t think I had one full night of sleep the whole time.”

“I’m just so happy that I found it,” she said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story offered one of the most thorough discussions of costs we have seen in a description of an emerging device. It provides a price for a 30-day supply of the patches and for a 10-day trial pack. It also points out, helpfully, that “Unlike C.P.A.P., Provent is not covered by Medicare and most major insurers, though some doctors say they expect that will change in the near future.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Lightly shocking a person’s brain just before they learned a new task appeared to strengthen memory in a handful of patients with epilepsy, a tantalizing result that could have implications for Alzheimer’s disease, U.S. researchers said on Wednesday.

Pacemaker devices known as deep brain stimulators made by Medtronic and St. Jude Medical are already used to calm muscle tremors in patients with Parkinson’s disease and other movement disorders, and are being tested for a host of other conditions such as treatment-resistant depression.

The devices are implanted under the skin in the chest with wires leading up the neck connected to tiny electrodes implanted deep in the brain, which produce electrical impulses.

The current study was done at the University of California at Los Angeles in seven epileptic patients awaiting surgery who had electrodes implanted deep in their brains to help pinpoint the source of their seizures. The team used this opportunity to see how stimulating the brain affects memory.

They focused on an area of the brain called the entorhinal cortex, which helps form and store memories.

“The entorhinal cortex is the golden gate to the brain’s memory mainframe,” Dr. Itzhak Fried, professor of neurosurgery at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, who worked on the study, said in a telephone interview. The research was published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Fried said sensory experiences that eventually become memories pass through this hub before they are stored in the hippocampus, the brain’s chief memory center.

For the study, patients played a video game in which they had to shuttle people around in taxis to different shops in a virtual city. The team tested whether stimulating the entorhinal cortex or the hippocampus while they were learning their way around the city improved their recall.

“When we stimulated the hippocampus itself, there was not an effect. It was really stimulation in the gateway to the hippocampus - the entorhinal cortex - where we got the beneficial effect in terms of memory,” Fried said.

Compared to testing before stimulation, zapping this part of the brain helped people recognize landmarks and navigate the virtual city more quickly. Fried said the findings suggest stimulating the brain just as memories are forming is key.

In Alzheimer’s disease, this area of the brain is affected early on, when signs of dementia begin to appear.

Fried said the study might have implications for treatments for patients with early Alzheimer’s disease, but he cautioned that the results are very preliminary.

“The question would be whether this can help memory in patients with memory impairments,” he said. Scientists are increasingly focused on ways to treat the memory-robbing disease, which affects more than 5 million Americans.

Despite costly efforts, no drug has been found that can keep Alzheimer’s from progressing, and policymakers are growing increasingly worried about the swelling ranks of dementia patients as the population ages.

Suzanne Haber, a neuroscientist at the University of Rochester Medical Center in New York who was not involved in the study, said she was “very excited about the finding,” but she cautioned that the treatment is very invasive, very expensive and unproven in Alzheimer’s patients.

The Obama administration said on Wednesday it plans to spend an additional $156 million over the next two years to help find an effective treatment for Alzheimer’s.

One team has already tried deep brain stimulation in Alzheimer’s patients. In a study published in the Annals of Neurology in 2010 researchers tested deep brain stimulation in six patients over the course of a year and found the treatment to be relatively safe. They also saw signs the treatment might have an effect on memory.

Dr. Sandra Black, a brain researcher at the University of Toronto who wrote an editorial on the current study, said the findings could have implications for early stage Alzheimer’s disease if tests were developed to identify this process early through imaging or genomics.

“Although the current evidence is preliminary, is based on small samples and requires replication, the potential application of deep-brain stimulation in amnestic disorders is enticing,” Black wrote.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This line of research is so preliminary that we don’t think it’s necessary that stories report specific cost estimates. This story did include a comment about similar treatments being very expensive.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allos defends the price, saying it made a significant investment to develop the first approved drug for this type of cancer.

“It’s a very aggressive disease, and patients right now have no options,” said James V. Caruso, the chief commercial officer for Allos, a 17-year-old publicly traded company based in Westminster, Colo., that has no other drugs on the market.

Mr. Caruso also said the price of Folotyn was not out of line with that of other drugs for rare cancers. Patients, moreover, are likely to use the drug for only a couple of months because the tumor worsens so quickly, he said. So the total cost of using Folotyn will be less than for many other drugs with lower monthly prices.

“We believe we are fairly priced,” he added, “and we’re benchmarked” against other drugs. In a conference call with analysts last month, Mr. Caruso said Allos had “not had pushback of any type at this point” from insurers.

Some drugs for rare cancers are close to Foltyn’s price. Genzyme’s Clolar for pediatric leukemia costs about $34,000 a week, though the company says that only two weeks of treatment are typically needed. Genzyme’s drug Campath, for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, costs about $5,000 a week for several weeks.

GlaxoSmithKline is charging up to $98,000 for a six-month treatment course of Arzerra, a drug approved in late October for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, which strikes about 15,000 Americans a year. About $60,000 of the cost would be incurred in the first eight weeks, when the drug is given more frequently.

Gloucester Pharmaceuticals, which won approval in November for a drug to treat cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, another rare cancer, declined to discuss what it would charge when that treatment, called Istodax, goes on sale in January.

Despite such comparisons, Dr. Lee N. Newcomer, senior vice president for oncology at the big insurer UnitedHealthcare, called the price of Folotyn “unconscionable.” He said that Folotyn alone would cost as much as UnitedHealthcare now typically spends in total to treat a lymphoma patient from diagnosis until death. That median expenditure now, he said, is $87,000 for a little over a year of treatments.

But Dr. Newcomer said insurers would be obligated to pay for Folotyn because there were no alternatives.

Folotyn has not yet shown an effect on longevity. In the clinical trial that led to approval of the drug, 27 percent of the 109 patients experienced a reduction in tumor size. The reductions lasted a median of 9.4 months.

But considering all the patients in the trial, only 12 percent had a reduction in tumor size that lasted for more than 14 weeks. The trial did not compare Folotyn to another drug or a placebo.

“This drug is not a home run,” Dr. Brad S. Kahl, a lymphoma specialist at the University of Wisconsin, said during a meeting of an advisory committee to the F.D.A. on Sept. 2. “It’s not even a double. It’s a single.”

Saying that even a single was helpful, Dr. Kahl was part of a majority on the panel that recommended approval of the drug, 10 to 4.

But after recently learning what Allos planned to charge for Folotyn, Dr. Kahl said he was “disappointed” by the “excessive” price.

“It dampens my enthusiasm for using that drug,” he said. “It creates these huge ethical quandaries about trying a drug that has a modest benefit for the average patient at enormous expense.”

Folotyn is given by a rapid intravenous procedure once a week for six weeks out of every seven. Even to try the drug for the first seven-week cycle to see if it works would cost over $50,000. In the clinical trial, the median duration of use was 70 days, which would cost roughly $70,000 to $80,000. But some patients used the drug for many months.

In a note to clients in October, Joshua Schimmer, an analyst at Leerink Swann, estimated that a typical treatment would last 3.5 months and cost $126,000, or about $36,000 a month.

For investors, a high price is usually a good thing. Mr. Schimmer’s note was entitled “Folotyn Prices High, Reiterate Outperform.” He estimated annual sales of the drug in the United States reaching about $300 million by 2014.

Patient advocacy groups say that while they wish prices were lower, high prices might be needed to encourage companies to develop new drugs.

“It’s a two-edged sword that we have to live with and deal with,” said Louis J. DeGennaro, chief scientific officer of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, which has received donations from Allos and other companies. “A peripheral T-cell lymphoma patient,” he said, “at first blush will see this therapy as a very good thing.”

Allos, which is still unprofitable, has lost $350 million since its founding in 1992 and failed to win approval of a previous drug.

“Every dime that goes into the company supports Folotyn,” Mr. Caruso said.

At the time Folotyn was approved in September, stock in Allos briefly peaked above $8.50 but has slipped since then, closing up 16 cents at $6.62, or an increase of nearly 2.5 percent, on Friday.

After the approval, Allos raised $93 million in a secondary stock offering. In the prospectus for that offering, the company said that one of the risks for investors was “the relative price of Folotyn as compared to alternate treatment options.” It said there was a risk it might have to lower the price or offer discounts to successfully market Folotyn.

Like many other companies with high-priced drugs, Allos has established a program to help patients arrange insurance reimbursement. It says it will give the drug free to uninsured patients who cannot pay for it any other way.

And because a patient’s out-of-pocket co-payments alone — Medicare’s is 20 percent — could be thousands of dollars a month for Folotyn, Allos is financing a co-payment assistance program run by the National Organization for Rare Disorders, a patient advocacy group.

While this helps patients, it also helps the company sell more of its drug. If the 20 percent Medicare co-payment is made, then Medicare will pay the other 80 percent of the drug’s price — or about $24,000 a month.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story goes into some detail about the cost of Folotyn, which is extraordinarily high. The story also does a great job of comparing the cost of the drug to other expensive cancer drugs. Costs were the main focus of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People who took a newer type of pain pill over a three-year period were less likely to develop polyps that could lead to colorectal cancer — but at the expense of a higher risk of heart problems, new study findings report.

And when participants stopped taking the pain pill Celebrex (celecoxib) out of concerns over side effects, they eventually developed more polyps than people who had remained on an inactive, or placebo, drug throughout the study.

So should people concerned about their risk of colorectal cancer consider Celebrex?

“The findings in this study don’t necessarily make that decision any easier,” said Dr. Andrew Chan of Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, who did not participate in the research.

The study, published in the American Journal of Gastroenterology, received financial support from Pfizer, which sells Celebrex.

This is not the first study to suggest Celebrex and similar drugs — known as COX-2 inhibitors - may reduce the risk of developing colon cancer, he said, but people need to balance that potential benefit with the higher risk of cardiovascular complications.

As a result, he said he suspects most people would choose to rely on regular colonoscopies to catch the disease in its early stages, rather than take a potentially risky drug for years.

But to people who have no underlying cardiovascular problems and a particularly high risk of colon cancer - they were diagnosed with it before perhaps, or have a strong family history - regular screening may not be enough, Chan noted.

“So for those patients, they might consider taking a drug like this,” he said.

Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in men and women, and strikes 1.2 million people each year.

Other research has provided signs that COX-2 inhibitors, which block the COX-2 enzyme that causes inflammation, could also prevent colorectal cancer, as well as lung cancer in heavy smokers.

However, most COX-2 inhibitors ran into safety issues a few years after their approval, and now only Celebrex remains on the U.S. market. At a cost of several dollars per day, depending on dosage, it is much more expensive than older pain relievers such as ibuprofen.

During the study, Dr. Nadir Arber of Tel Aviv University and his colleagues reviewed data collected from 1,561 people with a history of colorectal cancer. More than half had received Celebrex for approximately 3 years, before concerns over the increased risk of cardiovascular problems caused researchers to discontinue the study.

The scientists then followed the people willing to continue the research for another 2 years, noting who developed new polyps, including advanced polyps with features that suggest they’re more likely to become cancerous. Approximately half of the people who started the study agreed to continue.

Not surprisingly, Celebrex users were more likely to develop cardiovascular problems, including a 66 percent higher risk of serious cardiac disorders. But over the total 5-year period, people who took Celebrex were also less likely to develop new and advanced polyps than people who took a placebo.

Specifically, new polyps were found in 58 percent of people on placebo, and only 51 percent on Celebrex.

However, during the 5th year of the study alone, after the trial had been over for 2 years, 27 percent of Celebrex users developed new polyps, versus only 16 percent of people who had been on placebo - translating to a 66 percent higher risk among those who previously took Celebrex. Those who had been on Celebrex were also more likely to develop advanced polyps during that final year.

This rebound in risk actually makes biological sense, Chan told Reuters Health. If COX-2 inhibitors protect against colon cancer by blocking an enzyme pathway, when that blockage is released, the disease could occur “potentially at higher levels than had you never been on the drug in the first place,” he said.

Still, the results are “very promising,” Arber told Reuters Health by e-mail, adding he is now working to identify people who could benefit from the drug without experiencing the side effects.

Only half of the people who originally agreed to participate in the study remained after 5 years, and it’s unclear how this might affect the results, noted Chan, whose own research suggests aspirin could prevent deaths from colorectal cancer.

However, for a study that lasts this long, “those are acceptable numbers,” noted Arber.

If patients asked him whether they should take celecoxib to prevent colorectal cancer, Arber would tell them “no,” he added. “They should speak with their doctor.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story manages to work costs into the discussion: “At a cost of several dollars per day, depending on dosage, [Celebrex] is much more expensive than older pain relievers such as ibuprofen.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration approved a new drug on Tuesday to treat serious cases of eczema.

The drug, called Dupixent, is a twice-a-month injection under the skin. Patients can do it at home. It’ll cost $37,000 a year but the drug’s makers, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi, have stressed that’s the wholesale price and make a point of saying there will be programs to help people pay for it.

It’s approved for people with atopic dermatitis, a catchall term for itchy skin caused by allergy.

It can be very unpleasant.

“The cause of atopic dermatitis is a combination of genetic, immune and environmental factors. In atopic dermatitis, the skin develops red, scaly and crusted bumps, which are extremely itchy,” the FDA says.

“Scratching leads to swelling, cracking, weeping clear fluid, and finally, coarsening and thickening of the skin.”

There are many treatments out there now, from simple skin lotions to steroid creams and immune suppressant drugs like tacrolimus. But none of these works for everybody, and the immune suppressant drugs can raise the risk of cancers such as lymphoma.

Dupixent is for the hard-core cases that aren’t helped by anything else.

It’s a monoclonal antibody — a targeted immune system drug — that inactivates two inflammatory compounds called interleukin 4 or IL-4, and IL-13. “By binding to this protein, Dupixent is able to inhibit the inflammatory response that plays a role in the development of atopic dermatitis,” the FDA said in a statement.

Known generically as dupilumab, the drug can cause serious allergic reactions and eye inflammation. “The most common side effects include injection site reactions; cold sores in the mouth or on the lips; and eye and eyelid inflammation, including redness, swelling and itching,” the FDA notes.

The agency gave it both priority review and breakthrough therapy status, speeding it through the approval process.

Studies of about 2,000 people showed Dupixent injections resulted in clear skin or nearly clear skin for about two-thirds of those who tried it, and it reduced itching sharply in 40 percent.

"People with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis cope with intense, sometimes unbearable symptoms that can impact them for most of their lives," Julie Block, president and CEO of the National Eczema Association, said in a statement provided by the company.

“Of the adults with uncontrolled moderate to severe atopic dermatitis in the United States, it is estimated that 300,000 are most in need of new treatment options,” Regeneron said.

In a nod to the sensitivity around drug prices, the company stressed that there is no single price for the drug.

“The Wholesale Acquisition Cost (WAC) of Dupixent in the United States is $37,000 annually. Actual costs to patients, payers and health systems are anticipated to be lower as WAC pricing does not reflect discounts, rebates or patient assistance programs,” it said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This is a barely passing satisfactory rating–the story did disclose the cost of $37,000, but overlooked some important details when it then tried to explain that manufacturers think the actual cost to patients will be lower.
The full picture is more complicated. Drug company patient-assistance programs — which help patients cover co-payments and other out-of-pocket costs — are abhorred by economists because they shield patients from treatment costs and undermine the ability of insurers to steer patients to less expensive options.
In addition, an accompanying video states “a billion and a half dollars” was spent developing the drug but doesn’t point out that the purported development cost is small compared with the potential profits. If all 300,000 people the manufacturers of this drug say are “most in need of treatment options” receive this drug, the total cost could be as high as $11 billion a year, funds that must be diverted from other healthcare priorities or come from higher premiums or taxes. That broader analysis was missing in this story.
An independent draft analysis showed dupilumab did improve health outcomes compared to usual care but with additional costs, and that the drug did fall below commonly cited standards for cost-effectiveness. Still, the study relied on some uncertain variables and found the drug was most cost effective for patients with severe conditions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People with psoriasis who haven’t seen improvement with standard treatments now have a new option. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the injectable drug Siliq (broadalumab) for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in adults.

Because of an association with suicidal thoughts and behaviors, Siliq will be sold with a “black box” warning and should be considered only for patients whose psoriasis has not responded—or has stopped responding—to phototherapy or to other systemic medicines taken orally or via injection.

Plaque psoriasis is an autoimmune condition that causes cells to build up on the surface of the skin, forming thick red patches and flaky silver-white scales. Current treatment options for psoriasis include topical treatments (like corticosteroids) phototherapy (using an ultraviolet light box or a laser) and systemic drugs—delivered via a pill, an injection or an IV infusion—that work throughout the body.

Siliq is unique because it binds to the receptor of a protein called interleukin-17, a known contributor to inflammation. By blocking the receptor from being activated, it keeps the body from receiving signals that can fuel inflammatory responses and psoriasis progression. Two other psoriasis drugs currently on the market work similarly, but instead bind to the protein itself.

This small difference is significant, says Dr. Richard Fried, a member of the National Psoriasis Foundation medical board, since responses to drug treatments can vary dramatically from person to person. “Having another agent in our armamentarium that works by a different mechanism is a welcome addition and may prove beneficial to many psoriasis suffers,” he says in an email. (Fried says he has no involvement with the drug or the drug company.)

In the three clinical trials considered for drug approval, more than 50% of patients who used Siliq achieved total skin clearance—the ultimate goal of psoriasis treatments—within a year. The most common side effects of the drug were joint and muscle pain, headache, fatigue, diarrhea, throat pain, nausea, flu, low white blood cell count, fungal infections and reactions at the injection site.

The drug also comes with a more serious warning, as well. In a total of six clinical trials totaling about 6,200 participants, six suicides were reported by people receiving Siliq. People with a history of suicide attempts or depression had an increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior.

Because of these events, the labeling for Siliq will include a Boxed Warning, and the drug will only be available through a restricted REMS (Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy) program. In order to prescribe it, doctors must be certified with the program and must counsel patients about this risk. Patients must also agree to seek medical attention should they experience new or worsening mood changes, anxiety or suicidal thoughts.

A causal association between Siliq and increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior has not been established. Fried, a dermatologist and clinical psychologist, points out that psoriasis itself can be associated with mental health problems.

“Effective treatment has consistently shown reduction in the incidence and severity of depression and reduced likelihood of suicide,” says Fried. He adds that the data on Siliq suggests that it is not only effective in treating psoriasis, but that many patients experience improvement in anxiety and depression, as well.

Siliq, like other psoriasis medications, also affects the immune system. It can raise patients’ risk of infections and shouldn’t be used by people with certain chronic conditions, such as Crohn’s disease or active tuberculosis infections. People should also avoid immunizations with live vaccines while being treated with Siliq.

“Patients and their health care providers should discuss the benefits and risks of Siliq before considering treatment,” said Dr. Julie Beitz, director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, in an agency press release.

The drug’s recommended dosage schedule is an injection once a week for the first three weeks, followed by an injection every other week. Valeant Pharmaceuticals, Siliq’s manufacturer, says that pricing information is not available at this time, and expects to begin sales and marketing in the second half of 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this story credit for mentioning cost, when it states “pricing information is not available at this time.” However, the story would have been stronger if it had explained the known costs of similar injectable drugs, as we mention in our review of the FDA news release on this drug, and as discussed here. It’s likely this new drug would be in a similar price range.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
John Jeffries, a 49-year-old money manager in Dover, Mass., had hip-resurfacing surgery in 2008 and is now coaching his son's basketball team and long-distance cycling.

Alex Douglas, a Wall Street software architect, had both knees replaced last year at 39 after years of sports injuries. He can't wait to go kite-boarding this weekend. "I've been cleared to have fun," he says.

Hard charging baby boomers and Generation X-ers are wearing out their joints at younger ages and turning to joint replacement surgery - but is it a quick fix? WSJ's health columnist Melinda Beck discusses with Kelsey Hubbard.

Joint-replacement patients these days are younger and more active than ever before. More than half of all hip-replacement surgeries performed this year are expected to be on people under 65, with the same percentage projected for knee replacements by 2016. The fastest-growing group is patients 46 to 64, according to the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Many active middle-agers are wearing out their joints with marathons, triathlons, basketball and tennis and suffering osteoarthritis years earlier than previous generations. They're also determined to stay active for many more years and not let pain or disability make them sedentary.

To accommodate them, implant makers are working to build joints with longer-wearing materials, and surgeons are offering more options like partial knee replacements, hip resurfacing and minimally invasive procedures.

More younger people also need joint-replacement surgery due to obesity, and some orthopedists refer them for weight-loss surgery first to reduce complications later.

Even the most fit patients face a long period of rehabilitation after surgery and may not be able to resume high-impact activities.

"There is, to be honest, some irrational exuberance out there," says Daniel Berry, chief of orthopedic surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., and president of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons. "People may be overly optimistic about what joint replacement can do for them."

One big unknown: How long will the replacement joints last? In the past, many doctors assumed implants would wear out in about 10 or 15 years, and they urged young patients to put off surgery as long as possible to minimize the risk of needing a costly and difficult revision surgery—or even two. (A total knee replacement typically costs $15,000 to $22,000. A revision can be $45,000 or more, with a higher risk of complications.)

Steven Haas, chief of the knee service at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York City, says he frequently sees young patients who are in too much pain to play with their kids, take walks, work or enjoy traveling. "To them, the idea of being miserable in their 50s so they might not need another surgery in their 70s doesn't make much sense," he says.

Several studies of hips and knees implanted in patients long ago have found that 85% to 90% are still functioning well after 20 years. Advances in wear-resistant materials may make implants being used today last even longer.

For example, many hips and knees use a combination of metal and polyethylene parts, and continuous motion can wear away small polyethylene particles. Scientists have found that irradiating the polyethylene removes free oxygen radicals that contribute to degradation, so the polyethylene components are expected to wear much longer.

"Metal-on-metal" hip parts were supposed to wear better than plastic, but their use is declining due to concerns that they can release metal ions into patients' bloodstreams and cause soft-tissue damage. Hip implants made with "ceramic-on-ceramic" components have a disconcerting tendency to squeak.

Last year, one manufacturer, Smith & Nephew , won clearance from the Food and Drug Administration to market its latest technology as a "30-year knee" based on tests mimicking 30 years of wear.

Still, there are no long-term data on how any of the latest implants will fare in actual patients. "We have to install them and see," says Robert Namba, an orthopedic surgeon with Kaiser Permanente in Irvine, Calif.

The biggest variable is patients themselves. As a rule, the more active they are, the faster their joints will wear out, loosen or require revision.

Most orthopedic surgeons encourage patients with hip and knee implants to walk, swim and cycle as much as possible. Golf and doubles tennis are acceptable. But jogging, running, jumping and singles tennis are out. "If your goal is a 30-year knee, you need to avoid high-impact sports," says John Wright, an orthopedic surgeon at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

That said, some patients are determined to push the envelope, and some doctors give their blessing.

"If you have a brand new sports car and leave it in the garage, it will last forever and you won't have any fun," says Thomas Schmalzried, an orthopedic surgeon at St. Vincent Medical Center in Los Angeles. A former college basketball player, Dr. Schmalzried has patients who play competitive sports and run marathons with artificial joints. "I know that the technology is capable of this level of athletic function. What I don't know—what nobody knows—is where the lines are for the average patient."

Some doctors compromise and tell patients they can ski and surf if they were good at it before surgery, (and as long as they avoid skiing moguls).

"There's a happy medium, and it's not necessarily the same for every patient," says Dr. Berry. "One might say, 'I'm willing to take a risk because that activity is important to me,' and another might not."

Personal quality of life issues are also important in deciding whether—and when—a patient is ready for joint-replacement surgery.

"It got to the point where I couldn't get on my motorcycle anymore," says Paul Canter, a picture framer from Los Angeles who had a double hip replacement at 63 last year.

Chris Schubert was kicked by a horse when she was 25, then suffered a near-fatal staph infection from a cortisone shot. Mounting pain and inflammation over the next 14 years forced her to quit recreational horseback riding, interrupted her sleep and interfered with her work as a building contractor. She had minimally invasive knee replacement surgery with Dr. Haas last year, at age 38, and her pain and limitations are gone. "I thought my path in life was set and I'd just be miserable," she says. "I never imagined my life could be this wonderful."

Patients say that regaining function after surgery requires enormous mental and physical effort. "Pre-hab"—building up strength before the surgery—is just as important as re-hab afterward, they say.

"I was in the best shape of my life before I went in for the surgery," says Mr. Jeffries, the money manager, who trained twice a day for six months before his hip-resurfacing surgery in 2008.

And staying as fit and strong as possible is also critical to joint preservation. "I made up my mind. If I was going to go through all this surgery and rehab, I wanted to make these hips last as long as they possibly can," says Carol Espel, 55, an executive of Equinox Fitness who damaged both hips dancing professionally and teaching fitness for years. Now she takes classes in cycling, yoga, Pilates and strength training weekly. "No impact ever," she says.

Mark Liszt, the owner of a wholesale meat company in Los Angeles who had double knee replacement surgery in 2008 at the age of 60, says the first five months of rehab were very painful and discouraging. "You're fighting to get range of motion back. You're fighting to break adhesions. You're fighting depression and you're wondering, 'Is an era of your life over?' " But he worked through the pain and was back playing basketball a few months later.

Now 63, he still plays basketball twice a week. The surgery, he says, "gave me my life back. I can pivot. I can do a hook shot. And I am completely pain free."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story specified the costs of both primary and revision knee replacement operations.

 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A leading biologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, with backing from five scientists who are Nobel prize recipients, is wading into the murky world of dietary supplements with a new antiaging pill that is said to restore muscle tissue, improve brain function, and increase energy levels by improving “metabolic health.”

Leonard Guarente, one of the best-known antiaging researchers in the region, and the roster of eminent scientists have formed Elysium Health, which on Tuesday will debut its first product, a pill called Basis. They say it will enable the body to produce more of a natural compound that supports a healthy metabolism.

Many products in the supplement business are launched with questionable science, but Elysium said studies in mice show a clear connection between increased levels of this compound, called NAD, and improved health in older mice.

“There have been a lot of new findings in the past five years identifying some extremely promising compounds that promote wellness and health. [We want to] make them available for people to improve their health before they get sick,” said Guarente, an Elysium Health founder and its chief scientific officer. “We are filling a space by combining natural compounds with scientific validation.”

The active ingredients in Basis are nicotinamide riboside, a substance that makes NAD and is found in traces in many foods such as milk, and pterostilbene, an antioxidant found in blueberries. Both substances are available individually as dietary supplements.

At a recommended dose of two gel caps daily, a month’s supply of Basis will cost $60 ($50 with a membership) and will be available online only. The company’s chief executive is Eric Marcotulli, previously a partner at the Silicon Valley venture firm Sequoia Capital.

Among the scientific heavyweights advising Elysium Health are Martin Karplus, emeritus professor of chemistry at Harvard and a 2013 Nobel Laureate; Tom Sudhof, a Stanford School of Medicine professor who received a Nobel in 2013; Eric Kandel, a biochemist and biophysicist at Columbia University and a 2000 Nobel Laureate; Aaron Ciechanover, distinguished research professor at Technion-Israel Institute of Technology and a 2004 Nobel recipient; and Jack Szostak, a professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School who received a Nobel in 2009.

Szostak said his role at Elysium Health is to scour scientific literature for new natural compounds that are shown to improve health and bring them to the company’s attention as potential ingredients in new products.

“What interests me in this is that it is a different challenge, to apply what we are learning through basic research, not just to curing disease but to keeping people healthy,” said Szostak, who runs a research lab at Massachusetts General Hospital. “If you go to Whole Foods or CVS, you see miles of dietary supplements and vitamins. Most of them have no scientific basis, and you don’t know what you are getting.”

Guarente was involved in several other efforts to develop antiaging medicines that did not pan out. He was a founder of Elixir Pharmaceuticals and then became involved with Sirtris Pharmaceuticals, which conducted research into the potential antiaging properties of a chemical found in red wine.

With Elysium, Guarente and his colleagues are entering an industry with a mixed reputation. At $25 billion annually and growing, vitamins and supplements are hugely popular among consumers. But the business has often been criticized by mainstream medicine for making ambitious claims about quick cures and miraculous health improvements that are not subjected to rigorous scientific scrutiny.

If Elysium Health were developing Basis as a drug, it would have to conduct clinical trials with humans to prove that it works, and the Food and Drug Administration would have to sign off on its scientific evidence before it could be sold as medicine.

But as a supplement, Basis and similar products only have to be shown to be safe for humans to take, with labels that are not misleading. With Basis, for example, there is no scientific evidence yet that the pill would produce the same beneficial effect in humans as in mice.

Indeed, one scientist not involved with Elysium questions the company’s marketing pitch, saying there is too little information to know what Basis can do.

“It is not quite clear to me what they want to target with this pill,” said Pere Puigserver, a biology professor at Harvard Medical School. “What does it mean, to improve metabolic health? And what exactly is being repaired in the body? And is the outcome the same for everyone?”

Puigserver, who runs a cancer biology lab at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, noted that addressing health and aging through metabolism involves a complex web of pathways and mechanisms.

“We need more information on how this works precisely in people before we can advise them to take anything,” he said.

Guarente pledged that Elysium Health would be unlike most other companies in the business: It is conducting studies of its pill in humans and will release the results.

“As soon as we have analyzed the data, we will publish them on our website,” he said.

One of the venture capitalists backing Elysium Health acknowledged that skepticism is among the company’s greater challenges.

“This space is traditionally driven by marketing language,” said Kal Vapuri, whose New York firm Trisiras Group is one of Elysium’s initial funders. “But we will be data-driven and will communicate the complexities of science in simple ways.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story tells us early on in the story that a month’s supply of the pill, called Basis, costs $50-60. So consumers will pay up to $700 a year for the privilege of helping the company test its pills.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Acupuncture may help relieve chronic back, joint and shoulder pain, according to a new review of the evidence - but some of its benefit is likely due to the “placebo effect,” researchers concluded.

In an analysis of 29 studies, they found people who got acupuncture typically reported more pain relief than those who didn’t.

But patients treated with fake or “sham” acupuncture - using retracting needles that don’t stick in the skin, for example - estimated their pain at somewhere in between the other two groups, suggesting that they also got some benefit from the procedure.

“A doctor who has a patient in pain has a lot of options,” such as medications and physical or talk therapy, said lead author Andrew Vickers, from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.

“This provides evidence that they would be justified in considering… acupuncture,” he told Reuters Health.

Acupuncture has been controversial among doctors as a possible treatment for a range of conditions including chronic pain and fibromyalgia.

Some think it has potential as an add-on or alternative to standard treatment, while others argue any acupuncture-related benefits are likely the result of hopeful patients getting treatment they strongly believe will help them.

That either means many of the three million Americans that get acupuncture every year are “wasting their time” - or others who forgo it are missing out on potential benefits, Vickers said.

To try to help sort out which is the case, he and his colleagues analyzed 29 studies they deemed to be high-quality comparisons of acupuncture, fake acupuncture and no treatment. Those trials included close to 18,000 patients in the United States and Europe with back and neck pain, shoulder pain, chronic headaches or joint pain due to osteoarthritis.

The researchers found that on average, people treated with acupuncture reported a “modest” improvement in symptoms compared to those who had sham treatment, and a larger effect compared to untreated patients.

They estimated in their Archives of Internal Medicine report that about 50 percent of patients had their symptoms cut in half with acupuncture, compared to almost 43 percent of those treated with sham acupuncture and 30 percent with no acupuncture-like therapy.

A typical acupuncture session runs for about $100 and is often not covered by health insurance.

USUALLY NOT THE FIRST STEP

“I have a long list of chronic pain patients coming to seek acupuncture,” said Jongbae Park, head of Asian Medicine & Acupuncture Research at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine.

It’s usually “not their first approach to address the condition,” he said - rather people seek acupuncture when traditional care fails to stop their pain.

Park, who was not involved in the new study, said acupuncture focuses on healing the underlying tissue injury that is causing pain, rather than treating the pain itself as medications would.

“I am a biased clinician,” Park told Reuters Health. But, he added, “I would sincerely say more than 75 percent of my patients will see improvement.”

Vickers said people who are considering acupuncture should first make sure their acupuncturist is appropriately qualified and licensed. In those cases, he said, acupuncture is very safe - and the main downsides are costs and the inconvenience of getting to a clinic.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: “A typical acupuncture session runs for about $100 and is often not covered by health insurance,” according to the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Treating stroke patients who have lost control and awareness of one side of their body with magnetic stimulation to the brain may improve their symptoms, researchers said today.

In a new, small study published in the journal Neurology, patients who were given quick bursts of stimulation over a couple of weeks improved by about 20 percent on tests of vision and attention, while those who got a fake stimulation treatment didn’t improve significantly.

But researchers said it’s still unclear what types of patients might benefit from the treatment and by how much.

About half of people who have a stroke end up with difficulty processing or reacting to things on one side of their body, most often on the left side after a stroke in the right side of the brain, said Dr. Anna Barrett, director of stroke rehabilitation research at the Kessler Foundation in West Orange, New Jersey, who wasn’t involved in the new study. That post-stroke condition is known as neglect.

“People that have that tend to do much worse in their eventual recovery,” Barrett said. “They’re less likely to become completely independent.”

Most of those patients can improve with therapy and exercises, she said, but the process is often slow, and keeping people in the hospital during it is costly.

She said that because of that, the new findings are “promising,” but added that brain stimulation is still an experimental technique, and not ready to be used as part of normal stroke rehabilitation.

For the study, Italian researchers randomly assigned 20 patients with neglect to get real or fake magnetic stimulation in ten sessions over two weeks, in addition to their conventional rehab program. The treatment involved an electromagnetic coil placed over the left side of the brain that transmitted pulses of electrical currents.

Similar types of stimulation treatment are used in some patients with depression or during spinal surgery, according to Barrett. The device costs about $50,000.

Nine people in each group completed all the treatment sessions.

Before treatment, right after and another two weeks later, stroke patients were given tests to measure their visual-spatial skills, as well as attention and concentration. Those including drawing and shape-copying tests, as well as menu reading and map navigating tasks.

Patients in both groups started out with an average mark of about 170 on the tests, which are scored from 0 to 227 combined.

The “real” magnetic stimulation group improved by about 16 percent right after the treatment and 23 percent at the later time point, while there was no significant benefit seen in patients given the fake stimulation.

The researchers said that it’s not clear what the amount of improvement they observed would mean for patients in their daily lives.

But, lead author Dr. Giacomo Koch said, “What we found is that the improvement was more marked in those patients that were more impaired.”

Koch, from the Santa Lucia Foundation in Rome, told Reuters Health he thinks those patients with more severe problems would likely see a benefit outside of just test results.

He said that larger studies at multiple treatment sites are needed to determine how helpful magnetic stimulation can be in stroke recovery. But he was optimistic about the treatment’s future.

“I think in a few years this could become another tool that could be used systematically in the neurorehabilitation wards,” Koch said. He added that the treatment isn’t painful, and only takes a few minutes for each session.

Close to 800,000 people in the U.S. suffer a stroke each year, mostly older adults. For those with neglect, doctors typically prescribe cognitive rehabilitation, in which therapists teach skills and help the patient become more aware of the affected side of the body.

Barrett, also from the University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, said that she wonders whether stimulation could help patients achieve the goals that are most important to regaining independence after a stroke, such as using the bathroom.

It’s also not clear if the treatment might help most neglect patients, or if the findings only apply to certain groups, she told Reuters Health.

The ideal option might end up being a combination treatment that involves stimulation in certain patients and other therapies that address a range of skills important for regaining function, Barrett added. But, she said, “That all remains to be investigated.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that the transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) machine costs about $50,000, but it could also have noted — as WebMD did — that there are costs associated with training clinicians to use the machine. In addition, neither story tried to estimate what a course of treatment might cost patients or their insurers — information which probably could be gleaned by looking at the costs of TMS treatment for depression. Although there was room for improvement here, we think the story does enough to merit a satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Hospitals can improve patient care and reduce costs associated with coronary angioplasty if cardiologists perform more of these procedures through an artery in the wrist and if they take steps to discharge such patients on the same day, according to a new study led by Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Coronary angioplasty is a procedure in which arteries are opened to increase blood flow to the heart.

The research, published Feb. 20 in JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions, suggests that the lower costs of the wrist approach largely are due to the fact that patients experience fewer complications and can be discharged earlier, compared with procedures that access the heart through the larger, deeper artery in the groin. The researchers estimated that shifting standard practice by 30 percent to the wrist approach, along with same-day discharge, could save the United States $300 million per year.

“We have unequivocal evidence and data that show better outcomes when we access the heart’s coronary arteries and perform angioplasty through a blood vessel in the wrist rather than through the femoral artery in the groin,” said first author Amit P. Amin, MD, an assistant professor of medicine. “The femoral artery is the traditional route, but when we go in through a vessel in the wrist, we see less bleeding, fewer complications, less pain and discomfort, higher patient satisfaction, shorter hospital stays, and lower costs.”

Patients may undergo coronary angioplasty — also called percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) — to alleviate chest pain or shortness of breath. Such symptoms suggest the coronary arteries that deliver blood to the heart are blocked or narrowed and oxygen delivery to the heart muscle is reduced. Interventional cardiologists insert a small tube into an artery in the wrist or the groin, which can be used to view the narrowed heart artery, deliver an inflatable balloon to open up the narrowed section, and possibly deliver a stent to hold the vessel open.

Using the National Cardiovascular Data Registry CathPCI Registry, the researchers analyzed data from almost 280,000 Medicare patients who underwent PCI and were eligible for same-day discharge. Despite the fact that all of these patients were capable of leaving the hospital the same day as their procedures, only about 5 percent of these patients actually were discharged without having stayed overnight.

“We have seen that it is very safe to send these patients home the same day,” said Amin, who treats patients at Barnes-Jewish Hospital. “We use risk-prediction models to predict their risks ahead of time, and we plan ahead to mitigate any issues so we can facilitate a same-day discharge. This is really about patient care. We want to outline health-care pathways that provide the best care for patients.”

The analysis demonstrated an average cost of $13,389 for the wrist approach with same-day discharge, compared with $17,076 for the groin approach with at least one night of hospitalization, resulting in a cost savings of about $3,700 for outpatients who get the wrist-access procedure. Independent of the length of stay, the wrist approach costs about $900 less than the groin approach, on average.

The investigators estimated that if a hospital performing 1,000 of these procedures annually shifted 30 percent of these patients to the wrist-access with same-day discharge approach, the hospital would save $1 million over that period. Expanding that practice to hospitals nationwide might save the United States $300 million in health-care spending per year. Health-care costs for the 600,000 patients who receive PCI each year in the U.S. are estimated to be $10 billion.

Of the study’s patient population receiving PCI, 9 percent received the procedure in which doctors used wrist access. According to Amin, improved technology has allowed wrist access to become a viable route to the coronary arteries, even for complex cases, and should be considered for more patients.

“The traditional way has been to go through the bigger femoral artery that is a straight pathway to the heart,” Amin said. “Unfortunately, that artery is also deep. It’s associated with more bleeding complications. In contrast, the wrist artery is small and is associated with fewer complications. The minor challenge is in the difficulty of navigating a smaller, more twisting path of an artery through the wrist. But with advances we have in technology and equipment, those challenges are rapidly decreasing.”

This work was supported by a grant from Vita Solutions, a subsidiary of The Medicines Company, for whom Amin has provided consultation; and by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers UL1TR000448, KL2TR000450, TL1TR000449 and 1KM1CA156708-01. Amin also reported consulting for Terumo. Co-authors from other institutions reported receiving grant funding from or providing consultations to the National Institutes of Health; the American College of Cardiology Foundation; Eli Lilly; Amorcyte; Gilead; Genentech; UnitedHealthcare; Amgen; Janssen; Health Outcomes Sciences; Blue Cross Blue Shield of Kansas City; Edwards Lifesciences; Medtronic; St. Jude Medical; Abbott Vascular; Saint Luke’s Hospital Foundation of Kansas City, partially funded by Merck; Boston Scientific; Biomet; Daiichi Sankyo; AstraZeneca; and Bellerophon.

Amin AP, Patterson M, House JA, Giersiefen H, Spertus JA, Baklanov DV, Chhatriwalla AK, Safley DM, Cohen DJ, Rao SV, Marso SP. Costs associated with access site and same-day discharge among Medicare beneficiaries undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions. Feb. 20, 2017.

Washington University School of Medicine‘s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Cost comparison across angioplasty strategies is the raison d’etre of this study and its accompanying news release.  The release reflects on costs for both the individual procedure and for the country in great detail.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Swedish scientists report that they've successfully implanted "biosynthetic" corneas in 10 patients, potentially paving the way for more accessible treatment for those with cornea-related vision problems.

"The patients' own cells and nerves grew back, and there was an overall improvement in vision," said study co-author May Griffith.

Currently, some cornea patients get transplanted corneas from donors who have died. "Human donor corneas work very well," Griffith said. "However, there is a shortage of good quality corneas that can be used for transplantation."

The shortage means trouble for many of those whose corneas -- the clear surface at the front of the eye -- have been injured or damaged by illness. An estimated 5 million people in the world have an eye disease called trachoma that affects the cornea, and another 1.5 million to 2 million are thought to have developed cornea-related blindness through other diseases or trauma.

For more than a century, doctors have considered transplantation of corneal tissue from deceased donors to be the best treatment, the study authors wrote. Artificial corneas are another option, but they're difficult to implant into the eye and can cause side effects, the researchers said.

In the new study, researchers tested corneal implants that are "biosynthetic," meaning they're created with the help of living tissues. In this case, the corneas are produced with the help of human collagen -- a kind of protein -- that's grown in yeast. The mock corneas were then placed into the eyes of 10 patients after the diseased corneas were removed.

"We were pleasantly surprised that in six patients, vision improved from about 20/400 to 20/100, meaning that these patients could see objects four times farther away than before the operation," said Griffith, director of the Integrative Regenerative Medicine Center at Linkoping University in Sweden.

The researchers went one step further and gave contact lenses to the patients. With the lenses in place, they all had improved vision, Griffith said.

Why didn't they all get better vision immediately without the contact lenses? "We believe that sutures used in this study resulted in roughness on the surface," Griffith said. "The contact lenses compensated for the surface roughness, resulting in improved vision. We will use less disruptive sutures in our next clinical study, and this should correct this problem."

As for side effects, Griffith said the patients didn't report any pain or discomfort, and there were no signs that their bodies tried to reject the corneas, a risk that people face when they get transplanted organs.

As for cost, Griffith said the biosynthetic corneas "in theory" should be cheaper than donated corneas. Griffith said a German study recently found that donated corneas cost about $2,500.

The next step in research, Griffith said, is to create a "new generation" of cornea implants and test them on a wider variety of patients.

The study appears in the Aug. 25 issue of Science Translational Medicine.

Dr. Mark J. Mannis, chair of the Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science at the University of California, Davis Eye Center, said the findings in the study appear to be valid. "This is true cutting-edge work and brings an exciting new option to the repertoire of corneal transplant surgeons," he said.

For more about corneal transplants, try the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This is the only story of the three reviewed to discuss costs. As for cost, Griffith said the biosynthetic corneas "in theory" should be cheaper than donated corneas. Griffith said a German study recently found that donated corneas cost about $2,500.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But a number of new controlled trials and meta-analyses like Dr. Moore’s suggest that topical Nsaids are as effective as their oral counterparts for treating osteoarthritis in the knee and hand as well as musculoskeletal injuries like soreness and tendinitis.

The main advantage of a skin cream is that it bypasses the stomach and much of the bloodstream, theoretically minimizing serious side effects. Oral Nsaids can be toxic to the kidneys, and they increase the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. And some, including Vioxx and Bextra, were taken off the market after they were linked to heart attacks and strokes.

“The turning point for topical Nsaids was the fright over heart problems with Vioxx,” Dr. Moore said. “Suddenly there were tons of folks who thought topical Nsaids were a good idea.”

Dr. Roy D. Altman, a rheumatology professor at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, said the drugs might be especially helpful for “the elderly or those taking multiple medications, who were not getting treated but who can now use topical Nsaids and get some benefit.”

Another leading pain researcher, Dr. Roger Chou, an associate professor of medicine at Oregon Health and Science University, noted that the skin creams delivered “very high joint concentrations of the topical Nsaid, higher than with standard oral doses, with very low blood levels” — less than 5 percent of those found with oral Nsaids.

In clinical trials, the skin creams are linked to a higher rate of redness, irritation and rash. And the three topical Nsaids sold in this country — Voltaren gel, the Flector Patch and Pennsaid, a liquid — all contain the Nsaid diclofenac, whose oral version has been linked to liver damage.

The risks in the most vulnerable population — people with other illnesses, like liver disease, or those on blood thinners — are not known, because these patients are generally excluded from studies. One analysis of 19 studies of older adults found that about 15 percent of patients had gastrointestinal complaints, although not life-threatening ones.

“Future research needs to be done using patients with co-morbidities to know that these agents are safe in the highest-risk population,” said the author of the analysis, Dr. Una Makris, an associate research scientist at the Yale School of Medicine.

Still, in one of the only head-to-head trials between topical and oral Nsaids, subjects taking the pills had a much higher rate of indigestion, diarrhea, abdominal pain, abnormal liver tests and anemia than those using the creams.

No randomized, controlled study has assessed the risks for serious events like heart attacks, kidney failure and gastrointestinal bleeding, but other types of studies have found no association between topical Nsaids and these serious risk factors.

The American College of Rheumatology is rewriting its guidelines for osteoarthritis management and will include topical Nsaids in the recommendations, said Dr. Altman, who is on the guidelines committee.

Sports medicine and pain doctors are also recommending them for problems like tennis elbow, Achilles tendinitis and overuse injuries and strains. “We used them off label for a while before they were approved,” said Dr. Robin M. Gehrmann, the director of sports medicine at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. “Now that you can just write a prescription, I use them in my practice a lot more.”

Since the Food and Drug Administration approved the first topical Nsaid in 2007, sales in the United States have soared — to more than $264 million in 2009, according to IMS Health, a health care research company. The average copayment for a month’s supply of Voltaren gel or Pennsaid is around $30.

“I think many people are not aware of topical Nsaids, or there is a perception that they don’t work well, or people confuse topical Nsaids with other topical drugs, like the topical salicylates or capsaicin,” Dr. Chou said.

The topical painkillers are not for everyone. Aside from the possible risks to people with other illnesses, the drugs are not helpful for patients with pain throughout the body, like fibromyalgia, and should not be used along with oral Nsaids.

Nor are they recommended for stress fractures or tendon tears, because anti-inflammatory drugs in general have been shown to slow healing of tendons and bones.

And young, healthy patients may not want to bother with creams or gels, which have their maximum effect if applied four times a day. “It’s easier to pop a pill,” Dr. Altman said.

But for immediate relief of my tennis-related muscle pull, the cream was handy and helpful.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml"/>



The story says that the average copayment for a month’s supply of some of the topical NSAID medications is around $30. It would have been nice to include the cost of comparable oral medications.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 13, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- For black Americans suffering from heart disease, meditation might help prevent heart attacks, strokes and early death, a small new study suggests.

These benefits appear to be the results of meditation's ability to lower blood pressure, stress and anger, all of which have been linked to increased cardiovascular risk, researchers say.

"This is a whole new physiological effect on top of conventional treatment," said lead researcher Dr. Robert Schneider, director of the Institute for Natural Medicine and Prevention in Fairfield, Iowa. "People can prevent heart disease reoccurrence using their own mind-body connection. People have this internal self-healing ability."

An outside expert, however, said the study is too limited in size and scope to allow conclusions as to whether meditation really reduces risk of death or disease.

The new study focused on Transcendental Meditation. Originally from India, it is not associated with any particular religion or philosophy. It is thought to produce alpha brain waves that occur in deep relaxation. According to the Maharishi Foundation, more than 5 million people worldwide practice this type of meditation.

The research focused on blacks because they are at a higher risk than whites of having heart attacks and strokes and dying from heart disease, Schneider said. He added, however, that meditation would work as well among whites and other populations.

"Other studies have been done among whites and the results are similar," he said.

The report was published in the Nov. 13 issue of the journal Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. The study was sponsored by the Maharishi University of Management and funded by the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

For the study, Schneider's team randomly assigned 201 black Americans with heart disease either to a Transcendental Meditation stress-reducing program or health education class about lifestyle modification in diet and exercise.

Almost 60 percent of the participants were taking cholesterol-lowering drugs. Forty-one percent of the meditation group took aspirin, as did 31 percent of the health education group; 38 percent of the meditation group and 43 percent of the health education group smoked, the researchers noted.

Participants' average body-mass index -- a measurement of body fat based on height and weight -- was 32, which is considered obese.

Meditation consisted of sitting with eyes closed for about 20 minutes twice a day. The goal was to rest while remaining alert.

After more than five years of follow-up, the researchers found those who meditated saw significant reductions in blood pressure and anger compared to those receiving health education. In addition, 20 people in the medication group had a heart attack or stroke or died, compared with 32 in the health education group.

Both groups increased exercise and drank less. For those who meditated, there was a trend toward reduced smoking; however, this was not statistically significant.

Learning how to do Transcendental Meditation isn't inexpensive. An initial 10-hour course runs about $1,500 when taught by nonprofit groups, and there is continued lifetime follow-up, Schneider said.

And it's not something you can learn by yourself. "You've got to have a teacher right there in front of you teaching according to experience," he said. "So it's only learned live."

Transcendental Meditation is not generally covered by health insurance, he said. "One of the reasons we did the study is because insurance and Medicare calls for citing evidence for what's to be reimbursed," Schneider said. "This study will lead toward reimbursement. That's the whole idea."

But a cardiology expert said that although the study adds to evidence supporting meditation, it doesn't prove a cause-and-effect relationship between the practice and better health outcomes.

"Transcendental Meditation has been reported to have health benefits and has been evaluated in a number of studies," said Dr. Gregg Fonarow, professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles.

Some studies have suggested favorable effects on cardiovascular risk factors whereas others studies have been inconclusive, he said.

Even though the findings in this study were statistically significant, the new study was too small to be conclusive, Fonarow said.

"In addition, since this study was conducted at a single center and the primary [change in heart attack, stroke and death] was not statistically significant without adjustment for other factors, more studies and replication of these findings are needed," he said.

For more information on heart disease, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: According to the story, “An initial 10-hour course runs about $1,500 when taught by nonprofit groups, and there is continued lifetime follow-up.” And it’s generally not covered by insurance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“There’s really no precedent for another drug that does this,” said Dr. Matthew R. Smith, a prostate cancer specialist at the Massachusetts General Hospital.

Also, bone scans actually measure bone formation, not the presence of cancer itself. So it cannot be completely ruled out that XL184 somehow stopped bone growth without killing the cancer. However, Dr. Smith said he doubted that was the case because there were signs the drug also controlled tumors outside the bones.

Drugs now used to treat advanced prostate cancer, like Taxotere, do not have much affect on bone scans, Dr. Smith said. Bone drugs like Zometa from Novartis and denosumab from Amgen can protect cancerous bones from fractures, but have not been shown to fight the cancer itself.

Another investigator in the trial, Dr. David C. Smith of the University of Michigan, said he could not believe it when the bone scan of one patient, who previously had widespread cancer in his bones, came back completely clean.

“I thought they had scanned the wrong person,” said Dr. Smith, who is not related to the doctor in Massachusetts. “I’ve never seen anything like this.”

Exelixis will now add many prostate cancer patients to the midstage clinical trial from which the results were drawn, said Michael M. Morrissey, the company’s chief executive. A late-stage trial could begin as early as next year, he said.

XL184 is believed to block the formation of blood vessels that feed tumors and also inhibits a protein called MET that helps spur tumor growth.

Provenge from Dendreon, by contrast, trains the patient’s immune system to attack the tumor. The drug was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in April after a clinical trial showed that those getting the drug had a median survival of about 26 months, four months longer than those in a control group.

Some critics say Medicare would not be doing a review of a drug already approved by the F.D.A. were it not for its high cost.

“One has to wonder if today’s meeting is about something other than science, namely the cost,” Brad Loncar, an investor in Dendreon whose grandfather died of prostate cancer, told the Medicare Coverage Advisory Committee on Wednesday.

Dr. Louis Jacques, director of the coverage and analysis group at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said cost was not a factor and that the agency had reviewed products approved by the F.D.A. in the past.

Dr. Jacques said he ordered the review after being contacted by federal lawmakers questioning why their constituents could not get the drug. He realized that reimbursement by regional Medicare contractors was inconsistent, so he decided the agency should have a uniform national policy.

The Medicare Coverage Advisory Committee, which met in Baltimore, did not discuss the cost of Provenge or make a coverage recommendation. It reviewed the clinical trial data and then rated the strength of the data on a scale of 1 to 5.

The 10 voting members, mainly doctors and health policy experts, averaged 3.6 on the question of how much confidence they had that there was adequate evidence to conclude that Provenge significantly prolongs survival.

That is between 3, which is intermediate confidence and 5, which is high confidence. But some analysts said that should be enough for reimbursement. Trading in Dendreon shares, halted during regular market hours, rose 6 percent after hours.

However, the panel gave very low scores to evidence that the drug would help prostate cancer patients other than the type who participated in the clinical trial, which were men with advanced cancer, but no or minimal symptoms. That could give Medicare grounds for denying payment when the drug is used off-label, as cancer drugs often are.

Medicare is scheduled to put a proposed decision out for comment by March 30, with a final decision around the end of June.

Provenge has stirred passions since the F.D.A. initially declined to approve it in 2007. Some Dendreon investors and prostate cancer patients staged protests and advertising campaigns and sued the F.D.A. Two doctors who had spurred investor wrath by voting against the drug’s approval at an advisory committee meeting attended a major cancer conference accompanied by bodyguards.

Medicare’s review has drawn hundreds of comments, mostly in favor of coverage. One criticism of the drug was filed by a law firm, Willkie Farr & Gallagher, on behalf of a client who the law firm said wanted to remain anonymous because of the “public vilification of anyone that questions Provenge.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provided the costs for the FDA approved Provenge ($93,000/patient); as XL184 is under study and not available for sale, there was no information about what its costs might be.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Botox injections may provide some relief from arm tremors caused by multiple sclerosis, according to a small study published Monday. Botulinum toxin type A is sold under different brands, but it’s best known by the Allergan brand-name Botox.

Botox gained fame for smoothing aging skin — by blocking nerve signals and relaxing muscles under the skin — but the product has a number of medical uses. In the U.S., Botox is approved to treat conditions like chronic migraine, excessive sweating and certain symptoms of MS: overactive bladder and muscles spasms in the arms.

The new study, published in the journal Neurology, tested the effects of Botox injections on MS-related arm tremors, which affect up to two-thirds of people with MS. Researchers found that when they gave injections to 23 patients, the treatment typically eased their tremors and improved their writing ability.

Right now, there’s no good way to treat MS arm tremors, said Nicholas G. LaRocca, vice-president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society. Physical therapy and exercise have been studied, but are usually not very effective, said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study. Surgery is sometimes used in severe cases, but it’s risky and may not even have lasting benefits.

“Exploring new treatments is important, and it’s heartening to see there’s some promise here,” LaRocca said of the current findings. But there’s still a lot to be learned, he cautioned in an interview.

“This study is fairly preliminary, and it had a small number of patients,” LaRocca said. Larger studies, of more-diverse groups of MS patients, are needed, he said.

The study’s lead researcher agreed on the need for more work. “There are several questions that need to be answered by doing larger and longer-term studies,” Dr. Anneke van der Walt, a neurologist at Royal Melbourne Hospital in Australia, said in an email.

One is how long the benefits of repeat Botox injections might last: this study tested the effects of just one Botox treatment over three months.

In real life, the injections would have to be repeated every few months, or possibly every six months for some people, according to van der Walt. Another question is whether the side effects change over time. Muscle weakness was the most common side effect in this study, van der Walt said. It affected 42 percent of the study patients, though it went away within two weeks.

Muscle weakness is a potential concern in MS patients, LaRocca noted, since that problem often comes with the disease itself.

The study included 23 MS patients with mild to moderate arm tremors. Each patient received a round of Botox injections and a round of placebo injections (containing saline), three months apart. Half of the patients got the Botox first, the other half the placebo.

On average, the patients’ tremor “scores” had gone from a 5 to a 3 six weeks after Botox treatment — which essentially means moving from “moderate” to “mild,” LaRocca said. Their ability to write and draw a straight line had also improved by week six, and the benefits were still there at week 12.

In contrast, there were no improvements after the placebo injections.

Larger studies, van der Walt said, should look at whether Botox is more effective for some tremors than others. Tremors limited to the hand and forearm, for instance, might respond better than tremors that also affect the shoulder. If Botox is eventually approved for this MS symptom, LaRocca said it will be important for doctors to get training in how to give the injections — since the drug has to go into carefully chosen locations in the muscle.

“So practitioners will have to be up to speed,” LaRocca said. There will also be the matter of cost. That will vary from patient to patient, depending on how many injections are needed per treatment.

According to van der Walt, the cost could range from $500 to $1,000 Australian dollars, which are roughly equal to U.S. dollars. In the U.S., Botox treatments can cost $455-$575 per injection site.

Botox maker Allergan supplied the product for the study, and two of the researchers on the work have financial ties to the company. The study itself was funded by the Box Hill MS Research Fund and the Royal Melbourne Hospital.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains: “the cost could range from $500 to $1,000 Australian dollars, which are roughly equal to U.S. dollars. In the U.S., Botox treatments can cost $455-$575 per injection site.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Even though her mammogram showed no sign of cancer, Sandra Litt knew she could feel a lump. She had a second mammogram. Nothing there, the radiologist assured her. "Then one night, I found the 'nothing there' had grown bigger," Litt said. Her self-exam had proved accurate. Two years ago, Litt underwent a double mastectomy and months of chemotherapy to survive an aggressive breast cancer. It defies common sense, she says, for scientists to conclude that breast self-exams do women more harm than good. "It's a very important tool," the 67-year-old Portland woman says. "Why throw away an important tool?" A scientific review, published in August by the

, highlighted the downside of doing breast self-exams: Women taught to perform the monthly ritual wind up having unnecessary biopsies. They are about twice as likely to undergo biopsies that won't find cancerous tumors, according to two studies tracking hundreds of thousands of women in China and Russia. Conflicting news coverage has heightened the confusion. "Breast self-exam has no benefit," one headline proclaimed. "Breast self-exam key in catching what mammogram may miss," another said. What is clear is that studies don't supply an answer that fits all women.

Dr. Elizabeth Steiner, director of the breast health education program at

, said each woman must decide for herself, with full knowledge of the pros and cons, whether to perform self-exams. And there's not a right or wrong answer. Some may do the exams and accept the risk of unnecessary biopsies, she said. Others may decide that either they can't commit the time to do them right, or that the potential for false alarms and anxiety isn't worth it. "That's a very personal decision," Steiner said.

When doctors began promoting breast self-exams in the 1950s, the benefits seemed obvious. Here was a simple, inexpensive do-it-yourself way for women to find tumors before it was too late. During the women's health movement of the 1970s, the self-exam gained importance as a means for women to take charge and rely less on a paternalistic health system. But researchers have learned that self-exams aren't at all simple. The technique is complicated and difficult to learn to do well. Guidelines on how to do them correctly have evolved, leaving many women and doctors with outdated ideas. Further, decades of research still have not produced good evidence that self-exams make any difference in breast cancer survival. "Not only do the trials not find a benefit, the trials demonstrate harm in terms of increased physician visits and benign breast biopsies," said Dr. Nancy Baxter, a University of Toronto surgeon who reviewed the evidence on self-exams for the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. She said self-exams may not reveal tumors early enough to improve survival. "By the time a breast cancer is large enough to be detected by self-exam, tumor biology is the most important predictor of outcome, not finding a tumor a few months before it would have become apparent," she said. Given the lack of evidence, the

considers the exams unproven. And the

has recommended against routine teaching of breast self-exams since 2001. Unnecessary biopsies may not be the only hidden cost. "One danger of pushing breast self-exams on patients is that they may be falsely reassured by it and opt out of their mammograms," said Dr. Heidi Nelson, medical director of the

in Portland. She stopped routinely teaching self-exams to patients after the large trials in China and Russia showed no benefit.

Some evidence does suggest that self-exams done properly could make a difference. For instance, they provide a means to search for tumors in outer parts of the breast where mammography may not reach. About half of breast cancers develop in the upper-outer quadrant of the breast, which is largely inaccessible to mammography scanners. A small study in Canada in 1997 found that self-exams seemed to improve survival among a subset of women using proper technique. The preferred method, known as the vertical strip, three-pressure test, has proved the most sensitive and least likely to produce false alarms, Steiner said. In the largest and most influential study to date, involving 266,000 women in Shanghai, Steiner said researchers taught an inferior method of exams. She said that could partly explain why the Shanghai study failed to find improved survival. Self-exams also appeal strongly to some younger women, whose main screening test is a manual exam done by a doctor or nurse. Mammography is considered inappropriate for women younger than 40, and many doctors don't recommend it until age 50. If a woman decides to do self-exams, Steiner said, it's important to learn to do them right -- and do them every month without fail. "Done haphazardly and irregularly, it is probably worse than no breast self-exam at all," Steiner said. She encourages women to schedule an appointment devoted to learning the technique, which should take at least a half-hour. A few minutes squeezed into a routine annual exam aren't enough, she said. Steiner said not all doctors are up to speed on breast exam technique, which calls for lying down, not taking a few minutes standing in the shower -- the form pushed for years by physicians and even anti-breast cancer groups. "It's important to ask, 'Do you feel confident in your own technique and training me how to do it?'" she said. Nelson cautions women not to skip their mammograms if they don't find lumps during self-exams. But finding a lump also is no reason to panic, given the limited accuracy of the self-test. Litt, the breast cancer survivor, has another piece of advice: "Do not ignore your own judgment; and be assertive," she said. "You don't get a do-over."

What to make of breast cancer's "1-in-8" statistic.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It doesn’t cost anything to do a breast self-exam. 
The story does mention potential harms of increased doctor visits and unnecessary diagnostic procedures triggered by self-exams, with additional cost implied. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers, including senior author Penny M. Kris-Etherton, PhD, distinguished professor of nutrition at Pennsylvania State University, publish their findings in the Journal of the American Heart Association.

It is well known that avocados are high in fat, but the majority of an avocado's fat is monounsaturated, which is deemed a "good" type of fat. It is known that monounsaturated fats can help lower levels of bad cholesterol, reducing the risk of heart attack and stroke.

For their study, Kris-Etherton and colleagues set out to assess how avocado consumption - by replacing saturated fatty acids, or "bad" fats - affected risk factors associated with cardiovascular diseases.

The team recruited 45 healthy participants aged 21-70 years who were either obese or overweight.

Every participant was required to follow each of three cholesterol-lowering diets for 5 weeks. The diets consisted of a lower-fat diet without avocado, a moderate-fat diet without avocado or a moderate-fat diet with one Hass avocado a day.

Prior to starting each diet, subjects ate what the researchers deem an "average American diet," which was made up of 34% of calories from fat, 16% from protein, while around half of calories were from carbohydrates.

From both of the moderate-fat diets, participants gained 34% of calories from fat, of which 17% were from monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs). The lower-fat diet provided participants with 24% of calories from fat, of which 11% was from MUFAs.

Moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day lowered 'bad' cholesterol by 13.5 mg/dL

The researchers found that participants' levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) - referred to as the "bad" cholesterol - were an average of 8.3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) lower after following the lower-fat diet without an avocado and 7.4 mg/dL lower after following the moderate-fat diet without an avocado, compared with their baseline average.

However, after participants followed the moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day, their LDL levels were found to be an average of 13.5 mg/dL lower than their baseline average.

What is more, the team found that a number of additional blood measurements - such as total cholesterol, small dense LDL, triglycerides and non-HDL (high-density lipoprotein) - were better after participants followed the moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day, compared with the other two diets.

Although these findings demonstrate that an avocado a day alongside a moderate-fat diet has the potential to reduce bad cholesterol, the team notes that their research was a controlled feeding study. "That is not the real-world," says Kris-Etherton, "so it is a proof-of-concept investigation."

Still, the team believes their findings indicate that people should consider replacing saturated fatty acids in their diet with healthier fats from avocados and other sources. Kris-Etherton adds:

"We need to focus on getting people to eat a heart-healthy diet that includes avocados and other nutrient-rich food sources of better fats. In the United States avocados are not a mainstream food yet, and they can be expensive, especially at certain times of the year. Also, most people do not really know how to incorporate them in their diet except for making guacamole. But guacamole is typically eaten with corn chips, which are high in calories and sodium. Avocados, however, can also be eaten with salads, vegetables, sandwiches, lean protein foods (like chicken or fish) or even whole."

It should be noted that this research was supported by the Hass Avocado Board, but the researchers say the organization played no other role in the study.

In January 2014, Medical News Today reported on a study suggesting that consuming half an avocado with lunch each day may satisfy hunger in overweight individuals and help with weight management.

Our Knowledge Center article on the health benefits of avocado reveals some of the other ways the food may be good for us, as well as the potential risks of avocado consumption.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article does not mention a direct price for avocados, but it does mention that avocados tend to be expensive in many parts of the country at certain times of the year.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A government committee of health experts yesterday opened the door to selling Orlistat, a prescription weight-loss drug in a reduced dosage directly to consumers.

While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) still must approve the switch, the agency often follows the advice of its experts. If it does, Orlistat (xenical) -- currently sold only by prescription -- could be available over-the-counter (OTC) later this year. But it's important to know that the weight loss that's typical for users of the drug -- 5 to 10 percent of total weight -- will be less than many dieters expect. And many consumers may be put off by the drug's significant gastrointestinal side effects, including flatulence, diarrhea and anal leakage.

Nor is Orlistat a quick fix for unwanted pounds. To achieve any weight loss, users must also eat fewer calories and exercise more.

"It's not a miracle drug," notes Lawrence Cheskin, director of the Weight Management Center at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore, who conducted a study of Orlistat in adolescents. "None of these [weight loss] medications are."

Orlistat was approved as a weight loss and weight maintenance drug by the FDA in 1999 to treat obese and overweight people -- those with a body mass index of 30 or higher -- and overweight people (with BMI of 27 or higher) who already have weight-related health problems including diabetes, heart disease or high blood pressure.

More than 100 studies involving some 30,000 patients have been conducted with Orlistat, according to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) Consumer Healthcare, the maker of Orlistat, which has petitioned the FDA to permit OTC sales of the drug. The company says that 22 million people in 145 countries have taken the drug. "Orlistat is a very safe and effective drug with a long history of use around the world," says George Quesnelle, president of GSK Consumer Healthcare, North America.

In the longest study of Orlistat, participants who took the drug in addition to eating fewer calories and increasing exercise shed up to 12 percent of their body weight the first year. But by the fourth year of the study, they had regained some pounds. Overall, they lost about 7 percent of their body weight, compared to 4 percent for a control group that dieted and increased physical activity but didn't take the drug. The 7 percent figure works out to about 18 pounds for someone who weighs 250.

"That's little difference in weight, but significant in terms of medical benefits," notes Samuel Klein, director of the Center for Human Nutrition at the Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine. Those lost pounds translate to lower blood pressure, improved blood cholesterol levels and reduced risk of diabetes.

While Americans spend an estimated $1 billion on nonprescription weight loss products, few if any of those products have undergone the rigorous testing that is required by the FDA for prescription medications. Some weight loss experts say making Orlistat available directly to consumers broadens the proven options available to people trying to reach a healthier weight. "It's very exciting," Klein says.

But "the problem with Orlistat are the side effects," notes Johns Hopkins endocrinologist Aniket Sidhaye, co-author with Cheskin of a recent scientific review of Orlistat and other prescription weight loss drugs.

At the current recommended prescription dose -- 120 milligrams taken up to three times per day, for example up to 360 milligrams daily -- about 70 percent of users experience gastrointestinal complications, Klein says. They range from flatulence and increased bowel movements to diarrhea and anal leakage.

That's because Orlistat works by blocking fat absorption in the intestine. When fat that's eaten isn't absorbed, it must be eliminated. Thus, the gastrointestinal problems.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Estimates cost to be $2-3 /day.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., Aug. 25, 2016 – A study published today in the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine offers the most in-depth assessment yet of the safety and effectiveness of a high-tech alternative to brain surgery to treat the uncontrollable shaking caused by the most common movement disorder. And the news is very good.

The paper outlines the results of an international clinical trial, led by Jeff Elias, MD, of the University of Virginia Health System, that evaluated the scalpel-free approach called focused ultrasound for the treatment of essential tremor (ET), a condition that afflicts an estimated 10 million Americans. Not only did the researchers determine that the procedure was safe and effective, they found that it offered a lasting benefit, reducing shaking for trial participants throughout the 12-month study period.

“This study represents a major advance for neurosurgery, treatment of brain disease and specifically the treatment of ET,” Elias said. “For the first time in a randomized controlled trial, we have shown that ultrasound can be precisely delivered through the intact human skull to treat a difficult neurological disease.”

Pioneering Tremor TrialThe multi-site clinical trial included 76 participants with moderate to severe essential tremor, a condition that often robs people of their ability to write, feed themselves and carry out their normal daily activities. The trial participants all had tried existing medications, without success. The mean age was 71, and most had suffered with their tremor for many years.

Seventy-five percent of participants received the experimental treatment using focused ultrasound guided by magnetic resonance imaging. The remaining 25 percent underwent a sham procedure, to act as the control group. (They would later be given the opportunity to undergo the real procedure.)

Participants who received the treatment showed dramatic improvement, with the beneficial effects continuing throughout the study period. The researchers employed a 32-point scale to assess tremor severity, and they found that mean tremor scores improved by 47 percent at three months and 40 percent at 12 months. Participants reported major improvements in their quality of life. People who couldn’t feed themselves soup or cereal could again do so.

Participants who received the sham procedure, on the other hand, showed no significant improvements.

“The degree of tremor control was very good overall in the study, but the most important aspects were the significant gains in disabilities and quality of life – that’s what patients really care about,” Elias said.

The most commonly reported side effects were gait disturbances and numbness in the hand or face; in most instances, these side effects were temporary but some were permanent.

FDA Approved Based on the clinical trial led by Elias, the federal Food and Drug Administration has approved the focused ultrasound device, manufactured by InSightec Inc., for the treatment of essential tremor. The device focuses sound waves inside the brain to create heat, much like a magnifying glass focuses light. That heat can then be used to interrupt the troublesome brain connections responsible for the tremor. Elias can actually watch as patients’ tremor decreases, and the real-time imaging allows him to zone in on exactly the right spot before making any permanent changes to the brain.

The FDA approval means UVA can make the procedure available to eligible patients. UVA, however, is still working out the necessary logistics; it’s not yet clear when Elias will begin treating patients. Because the approach is so new, insurance plans will not yet cover the procedure, though that may change in the coming months. The cost at UVA has not yet been determined.

People interested in the procedure can learn more at uvahealth.com/focusedultrasound. The site includes a list of frequently asked questions and will be updated as UVA prepares to make the treatment available.

The procedure is not for everyone with essential tremor. It can’t be used in patients who cannot undergo MRI imaging, including those with implanted metallic devices such as a pacemaker. It is also not available for pregnant women, people with heart conditions or very high blood pressure, patients with kidney disease or clotting disorders, patients on blood thinners, patients with a history of strokes or brain tumors and people with substance abuse issues. There are other exclusions as well. Doctors at UVA will evaluate potential patients to determine their eligibility and then recommend the best course of treatment.

Groundbreaking ResearchUVA is a world leader in focused ultrasound research. Elias and his colleagues are testing the capability of focused ultrasound to treat Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, brain tumors and benign breast tumors.

The essential tremor research has been supported by InSightec, the Focused Ultrasound Foundation and the BIRD (US-Israel Binational Industry Research and Development) Foundation.

FOR REPORTERS: Elias will be available for interviews today, and he’ll be doing a Facebook Live broadcast at 3:15 Eastern. To arrange an interview, contact Alex Prevost at 434.906.7255 or amp3gb@virginia.edu. High-resolution images and video are available as well.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions cost, saying, “Because the approach is so new, insurance plans will not yet cover the procedure, though that may change in the coming months. The cost at UVA has not yet been determined.”  But the procedure is still neurosurgery which is inherently expensive.  Readers might benefit from knowing the cost of the current alternative surgical approach to treating this condition, deep-brain stimulation. The fact that other language in the release does come close to marketing this procedure for the medical center is also troubling.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
What Happens If You Try To Prevent Every Single Suicide?

Each year, nearly three times as many Americans die from suicide as from homicide. More Americans kill themselves than die from breast cancer.

As Dr.Thomas Insel, longtime head of the National Institute of Mental Health, prepared to step down from his job in October, he cited the lack of progress in reducing the number of suicides as his biggest disappointment. While the homicide rate in the U.S. has dropped 50 percent since the early 1990s, the suicide rate is higher than it was a decade ago.

"That to me is unacceptable," Insel says.

It hasn't been for lack of trying. The U.S. has a national suicide hotline, and there are suicide prevention programs in every state. There's screening, educational programs, and midnight walks to raise awareness. Yet over the past decade or so, the national suicide rate has increased. In 2003, the suicide rate was 10.8 per 100,000 people. In 2013, it was 12.6.

An effort that began in Detroit in 2001 to treat the most common cause of suicide — depression — is offering hope. With a relentless focus on finding and treating people with depression, the Henry Ford Health System has cut the suicide rate among the people in its insurance plan dramatically. The story of the health system's success is a story of persistence, confidence, hope and a strict adherence to a very specific approach.

That approach saved the life of a woman who prefers to be known only by her first name, Lynn. She agreed to share her medical history on the condition that we not use her full name to protect her privacy.

Lynn, who's now in her mid-50s, has had bipolar disorder, also known as manic-depressive illness, for nearly 30 years. The depressive part of her illness "is like the pain of having a cancer," she says. About 15 years ago, she started getting irresistible urges to take her own life and she started making serious attempts — at times almost monthly.

"When I was in the depths of depression, I was being pulled and sucked into this black tunnel," she says. "I was desperately trying to grab onto something to stop from being sucked in." Sometimes she couldn't find anything to hang on to. "Those are the times when I finally let go and attempted suicide," she says.

The program that saved Lynn almost didn't get off the ground.

Fifteen years ago, suicide prevention care at Henry Ford, like in many places, was mostly reactive. When patients came in talking about suicide, health providers took notice. But little was done to find people before they reached that point.

Some of the health providers in the psychiatric division decided they could do better. So they applied to a foundation for a grant to provide something they called "perfect depression care" for the 200,000 patients in the health system. The goal: zero suicides.

The mental health division failed to win the grant, but the health system went ahead with the proposed changes anyway.

The plan it developed is intensive and thorough, an almost cookbook approach. Primary care doctors screen every patient with two questions: How often have you felt down in the past two weeks? And how often have you felt little pleasure in doing things? A high score leads to more questions about sleep disturbances, changes in appetite, thoughts of hurting oneself. All patients are questioned on every visit.

If the health providers recognize a mental health problem, patients are assigned to appropriate care — cognitive behavioral therapy, drugs, group counseling, or hospitalization if necessary. On each patient's medical record, providers have to attest to having done the screening, and they record plans for any needed care.

Therapists involve patients' families, and ask them to remove guns or other means of suicide from their homes. Clerks are trained to make sure that patients who need followup care don't leave without an appointment. Patients themselves come up with "safety plans."

Lynn has two copies, one by her nightstand and one in her kitchen. Each lists things she can do when she feels depression coming on. She could sit on her balcony, or do some drawing or painting. The list includes her therapists' phone numbers. And there's a reminder that the feeling will pass — it has before.

Before the zero suicide plan went into effect, says psychiatrist Doree Ann Espiritu, acting head of the zero suicide program at Henry Ford, you might make a contract with a patient where the patient agrees not to commit suicide. Studies show it doesn't work very well, she says.

Today, providers are trained to be comfortable asking their patients about suicidal thoughts. "There is a fear among clinicians that if you ask questions about suicide, you are giving the patient an idea that this could be an option," says Espiritu, "and if you ask about guns or pills, that you are giving them some hints on how they can carry out a plan." The Henry Ford therapists are trained to break that barrier.

For Lynn, the key was persistence — her therapists', and her own. "I recall one time with my psychiatrist, who kept trying to encourage me and help me find ways of coping, and I can remember saying, 'I don't believe there's hope, I don't see it, I don't feel it, I need you to hold on to that for me because it's not there,' " she recalls.

Her therapists never gave up. "There is no question that the message I got from Day 1 is that they knew they could help me, and they would help me," Lynn says. Over the years she's been in group therapy, day treatment, and, when things got bad, the emergency room.

The Henry Ford approach is catching on. A stream of visitors from U.S. health insurers and from the United Kingdom have made site visits. The Suicide Prevention Resource Center has run two zero suicide training academies for teams from health care systems based on the Henry Ford principles. Other health systems have adapted the plan, including Group Health Cooperative in Seattle and the behavioral health provider Centerstone in Tennessee.

Espiritu started work at Henry Ford just as the program was starting, and she remembers the initial staff meetings: "There was a lot of, 'How can you do this? How can you aim for zero? How can you expect your clinicians to be perfect and follow this protocol?' " Some people didn't think it could be done, she says, or even attempted.

Still, the health system went ahead, and the rewards were nearly immediate. Henry Ford epidemiologist Brian Ahmedani studies the numbers. In 2009, for those being actively treated for a mental health problem or substance abuse, "we had a rate of zero per hundred thousand," he says. It's crept up to 20 per 100,000 per year, but that's still 80 percent lower than it was when the program began. The rate is five per 100,000 in the organization's general population, which is well below the national average and has remained steady despite an increasing rate of suicide statewide.

There's reason to think a full-bore effort to treat depression could reduce health costs, because untreated depression is associated with higher medical bills for chronic illnesses such as diabetes and hypertension. But there are training costs involved, and the Henry Ford system has had to keep its staffing up to be able to provide care for people who need it.

Officials at Henry Ford say they haven't analyzed the costs. But Centerstone has. The behavioral health provider in Nashville implemented the Henry Ford approach for nearly 200 patients who'd already made a suicide attempt. Reductions in emergency room visits and hospitalizations over the course of a year resulted in savings of more than $400,000.

Why push for zero, rather than just a reduction? "Because if you say we're OK with five a year, one of those might be your brother or your friend," says Espiritu. "We aim for zero because it reminds all of us of what we would want for ourselves." Maybe it is not possible, she says. But it is a goal.

And as for Lynn, she doesn't consider herself cured. She says with the treatment she's received at Henry Ford, she's learned to live, even thrive, with bipolar disease. And she's alive. That, she says, makes her a big success story.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: At issue in the story is the health system’s so-called “perfect depression care,” which incorporates depression screening into primary care. Patients deemed to have, or be at risk of, depression are then given appropriate treatment. It’s difficult to pin a specific cost to this. The matter is further complicated by the fact that treating depression can also save money by driving down costs related to associated health problems. However, the story notes that Centerstone — a separate health system that has adopted the Henry Ford Health System’s model for a smaller cohort of patients — did do a cost/benefit analysis and found that it resulted in savings of more than $400,000 per year. While we’ll award a Satisfactory, we think there was a muddling here of Henry Ford’s global screening strategy with the intense care provision in the Centerstone model. It is not appropriate to apply the cost analysis of the latter to the former. In addition, it can be argued that screening every patient at every visit it wasteful. The story reads/sounds somewhat like a paean to doing as much as you can and adopting a kitchen-sink approach rather than a carefully honed and efficient one.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Do this and similar exercises hundreds of times over multiple sessions weekly; continue for months; and, gradually, presbyopia lessens, a number of studies show.

One study also examined functions of the eye itself and found none of these improvements were because of changes in the eye. They’re all in the brain.

Various smartphone apps say they offer this kind of vision-improving training; I used one called GlassesOff, the only one I found that was backed by scientific studies.

Perceptual learning can improve the vision of people who already see quite well and those with other conditions. For example, a study tested the approach in 23 young adults, around age 24. Compared with a control group of 20 young adults, the treatment group increased letter recognition speed. Similar training is an effective component in treating amblyopia, also called “lazy eye,” which is the most frequent cause of vision loss in infants and children, affecting 3 percent of the population. It may also improve vision in those with mild myopia (nearsightedness).

It should be acknowledged that some researchers involved in many of these studies have financial ties to GlassesOff. However, other studies with no commercial links obtained similar results, and several scientists I spoke to, including those without ties to GlassesOff, thought the science behind the app was credible. One study published in Psychological Science trained 16 college-aged adults and 16 older adults (around age 71) with Gabor patch exercises for 1.5 hours per day for seven days. After training, the older adults’ ability to see low-contrast images improved to the level that the college-age ones had before training.

Scientists don’t know exactly how perceptual learning relieves presbyopia, but they have some clues based on how our brain processes visual information.

After first taking in “raw data” of an image through the eye, different sets of neurons in the brain process it as separate features like edges and colors. Then the brain must coordinate activity across sets of neurons to assemble these features into recognizable objects like chairs, faces, letters or words. Reading at our normal pace, the brain has only about 250 milliseconds to do this work until the eyes automatically move onto the next letter or word. Once they do so, we’re taking in more information from whatever the eyes focus on next. If we haven’t yet processed the prior set of information, we can’t understand it.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The column provides clear information about the cost of the app tried by the writer. It would have been strengthened by information about the cost of bifocals and, in particular, over-the-counter drugstore “readers.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Antidepressant drugs really do work, a major new international study has proven. Pooling data from 522 trials including nearly 120,000 patients, researchers found all drugs analysed were more effective than placebos in the treatment of adults with acute depression.

Authors of the study—published yesterday in the Lancet—believe many more people could benefit from antidepressant medication.

The study results represent the most comprehensive evidence currently available, they wrote.

More than 300 million people worldwide have depression, according to the World Health Organization, of which less than half recieve effective treatments. In many countries, the rate drops to less than 10 percent.

Read more: Trump Health Exam: President Still Taking Hair Loss Drug Even After Research Revealed Link to Erectile Dysfunction and Depression

In the U.S., the National Institute of Mental Health estimates 16.2 million adults experienced at least one major depressive episode in 2016. Approximately 37 percent of these people received no treatment.

In the U.K, where a number of the study authors are based, at least one million more people could benefit from drugs or psychotherapy, senior author John Geddes said.

Some drugs more effective than others

The researchers analyzed existing studies of 21 different drugs, and found some were much more effective than others.

Drugs ranged from more than one third more effective than a placebo to more than twice as effective. The best performers included amitriptyline and escitalopram, while the worst included fluoxetine—commonly sold under the trade name Prozac—and reboxetine, which is not approved for sale in the U.S.

The results add up to a complex treatment picture for what authors called “one of the most common, burdensome, and costly psychiatric disorders worldwide in adults.”

Antidepressants do not improve symptoms in about 40 percent of people, study author Andrea Cipriani of Oxford University told a press briefing.

While these results should reassure many people with depression that antidepressants can be effective, “this does not necessarily mean antidepressants should always be the first line of treatment,” he said.

Read more: By 2020, We’ll Have Flying Cars and Robot Bellboys—along With Crippling Depression and Unemployment

Talking therapies are thought to be about as effective as antidepressant medication, but these are often much more expensive.

Experts not involved in the research agreed the results were significant.

Helen Stokes-Lampard, chair of the U.K.’s Royal College of GPs, expressed concern about the stigma surrounding antidepressant use.

She said in a statement: “Taking antidepressants is frequently portrayed as a negative thing or something done only when other therapies are not available or have failed, but this in itself can add to the unfortunate stigma that sometimes exists around people with mental health conditions.”

But she also urged caution. “Although antidepressants are of proven benefit—as this study shows,” she said, “no doctor wants their patients to become reliant on medication.”

Carmine Pariante, a professor at the UK’s Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience and spokesperson for the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said the study "finally puts to bed the controversy on antidepressants."

James Warner, an Imperial College London psychiatrist, added: “Depression causes misery to countless thousands every year and this study adds to the existing evidence that effective treatments are available.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Without mentioning any numbers, the story does say that the costs of antidepressant drugs tend to be lower than the other major treatment approach for depression, which is talk therapy.
The story would have been stronger with cost data. For example, the four drugs found most effective  in the analysis– mirtazapine, escitalopram, venlafaxine, and sertraline — cost $8 to $12 for 30 tablets, according to the web site GoodRx. The study says, “All of the most effective antidepressants are now off patent and available in generic form.”
It also doesn’t mention that talk therapy may have more value for some patients because it can equip people with tools for life, and severe depression needs to be treated by a combination of drugs and talk therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About one in 20 men is estimated to have Peyronie’s, but figures are not precise because people with the condition tend not to discuss it publicly.

Although the company selling Xiaflex will be Auxilium Pharmaceuticals of Malvern, Pa., the F.D.A. approval was a belated triumph for the drug’s original developer, BioSpecifics Technologies of Lynbrook, N.Y., on Long Island. Founded in 1957, it struggled for decades to find uses for the product, almost going out of business before licensing the drug to Auxilium in 2004.

“It sort of proves to people that if you really believe in a drug you should never give up,” said Matthew Geller, a biotechnology investment banker who is a member of the BioSpecifics board.

Shares of BioSpecifics closed Monday at $27.61, up from $1 as recently as late 2006.

Some people treated with Xiaflex in clinical trials for the Dupuytren’s hand condition said it had made a big difference in their lives, and had allowed them to avoid painful surgery.

“When I looked down and saw my finger straightened out, I cried,” said Kenneth Nelson, 65, of Indianapolis. “It was to me just like a miracle.”

Xiaflex is an enzyme produced by a gangrene-causing bacterium, Clostridium histolyticum, which uses it to eat away the tissues of its victims. The enzyme, called collagenase, breaks down collagen, a major component of the body’s connective tissue that is found in skin, tendons, cartilage and other organs.

But collagenase by itself does not cause gangrene. And there are times doctors need to break down collagen, such as when an excess builds up in the hand or penis, causing Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. The ailments are named for French surgeons who described the conditions in the 18th and 19th centuries.

The enzyme was first extracted from the bacteria around 1950 by Ines Mandl, a young biochemist at Columbia University. Edwin H. Wegman, a Long Island entrepreneur, learned about Dr. Mandl’s work and set up a company called Advance Biofactures, which later became BioSpecifics, to turn collagenase into a drug.

In 1965, the company won approval of an ointment containing collagenase for use in removing dead tissue from skin ulcers and burns. The ointment, sold by licensees under the name Santyl, was a modest success, but the company never truly prospered.

So in the 1970s the company began developing what it thought would be a bigger money-maker, an injectable collagenase. It tested that drug for numerous uses, including herniated disks. Finally, in the early 1990s, two professors of orthopedics at the nearby State University of New York at Stony Brook suggested using the drug for Dupuytren’s.

The professors, Dr. Lawrence C. Hurst and Marie A. Badalamente, injected the drug into the tails of rats, as a stand-in for human fingers. They found they could dissolve the collagen in tendons, making the tails floppy, without harming nearby nerves and arteries. Then they organized clinical trials in patients and got federal grants to help pay for the work. The professors and Stony Brook will share a royalty of one half of 1 percent of sales of Xiaflex for use in treating Dupuytren’s.

But work was slowed by lack of money, and by 2004, BioSpecifics was about out of cash. In desperation, Ed Wegman’s son Mark, a top computer scientist at I.B.M., called a childhood friend, Laurence Korn, who had been the chief executive of a successful biotechnology company now known as PDL BioPharma.

With Dr. Korn’s help, BioSpecifics licensed the drug to Auxilium in a matter of weeks, receiving $5 million initially.

Auxilium was interested because of Peyronie’s disease. It already was selling a gel for men with low testosterone and had learned from urologists about the need for better treatments for bent penises.

“From talking with surgeons and patients who have Peyronie’s, neither of them wants to do the surgery,” said Will Sargent, a spokesman for Auxilium.

Two years ago, the drug giant Pfizer, which sells the erectile dysfunction drug Viagra, licensed the European rights to Xiaflex from Auxilium for an initial payment of $75 million. BioSpecifics got $6.4 million of that amount and will receive 8.5 percent of additional payments of up to $410 million that Pfizer might make.

Auxilium sought approval for treating Dupuytren’s first because it was easier to measure success in straightening fingers. But the company hopes to begin late-stage trials of Xiaflex for Peyronie’s disease later this year. In a midstage trial, injections of Xiaflex into the collagen plaque in the penis reduced the curvature. But the drug did not reduce pain or discomfort during intercourse by a statistically significant amount.

While collagenase itself is not patented, the companies do have patents on the use of the enzyme to treat Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. They are also shielded from competition for seven years under a federal law aimed at spurring development of drugs for rare, or “orphan,” diseases — even though newer estimates suggest these two diseases are not as rare as thought when the drugs were given orphan status.

Auxilium and BioSpecifics hope that the half-century-old collagenase might eventually become as versatile as Botox, another bacterial product. They are looking at uses that range from loosening up immobile “frozen shoulders” to eliminating fat bulges and cellulite.

With its belated success, BioSpecifics has sold off its ointment business. It now has only five employees and a business of collecting a roughly 11 to 12 percent royalty on sales of Xiaflex.

“We will be a cash machine going forward,” said Thomas L. Wegman, the president and the other son of the company founder. “We don’t have to pay for marketing. We don’t have to pay for manufacturing.”

The Wegman family — the two sons and the founder’s 75-year-old wife, Toby — controls about 25 percent of the company’s stock.

Ed Wegman, the company’s founder, did not live to see the F.D.A. approval, dying at age 87 in 2007. On Feb. 2, the day the drug was approved, one BioSpecifics director sent an e-mail message to the others saying, “Well done. Hope Ed is looking on.”

Meanwhile, Dr. Mandl, the biochemist who first isolated collagenase from the bacteria, is nearing 93. Last year, when BioSpecifics stock rose above $30, she sold the last 1,000 shares she had been given for serving as a consultant to the company over the years.

Unfortunately, she had sold most of her holdings years earlier for a relative pittance. “If I still had what I originally had,” she said. “I’d be very rich.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The main story estimates a course of treatment will cost about $5400, and the sidebar helpfully compared this amount to some of the other treatment options including surgery and needle aponeurotomy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dear Julia: How well do flu shots actually work?

Just about every influential public health figure urges people to get their flu shots each fall as a necessary precaution during influenza season.

So over dinner, I asked a couple of respected evidence-based medicine researchers what they thought of the vaccine. I was taken aback by their response. They basically laughed at the idea that the flu shot was particularly effective.

This posed a conundrum. It seemed like there were two groups saying very different things. But after reviewing the research, I think I understand what's going on here. It's true that flu vaccines don't work spectacularly well, at least according to the best evidence we have (and most of the evidence on flu vaccines is of poor methodological quality). But the downsides to getting a vaccine are extremely minimal, and flu shots may still be helpful in reducing some illness and saving lives, which is why public health experts say you should get vaccinated anyway.

Why the flu vaccine isn't always effective

The flu vaccine has been our main strategy for warding off seasonal flu for more than 60 years. Seasonal influenza, which surfaces as a respiratory illness, is caused by influenza A and B viruses. The flu shot is designed to protect people against three or four strains of the A and B viruses that researchers believe will be most common that year, leading to the nasty fevers, headaches, coughs, and runny noses that make many people miserable in the fall and winter.

The challenge, however, is that the flu virus is highly unstable, mutating all the time. So this means drug companies can't just make one kind of vaccine that'll last a lifetime. Every year, public health agencies essentially make educated guesses on what strains and mutations will make the rounds. And that's not easy. In February, the World Health Organization offers a prediction — based on surveillance and laboratory and clinical studies — and then each country uses that prediction to approve vaccines in its jurisdiction. (In the US, the Food and Drug Administration makes that final call.) The potential for error here can dramatically alter the effectiveness of the flu shot in a given season. If vaccine makers prepare for one combination of viruses and different ones end up circulating widely, the vaccine won't work that well.

This may help explain why the evidence on the effectiveness of flu shots is relatively mixed. The Cochrane Collaboration, an independent nonprofit that reviews the evidence on medical questions, has conducted two major meta-analyses (looking at the results of lots of individual studies) on whether the shot prevents flu in healthy children and adults.

In kids, the highest-quality evidence — a randomized controlled trial — suggests the vaccine works well enough: On average, if you give six kids under the age of 6 a flu shot, you can expect to prevent one case of the flu. For children under age 2, the benefits are less clear; the evidence, the researchers found, was scant, and of the research that was available, it seemed the efficacy of the shot was similar to placebo.

In adults, however, the vaccine's effects are more modest. "Depending on the season," explained Tom Jefferson, an author on these Cochrane reviews, "you need to vaccinate anywhere between 33 and 100 people to avoid one set of symptoms." In a good year, when the WHO guesses correctly and the flu shot matches the strains in circulation, you need to give 33 adults flu shots, on average, to prevent one case of illness. In a year when the WHO guesses badly, you need to vaccinate 100 people to prevent one flu case.

Jefferson pointed out that his Cochrane review on adults also found that flu vaccination rates have barely any effect on the number of sick days taken and no major impact on rates of hospitalization. So, yes, the flu vaccine can prevent illness, but it's hard to detect major effects on public health in the data.

On the other hand, the evidence suggests that there's no harm in getting a flu shot, either. The meta-analyses found no evidence of serious side effects beyond the odd case of soreness at the injection site.

That seems to be the same conclusion that other studies have drawn — the flu vaccine is modestly helpful, and doesn't hurt. In 2012 researchers analyzed 15 meta-analyses on the flu shot and concluded, "Most influenza vaccines have been shown to confer some protection against naturally acquired infection and no evidence for major harms has emerged."

One key caveat here is that the evidence, overall, is pretty poor quality. Most of these analyses rely overwhelmingly on observational studies, where researchers observe and gather data on people who take the flu shot compared with those who don't. Because these aren't experiments — ideally we'd have randomized controlled trials — they're more prone to bias and therefore less reliable.

In the case of the elderly, the situation is particularly troublesome. As this Lancet study points out, because annual flu shots were recommended for the elderly since the 1960s, it has been unethical to conduct high-quality randomized controlled trials where you give only one group the shot in order to compare it with another group that didn't get the vaccine. So, as this Cochrane review notes, it's impossible to draw firm conclusions on the effectiveness of the flu vaccine for those over 65 because the data is so biased and poor.

Again, though, this doesn't mean we should throw away the vaccine. Stanford researcher John Ioannidis told me how he makes sense of this issue after reviewing the evidence: "Overall the flu vaccine is effective, and it does save lives. I cannot put an exact figure to how many, but it may well be millions of lives. Generally it is safe and rather cheap, so even if the effectiveness is less than optimal sometimes, overall it is a good deal."

Why people still bother to get the shot

Despite the limited evidence of effectiveness, there are still good reasons why public health experts recommend the shot.

For one, in those years when the WHO guesses correctly which strains will circulate, the shot tends to be a lot more helpful than some of these averages suggest. And the vaccine is overwhelmingly safe. There's also little by way of alternatives. Beyond public health measures (making sure you have good hand hygiene and avoiding the office when you're sick), the flu shot is the best medical intervention we have for preventing infection. So there's little downside with at least some potential benefit. I personally continue to get the flu shot for this reason.

As Roger Baxter, the co-director of the Kaiser Permanente Vaccine Study Center, told me, "Flu vaccines are not a panacea, and do not prevent all cases of flu, even in the best years, when there are no manufacturing problems and the match is perfect." He continued: "However, the vaccines provide moderate protection, and can prevent huge numbers of cases of this serious illness. Many studies have shown that the vaccines are very safe, so the benefit-to-risk ratio is high and the cost is relatively low."

Welcome to Dear Julia, a column where readers can submit everyday health questions. Which over-the-counter painkillers work best? Is it better to run or walk for exercise? How much harm does frequent flying do to your body? Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form, or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While the story only touches on the costs of flu shots in passing, saying that they’re relatively cheap, we’ll give them the benefit of the doubt on this category.  At least at two points in the story, the issue of costs are raised.  We would have liked it even better had the story mentioned the actual range of possible costs for the flu vaccine.  A quick web search shows the prices ranging from $10 to $30, based on information from the CDC.  And free shots are regularly available at public health centers as well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jay Konduros used to rush home several times a year after accidentally cutting or bumping himself. There he would inject himself with refrigerated blood-clotting factor to prevent internal bleeding and extensive bruising and swelling. “I was walking on eggshells all the time,” said the former aerospace engineer who has a blood disorder called hemophilia B.

Then, last year, Konduros enrolled in a clinical trial, receiving an experimental gene therapy at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Almost immediately, he began producing the missing clotting factor. Several weeks later, after he dropped a heavy box on his shin, he watched a bruise develop and shrink within hours. “Are you kidding me?” he thought. “Life's easy if this is what happens.”

Konduros, 53, who runs a bakery and cafe in southeastern Ontario, is one of 10 men in an early-stage trial sponsored by Spark Therapeutics. (The disorder is much more common in men than women.) On Wednesday, researchers reported that a single intravenous infusion of Spark's novel gene therapy enabled patients to safely produce sufficient clotting factor to prevent dangerous bleeding episodes.

The treatment also “nearly universally eliminated” the need for preventive infusions of clotting factor a few times a week, the scientists said. And its effects lasted; after a year and a half, the longest patient follow-up, the therapy was continuing to work.

The results, published Wednesday online in the New England Journal of Medicine, represent “another example of the gene-therapy renaissance,” Matthew Porteus, a pediatrician at Stanford University, wrote in an accompanying editorial. He said the data suggests that the treatment ultimately might provide an “ideal cure” for hemophilia B.

Still, he noted, the study has some limitations. The follow-up period was relatively short, from 28 to 78 weeks in the new report; longer-term studies are needed to prove safety and effectiveness over extended periods. In addition, he said, researchers need to find ways to provide the therapy to a broader group of people, including children, and to figure out how to reduce the costs involved.

The researchers presented earlier findings on the gene therapy a year ago at the American Society of Hematology's annual meeting, but the latest data covers a larger patient group and a longer time period.

The hemophilia gene therapy is one of several being tested for conditions including sickle cell anemia and Huntington's disease. The one-time treatments seek to fight the disease by adding correct copies of a patient's defective genes. If approved, such treatments are expected to command stratospheric prices. For example, a separate Spark gene therapy for a rare type of childhood blindness, which is on track for Food and Drug Administration clearance soon, could cost $1 million per patient for infusions in both eyes, according to some Wall Street analysts.

Still, the therapies can produce at least some offsetting savings. Porteus noted in his editorial that the hemophilia therapy resulted in savings of about $200,000 a year per patient because of the elimination of clotting-factor infusions.

Other experts also were impressed by the results. The hemophilia study “is small but very promising, and it gives me the sense that gene therapy for hemophilia B is going to be at our disposal in no time, maybe a few years from now,” said Aric Parnes, who is associate director of the Boston Hemophilia Center at the Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center and wasn't involved in the study. “One of the key things is, how long will the treatment last? Does it wane over time? So far, with a full year, it doesn’t look like that is happening.”

Lindsey George, the lead investigator and a hematologist at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, said that nine of the 10 men in the trial didn't experience any bleeding episodes after the gene therapy treatment. The one patient who needed clotting factor because of bleeding used 91 percent less than before, she said.

“People were planning their lives around hemophilia, and now they are doing activities that they weren't before,” George said. “One man who came in a wheelchair is now out of a wheelchair and is coaching Little League.”

People with hemophilia B inherit a gene mutation on the X chromosome that interferes with their ability to produce normal levels of blood-clotting factor IX. (Because women have two copies of the X chromosomes, the other one can compensate, so they may carry the disease but not suffer from it.) Bleeding episodes — which can result from injury or occur spontaneously — can cause extensive damage and be life threatening.

The therapy developed by Spark, a biotech company spun off from the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia in 2013, involves a bioengineered gene designed to prompt the body to produce increased levels of a different clotting factor. The gene is transported to the liver, where clotting factor is made, by a harmless virus called an adeno-associated viral vector. For the current trial, which is being funded by Spark and Pfizer, researchers used a clotting factor that is 8 to 10 times as strong as the normal version. The stronger factor is called Factor IX-Padua, because it was discovered in 2009 in an Italian family.

Patients produced clotting-factor levels that were enough to allow blood to clot but not to spur an undesirable immune-system response, the researchers said.

FDA advisers urge approval for first gene therapy for inherited disease

In a first, scientists edit genes inside a man's body to try to cure a disease. What's next?

'This is not the end': Using immunotherapy and a genetic glitch to give cancer patients hope
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although this therapy is not yet available for patient use, the story makes a point of noting that the cost may well be “stratospheric,” should it make it to market.
If approved, such treatments are expected to command stratospheric prices. For example, a separate Spark gene therapy for a rare type of childhood blindness, which is on track for Food and Drug Administration clearance soon, could cost $1 million per patient for infusions in both eyes, according to some Wall Street analysts.
Still, the therapies can produce at least some offsetting savings. Porteus noted in his editorial that the hemophilia therapy resulted in savings of about $200,000 a year per patient because of the elimination of clotting-factor infusions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration approved a second version of a groundbreaking treatment Wednesday that genetically alters patients' cells to attack cancer — this time, to fight aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

The treatment is for adults with certain types of large B-cell lymphoma who have not responded to or who have relapsed after at least two other kinds of treatment, such as chemotherapy and bone-marrow transplants. The group numbers about 7,500 patients a year in the United States.

The one-time infusion, known as CAR T-cell therapy, is made by Kite Pharma, which is based in Santa Monica, Calif., and recently was bought by Gilead Sciences for $11.9 billion. Kite announced Wednesday that the treatment's brand name will be Yescarta and its price will be $373,000.

In late August, the FDA cleared the first CAR T-cell therapy, which is designed for children and young adults whose leukemia doesn't respond to standard treatments. About 600 patients in the United States fall into that category every year. Kymriah, which costs $475,000, is manufactured by Novartis.

Biotech analysts had expected the Kite price to be lower than Kymriah's, in part because the number of eligible patients is larger and the response rates are lower. Even so, Yescarta's cost is likely to stoke the ongoing debate about high drug prices.

The FDA approval is the latest step forward for the fast-moving field of immunotherapy, which aims to bolster the immune system to attack malignancies. CAR T-cell therapies are among several approaches, along with treatments called checkpoint inhibitors and cancer vaccines, but they have recently grabbed much of the attention. Dozens of other companies also are working on them.

“Today, marks another milestone in the development of a whole new scientific paradigm for the treatment of serious diseases,” FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said in a statement, adding that the approval demonstrates “the continued momentum of this promising new area of medicine.”

A CAR T-cell therapy involves a complicated and customized procedure in which T cells — sometimes called the foot soldiers of the immune system — are removed from the patient. They are sent to a special lab and genetically modified to target a protein on the surface of the patient's cancer cells. Once the modified cells are returned to the patient, their numbers expand exponentially as they become an army of cancer fighters.

In 2015, Marie Miceli was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma at Siteman Cancer Center in St. Louis, which is jointly owned by Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University School of Medicine. She received chemo and underwent a bone-marrow transplant. Neither worked.

“The doctors were saying, 'Go see an attorney and get your life in order,' " the 64-year-old Realtor recalled. Then they offered her a slot in Kite's clinical trial, a last-resort effort. “I could feel it when they put those T cells back in,” she said. “It was the craziest feeling in the world.” When she was checked a month later, she said, her cancer was gone. It hasn't returned.

Kite's “vein-to-vein” turnaround period — from cell extraction to reinfusion — is about 17 days, according to Frederick Locke, an oncologist at Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa and co-leader of the Kite trial.

The FDA said the safety and efficacy of Yescarta were established in a multi-center trial of more than 100 adults with large B-cell lymphoma. An independent review committee found that 72 percent of patients treated with a single infusion responded to therapy, including 51 percent who then showed no evidence of remaining cancer. Kite has said that at six months, 44 percent of patients were still responding, with 39 percent having no sign of cancer.

“This is not just an incremental benefit,” said David Chang, Kite's chief medical officer. “It raises the potential that a cure can be possible.” Some of the first patients who underwent treatment now have been in remission for three to five years, he said, although he cautioned that it's still too early to know whether those patients are cured.

Locke said about 13 percent of patients in the trial had a severe side effect known as cytokine release syndrome, which produces high fevers, low blood pressure and other flulike symptoms. Twenty-eight percent had neurological “events,” such as severe confusion; three patients died of complications caused by the treatment.

“These are patients who knew they were out of options,” he said, noting that lymphoma patients who relapse or don't respond to treatment have just a 50 percent chance of surviving for six months.

Because of the side effects, the treatment will carry a boxed warning, the FDA's most serious. In addition, the agency is requiring hospitals and clinics that dispense Yescarta to be certified after undergoing special training.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in adults. This type of cancer begins in the immune system and can be fast- or slow-growing, the FDA noted.

Kite's CAR T-cell product was developed years ago at the National Cancer Institute by pioneering scientist Steven Rosenberg and licensed to the company for commercialization.

Armin Ghobadi, an oncologist at Siteman who was an investigator in the Kite trial, said the new treatment is “just the first step” and that researchers are working to make it safer and more effective. He said the therapy already has been life-changing for many of his patients — and for him.

“There's nothing worse than telling patients, 'I'm sorry, we are done here, we don't have anything else to offer,' " he said.

FDA advisers urge approval for first gene therapy for inherited disease
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states the cost of this new therapy. It also contrasts it to the other approved drug for CAR T-cell therapy. However, it would have been helpful to know if this cost includes all the related hospital care and services, or is simply the cost of the drug itself. It also would have been useful to compare it to other treatments for this form of cancer, such as chemotherapy or transplantation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Transcranial magnetic stimulation is gaining acceptance since it came on the market four years ago. Beginning Saturday, Medicare will cover the treatments when other therapies have failed.

NASHVILLE -- Sick with depression, Harriet Bruce spent her days lying in bed for months at a time.

Then she agreed to a transcranial magnetic stimulation. The new treatment pushes powerful magnetic currents into the front of the brain, the part that controls emotions.

These days, Bruce awakens before her alarm goes off and dives into projects, including monster tasks she once dreaded.

"I have a room in my house in which I had stacked boxes from when we moved 10 years ago that I wanted to get to, but I couldn't do it," the Centerville woman said. "But I've been working on that."

Transcranial magnetic stimulation, once considered an experimental treatment for depression, is gaining acceptance since it came on the market four years ago. Beginning Saturday, Medicare will cover the treatments when other therapies have failed. This week, specialty insurance administrator Magellan Behavioral Health Inc. issued medical necessity guidelines for TMS treatment and will provide coverage effective Jan. 1.

Doctors who use the NeuroStar TMS Therapy system say treatments are more effective than medications with far fewer side effects. It's an alternative to electroconvulsive therapy — shock treatments — for patients who have not responded to drugs or psychotherapy. But TMS is expensive. It can cost as much as $400 for a 37-minute session and require multiple treatments. The total bill can range between $8,000 and $12,000.

The cost, however, is less than an extended hospital stay.

"We had several patients who were headed toward the hospital, who had this treatment and were able to avoid that," said Dr. Scott West, a psychiatrist who pioneered the treatment in Nashville 2 and one-half years ago.

The NeuroStar system resembles a dentist's chair. A patient sits in the chair while a magnetic pulse emitter transmits energy from a levered arm — a process similar to undergoing dental X-rays. The device makes a clicking noise while delivering the magnetic pulses.

"When this large magnet pulses repetitively, it causes an electromagnetic field which then passes through the skull and stimulates the brain tissue itself," said West, explaining a cascading effect that results in the interior nerve fibers connecting better.

Dr. Michelle Cochran, purchased her TMS system about 18 months ago. The devices cost around $100,000, Cochran said, who has treated 45 patients with the therapy.

"Most people are not scared of it," she said. "It sounds sort of creepy and weird when you think about it, but for the most part, it is safer in general than taking a medicine. You've got less seizure risk than taking a medicine. You've got less side effects than taking a medicine."

Both Cochran and West cite high patient response rates. A clinical trial funded by the National Institutes of Health revealed a "significant effect of treatment" when patients received TMS treatment. It compared outcomes of patients who actually received the magnetic pulses against patients in a "sham" group, who sat down in the treatment chair for fake sessions.

Depressed patients who received the real TMS treatment had remission rates four times higher than those in the sham group.

However, insurers, including UnitedHealthcare and BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, remain reluctant to embrace the treatment. UnitedHealthcare's medical policy for TMS says it is unproven for treating depression.

"Generally speaking, just because a device, procedure or medication has been approved or is deemed to be safe by some entities does not mean that it is automatically covered," BlueCross BlueShield spokeswoman Kelly Allen said. "Quality and safety are our first priority in setting our medical policy, but those have to be balanced with affordability."

Cochran does not accept Medicare and has chosen to be an out-of-network provider. West is a Medicare provider.

Said West: "Typically, when Medicare starts to cover something the excuse of experimental and investigational is no longer valid."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provides the reader with information on the cost so it meets the criterion.  We would have liked a bit more information.  For example, how durable is the response and will patients need repeated treatments? Based on the literature to date, patients may need to undergo treatment every 2-3 months.  We are told that each treatment costs about $400 and the total cost is $8-12,000.  That means each patients receives 20-30 treatments.  There are ancillary costs associated with each trip that we would have liked to have included. Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There is only “moderate’’ evidence that the newly approved prostate cancer drug Provenge helps patients, according to an analysis done for Medicare that was made public on Wednesday.

The analysis is part of a controversial review by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to determine whether to pay for Provenge, which costs $93,000 per patient and extended lives by about four months in clinical trials. Medicare advisers will meet next Wednesday to discuss the drug, which was developed by Dendreon, a Seattle-based biotechnology company.

Provenge is the first so-called therapeutic cancer vaccine – meaning it works by training the patient’s immune system to attack the tumor – to win F.D.A. approval. The treatment is made for each patient from his own blood. Sales have been small so far because Dendreon’s manufacturing capacity has been limited.

While Medicare generally pays for drugs that are approved by the Food and Drug Administration, its debate over paying for Provenge has raised concerns among some cancer patients, doctors and investors who say the government is sending a warning shot that it will not automatically pay for high-priced medicines.

“Not only is C.M.S.’s action contrary to Congress’s intent to ensure beneficiary access to drugs and biologicals used in an anticancer chemotherapeutic regimen, but it threatens to stifle future innovation and cancer research for years to come,’’ Dr. Al B. Benson III, president of the Association of Community Cancer Centers, said in a comment submitted to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

But others say the health care system cannot afford to continue paying high prices for all therapies, particularly cancer drugs that extend lives by only a few months.

With expensive medicines there is already a sort of dual approval system, especially with private insurance companies. First a drug must get F.D.A. approval and then a manufacturer often must go through a lengthy process of persuading insurers to pay for the drug.

Medicare is not supposed to consider price when determining whether to cover a drug, however.

Some analysts have assumed that Medicare will pay for Provenge when used for the patients specified in the drug’s label – those with advanced prostate cancer that is resistant to hormone-deprivation therapy but who are experiencing no or minimal symptoms.

The Medicare review might be more designed to limit off-label use of the expensive drug, such as for patients who already have symptoms. The review for Medicare said there was insufficient evidence to judge whether Provenge would work if used off-label.

The F.D.A. declined to approve Provenge in 2007, setting off protests by patients and Dendreon investors. After Dendreon completed another trial, which reaffirmed a survival advantage for the drug, Provenge was approved this April.

But the analysis for Medicare said that there were issues in how the trials were designed that made it difficult to assess how effective Provenge really was. One big issue was that the placebo used in the control arm was not really inert.

Robyn Karnauskas, a biotechnology analyst at Deutsche Bank, said in a note to clients Wednesday that the assessment of moderate evidence in support of Provenge boded well for reimbursement. “Historically, moderate means that CMS will reimburse the product for its on-label indication,’’ she wrote.

Dendreon’s shares rose more than 5 percent in trading after the close of the market.

The assessment was done by a technology evaluation group at the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association under contract to the government’s Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story appropriately reports that Provenge treatment costs $93,000 per patient and is satisfactory based on the criterion. However, the costs should ideally be put into context and compared to alternative treatments. An editorial published along with the Provenge trial in the New England Journal of Medicine noted the costs of alternative treatment is $1,800 per patient.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Palliative Care Consults for Patients with Advanced Cancers Reduces Hospitalization and Improves Quality of Care

Integration of Palliative Care Improves Many Measures of Quality

Newswise — (NEW YORK — March 15, 2017/Embargoed until March 17, 4:00 pm ET) Cancer patients admitted to the hospital with advanced stages of disease who were referred early to palliative care had decreased health care utilization and increased use of support services following discharge, according to a new study led by researchers at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Published today in the Journal of Oncology Practice, the study also determined that a systemized process of referrals resulted in significant improvements in 30-day readmission rates, hospice referral, and receipt of chemotherapy after discharge in patients with advanced cancers. This is the first study to demonstrate that among advanced cancer patients admitted to an inpatient oncology service, standardized use of triggers for palliative care consultation is associated with substantial improvement on multiple quality measures.

Patients with advanced cancers often have significant symptoms that affect their emotional status, quality of life, and functional ability. The integration of palliative care improves symptom control and decreases unwanted health care use, yet many patients are never offered these services.

“As cancer progresses, patients are often at high risk for physical pain and emotional distress,” said Cardinale B. Smith, MD, MSCR, Associate Professor of Medicine (Hematology and Medical Oncology), and of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. “Health care utilization is extremely high once cancer progresses, with hospital readmission rates as high as 40 percent and death in the acute care setting ranging from 30-50 percent – both measures of poor-quality cancer care.”

To improve the quality of care, researchers at the Icahn School of Medicine developed standardized criteria or “triggers” for palliative care consultation for patients admitted to the cancer unit at The Mount Sinai Hospital. Patients were eligible for this prospective cohort study if they met one or more eligibility criteria: advanced solid tumor cancer, prior hospitalization within 30 days, hospitalization for more than 7 days, or active symptoms.

“Care for patients with advanced cancer is often characterized by time spent on acute-care hospital wards and intensive care units, or receiving invasive procedures, chemotherapy infusions, and radiographic imaging. Such interventions drive escalating costs and are often directly in conflict with patients’ prior stated wishes,” said Dr. Smith.

Consultation with the palliative care team included establishment of goals of care, advance care plans using standardized communication protocols, transition planning and symptom assessment and treatment using the Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale (ESAS). The palliative team was composed of one board certified PC physician, one nurse practitioner, one social worker, a chaplain, and one to two trainees.

“Our results highlight the need to adopt this practice at acute care hospitals across the nation,” said Dr. Smith. “Palliative care involvement helps patients understand their prognosis, establish goals of care, and formulate discharge plans in line with those goals, and this study is the first to confirm the impact of using standardized criteria and automatic palliative care consultation on quality of cancer care.”

Co-authors of the study include Kerin Adelson, MD, Division of Hematology/Oncology at Yale University School of Medicine.

About the Mount Sinai Health SystemThe Mount Sinai Health System is an integrated health system committed to providing distinguished care, conducting transformative research, and advancing biomedical education. Structured around seven hospital campuses and a single medical school, the Health System has an extensive ambulatory network and a range of inpatient and outpatient services—from community-based facilities to tertiary and quaternary care.

The System includes approximately 7,100 primary and specialty care physicians; 12 joint-venture ambulatory surgery centers; more than 140 ambulatory practices throughout the five boroughs of New York City, Westchester, Long Island, and Florida; and 31 affiliated community health centers. Physicians are affiliated with the renowned Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, which is ranked among the highest in the nation in National Institutes of Health funding per investigator. The Mount Sinai Hospital is in the “Honor Roll” of best hospitals in America, ranked No. 15 nationally in the 2016-2017 “Best Hospitals” issue of U.S. News & World Report. The Mount Sinai Hospital is also ranked as one of the nation’s top 20 hospitals in Geriatrics, Gastroenterology/GI Surgery, Cardiology/Heart Surgery, Diabetes/Endocrinology, Nephrology, Neurology/Neurosurgery, and Ear, Nose & Throat, and is in the top 50 in four other specialties. New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai is ranked No. 10 nationally for Ophthalmology, while Mount Sinai Beth Israel, Mount Sinai St. Luke's, and Mount Sinai West are ranked regionally. Mount Sinai’s Kravis Children’s Hospital is ranked in seven out of ten pediatric specialties by U.S. News & World Report in "Best Children's Hospitals."

For more information, visit http://www.mountsinai.org/, or find Mount Sinai on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release makes several general statements about the costs of not referring patients early to palliative care.
It’s not clear whether the cost savings at a large hospital like Mount Sinai would carry over to smaller hospitals across the country that might not have the requisite staff already in place. Additionally, a statement about the implications of costs incurred by patients for early palliative care would improve the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fading, close-up vision is one of the more vexing and ubiquitous consequences of growing older. For Cheri Ekstadt of Lakeville, Minnesota, it’s meant buying nine pairs of reading glasses, which she places wherever she might come across something with fine print.

“I usually have three upstairs and three downstairs and some in my purse,” says Ekstadt, 50.

Without the glasses, she can’t read anything.

“Looking at the computer— whether it be for work, for Facebook— any labels when I’m out shopping, reading the newspaper, I can’t do that,” she says.

Like millions of other Americans over age 35, Ekstadt has presbyopia, aging eyes. Some notice it more than others, but it happens to everyone when the lenses in the eyes lose their flexibility.

“It’s just a part of getting older,” says Dr. Ralph Chu, an ophthalmologist in private practice in Bloomington, Minnesota.

But that may be changing. In a little over a year, the FDA approved two new devices to help with age-related vision loss. The most recent to receive approval, the “Raindrop”, is made mostly from water and works by reshaping the cornea helping the eye to focus better on close-up objects.

Both of the new implants, Raindrop and KAMRA, go into only one eye. The other eye will be for seeing distance, explains Dr. D. Rex Hamilton, director of the Laser Refractive Center at the Stein Eye Institute at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a clinical professor of ophthalmology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA.

“So the other eye needs to have good distance vision without glasses,” Hamilton says, adding that sometimes people have laser surgery to improve the distance vision in the eye that won’t be getting an implant to improve vision close-up.

Also, Hamilton notes, the implants aren’t a “be all end all. They may work quite well for a period of time but a person's lenses will continue to change with age and, ultimately, the patient may need cataract surgery.

A cataract procedure replaces the lens, improving both near and far vision, and lasts for the rest of the patient’s life. About half of Americans have cataracts or cataract surgery by age 80, according to the National Eye Institute.

Still, for those who don’t want to wait till their lenses cloud over, “this is a life-changing procedure,” Chu says. “This is more than just about convenience. It’s functioning in your day-to-day life.”

Ekstadt has the privilege of being the first person in the nation to get the Raindrop outside of a clinical trial.

The procedure to implant the device into Ekstadt’s cornea takes less than 5 minutes: The doctor uses a laser to create a tiny pocket in her cornea and two minutes later the Raindrop is inserted and the procedure is finished.

Just 15 minutes after the surgery Ekstadt can already see better and can make out a line in the eye chart that she couldn’t decipher before.

And now she’s able to read without the aid of glasses.

That doesn’t mean she won’t need more attention from her doctor, says Hamilton. “There’s a healing process after the inlay is put in that requires eye drops be put in on a daily basis for around three months," says Hamilton. "You need to be monitored by your surgeon during that period of time.”

One downside: the implants aren’t covered by insurance or Medicare, says Hamilton, adding “the cost is around $4,000 to $5,000.”

There are other risks with the procedure, but they are rare, according to clinical trials.

“Any time you do surgery there is a risk of infection—about one in 2,000,” Hamilton says. “And an infection in the cornea can cause scarring that can affect your vision.”

Hamilton suggests that people wanting to have an implant find an experienced eye surgeon, one who does both cataract surgery and refractive surgery, which includes LASIK.

Lauren Dunn is a medical producer for NBC News; Linda Carroll is a contributor for NBCNews.com
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story gives us the price of $4-5,000 for surgery, which is not likely to be covered by insurance or Medicare.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It may seem novel for a nonbeauty company to get into skin care, but these days, it really isn’t, Mrs. Lewis said. “There are ingredient suppliers that provide ingredients to health care, food and drink industries, and cosmetic companies,” she said. In Japan, “food and health care companies have found cosmetic applications for their ingredients, so they are creating skin care brands.”

For example, Frutarom, a flavor-ingredient house based in Israel, makes Alguard, a purified polysaccharide shield from a red microalgae that it says protects skin from daily assaults and reduces roughness as well as the look of fine lines.

There are more than 100 algae-derived ingredients used in cosmetics worldwide, Mrs. Lewis said. The patent-pending alguronic acid in Algenist is a “single, purified, highly bioactive compound,” said Tony Day, the vice president for research and development at Solazyme, and therefore delivers “much higher activity to the skin” than products using only a microalgae extract.

Studies conducted by an independent lab and commissioned by Algenist, none of which have been published in a peer-reviewed journal, showed alguronic acid increased cell regeneration and the synthesis of elastin (which gives skin that snap-back youthful quality). This testing also demonstrated that alguronic acid provided protection against cell damage induced by ultraviolet rays, and inhibited the enzymes that break down elastin.

After reviewing press materials and Solazyme’s 84-page patent application, Dr. David McDaniel, a dermatologist and the director of the Institute of Anti-Aging Research in Virginia Beach, Va., said he was impressed by the in-vitro testing of alguronic acid. “In the petri dish, their data seems to show some substantial benefits to their active ingredient,” he said. But he cautioned that in-vitro testing does not demonstrate how a final formulation works off the shelf.

Dr. Dana Sachs, an associate professor of dermatology at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, wrote in an e-mail after looking at Algenist’s dossier that “the claims on cell regeneration and elastin synthesis are based on in vitro models, which is hard to extrapolate to in vivo, and again no statistical significance is presented, so this is a weak claim.”

Dr. Day, who has a doctorate in biochemistry, said that statistical significance was found but not included in press materials. And, according to the company, a study of 30 women showed that after 10 days of using the Algenist serum, they had a 25 percent decrease in wrinkles as shown by silicone replicas of their faces.

Dr. Ellen Marmur, the chief of the division of dermatologic and cosmetic surgery at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan, did say Algenist could fairly claim that alguronic acid offers protection against ultraviolet damage to cells, and that she might use the product as “a nice sun protection on top of S.P.F. protection.”

Algenist literature touts alguronic acid’s superiority to hyaluronic acid, retinol and vitamin C, among other anti-aging ingredients, in encouraging elastin synthesis and cell regeneration. But Dr. McDaniel, who does research into using plant-derived products to lengthen the life of cells, says he thinks the comparative data must be viewed with caution because the studies that yielded it are “challenging to do accurately, hard to interpret and not necessarily predictive of final products.”

Soon, consumers will judge whether Algenist products are a breakthrough. In an unusual move, Sephora is introducing the line in 800 locations in 8 countries all at once, in a rollout coordinated with QVC. “It was a brand nobody has ever heard of,” said Allen Burke, the senior adviser for beauty strategy and development at QVC. “We want to give it a lot of visibility all at the same time.” But Mr. Burke knows that marketing has its limits. “It can be the most interesting story in the world,” he said. “But if it doesn’t deliver, it’s not a business that we can do.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that these products retail for $65 to $95. We would have liked to have seen how long one of those products would last with typical daily use. Is it $95 a month? Every three months?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among the less convinced is Dr. John H. Glick, director of the Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Glick tells his patients about the new data but does not suggest they skip chemotherapy. After all, he notes, the national guidelines were based on results from large randomized clinical trials. And the recent data indicating that some women can skip chemotherapy are based on an after-the-fact analysis of selected clinical trials.

"We're in an era where evidence-based medicine should govern practice," Dr. Glick said.

For women with breast cancer, of course, the uncertainty is excruciating. Faced with a disease that already causes indecision and anxiety, they are now confronted with incomplete data, differing opinions from different doctors and a choice that can seem almost impossible: Should they give up a taxing treatment when all the answers are not in and they have what may be a fatal disease?

"If the medical profession is not even close to being of one mind, how is the woman to know?" said Donald A. Berry, a statistician at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, the lead author of a recent paper questioning chemotherapy's benefits in many women.

Barbara Brenner, who has had breast cancer and is executive director of the advocacy group Breast Cancer Action, said, "There's a real problem," and added, "We finally tell people at the end of the day: 'You're going to get a lot of information. Trust your gut. Nobody has the answers.' "

"I'm really glad I was diagnosed 13 years ago," Ms. Brenner said, "when there were fewer choices."

Doctors worry, too. It took two years before the National Cancer Institute and its researchers could even agree on a design for the large new American study that will test the idea that many women might safely forgo chemotherapy.

The study, which starts enrolling patients at the end of this month, will involve women whose cancers are fueled by estrogen and have not spread beyond the breast. They will be randomly assigned to have the standard treatment — chemotherapy followed by a drug like tamoxifen that starves tumors of estrogen — or to skip chemotherapy and have treatment only with a drug like tamoxifen.

Unlike the American study, the one now planned in Europe will also include women whose cancer has spread beyond their breasts into nearby lymph nodes. The American study may eventually add such women, said Sheila E. Taube, who directs the cancer diagnosis program at the National Cancer Institute.

Dr. Taube said the debate reminded her of one a few decades ago, when the question was whether all women with cancer needed mastectomies or whether many could have a lumpectomy instead. "To me, the situations are analogous," she said.

The chemotherapy question starts with American and European guidelines that say almost every woman with breast cancer that has gone beyond its earliest stages, when it is confined to the milk duct, should have the treatment. And for good reason, many cancer researchers say: a series of large studies has shown that chemotherapy saves lives and that newer and more aggressive regimens are improvements over older ones.

That has led doctors to feel most at ease giving very aggressive treatments to almost everyone.

"Part of it is that this area of medicine we're practicing in is kind of a high wire act," said Dr. Michael Lee, an oncologist in private practice in Norfolk, Va. "It is more comfortable to adopt things that are aggressive."

But most of those studies were done at a time when doctors did not distinguish between the 70 percent of women with breast cancers fueled by estrogen and the 30 percent whose cancers were not.

Now Dr. Berry, the M. D. Anderson statistician, and a group of leading cancer researchers have found that the chemotherapy benefits in those clinical trials were concentrated almost exclusively in women whose cancers were impervious to estrogen. For the others, with estrogen-sensitive tumors, the lifesaving benefit came from hormonal therapy. The results of the analysis, published recently in The Journal of the American Medical Association, were the same even if the cancer had spread to the lymph nodes.

The drawback of that study, Dr. Glick notes, is that it was not a large prospective randomized clinical trial, the gold standard in medicine.

There is also another issue. What if some women with estrogen-fed tumors do benefit from chemotherapy? How can they be identified?

One possibility is new genetic tests, which are part of the two studies that are about to begin. The cancer institute is using the Oncotype DX test, which includes genes associated with response to chemotherapy, among them genes involved with a cell's response to estrogen.

The study is ethical, said Dr. Larry Norton of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, because the only women whose treatment will be decided at random are those in a kind of gray area, not women for whom chemotherapy would be a clear benefit or clearly unnecessary.

"I think the clinical trial is really a superb one," Dr. Norton said. "I would like to see it go so we have definitive data."

In the meantime, some physicians, like Dr. Winer, are taking their own best shot at figuring out who really benefits from chemotherapy. He asks how sensitive the tumor is to estrogen, how aggressive a pathologist believes it is, how big it is, how much has spread to the lymph nodes and whether its surface has a type of protein, HER2, that is associated with a better response to chemotherapy. After talking through the decision with his patients, he says, he is comfortable omitting chemotherapy in some who would have had it not long ago.

Others, like Dr. Francisco J. Esteva of M. D. Anderson, use a computer program to calculate a woman's risks of recurrence and give the option of no chemotherapy only to women with low-risk cancers confined to their breasts.

Still others, like Dr. Glick, are starting to tell women with estrogen-fed cancers that although they still need chemotherapy, they may not need the most intense treatment.

And while some, including Dr. Winer, predict that the use of chemotherapy will almost certainly decline in the years ahead, for now most doctors are sticking with the current guidelines, waiting for expert advice from national panels on what to do.

"I don't know that many doctors who are comfortable giving women an option about chemotherapy," said Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, an advocacy group. "A lot of physicians talk about the data, but then they say, 'But, to be on the safe side. ...' "

Still, doctors say it is not simply that they are urging more and more chemotherapy on patients. In many cases, it is patients who want the most aggressive treatment.

"A cancer diagnosis is earth-shattering," said Dr. Lee, who has had cancer himself. "You stay up at night. You wonder. Even when you're doing well, you don't know whether to trust it."

And so, he said, "a lot of people will take a treatment even if there is a very low statistical chance that they will benefit."

That was what happened a few months ago, when Dr. Esteva told Janice Baty of Sulphur, La., a 40-year-old mother of two, that she might not need chemotherapy. After a long discussion with Ms. Baty and her husband, Dr. Esteva left them so they could decide what to do.

"My husband said, 'Look, we have two little kids,' " Ms. Baty recalled. "I called the doctor back in and said, 'We're doing the chemo.' "

Women who say they want the most aggressive treatment may not fully realize what they are asking for, said Mary Peelen, 45, of San Francisco. Ms. Peelen learned in January 2005 that she had cancer. It was small, was fed by estrogen and had spread to just two of her lymph nodes. Her oncologist was adamant: chemotherapy was her only option.

"I felt frightened and very coerced," she said. She had an aggressive regimen, suffered terribly and was left with painful nerve damage in her arms and hands that prevents movements like opening jars or using scissors and frequently makes her drop things.

Ms. Peelen feels that in a way, she just missed the revolution, perhaps one of the last women with her type of cancer who will have to suffer so much.

For now, the answers as to who should have chemotherapy are far from clear.

"I think practice should change, but it's very dicey," said Dr. Berry, of M. D. Anderson.

His colleague Dr. Esteva says it is one thing for a statistician like Dr. Berry to look at retrospective data, and another for a physician, like himself, to sit down with a patient who has to make what may be a life-or-death decision.

"It's not a perfect science," Dr. Esteva said. "A statistically small reduction in risk may be very important to some women, while for others chemotherapy is not worth it."

And so, Dr. Esteva said, he is left asking many women with early-stage breast cancer to decide what can seem like the undecidable: whether they want "to take something potentially toxic when you have a 90 percent chance of being cured without it."

"My experience ," he said, "is that more want to get chemo than not."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There is no discussion of the cost of chemotherapy and no mention of potential cost savings for women who might not benefit as much from treatment; however, this is not very relevant to this story, as there is a suggestion that less treatment might be better, with a cost savings implied. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It takes up to 15 years and $5 billion for a new drug to make it through testing and earn approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Before researchers try a compound on humans, it’s tested at labs in petri dishes and on animals, such as mice and monkeys. More often than not, these studies produce mixed data that don’t tell researchers much about whether it is safe and effective for humans.

For some time, scientists have been searching for ways to cut down on the cost and failure rate of drug testing. Researchers at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University have developed a beautiful solution: Organs-On-Chips.

The clear and flexible polymer microchips are lined with human cells. Each one represents a different human organ system, such as lungs, heart and intestines. The institute’s goal is to create 10 different organ systems that can be joined together by blood vessel channels to simulate human physiology on a microscale and provide a cheaper, more reliable way to test new drugs.

The sophisticated architecture of these organs-on-chips—which are about the size of a thumb drive—has also earned the Wyss Institute recognition in the art world with a Design of the Year award from the Design Museum and placement in the Museum of Modern Art’s permanent collection.

“The real power of this approach is that you have a window to the inner workings of life,” says Don Ingber, founding director of the Wyss Institute and a professor of Vascular Biology and of Bioengineering at Harvard University. “Anything you can ask at the molecular level, we could do in our chips.”

In 2008, the team built and tested its first “organoid” chip to mimic the mechanical function of human lungs. It contains tiny channels separated by a porous membrane to create two distinct, hollow passageways—one lined with human lung cells and the other with capillary blood vessel cells. Air is suctioned through the side channels to emulate breathing. Ingber and his team introduced bacteria into the chip’s lung channel and white blood cells into the capillary channel. They observed that the white blood cells permeated the membrane and attacked the bacteria in the lung cell channel—exactly what would happen in human lungs fighting off an infection.

In another experiment, the team at Wyss filled a chip’s lung cell channel with interleukin 2, a chemotherapy drug known to cause pulmonary edema, an accumulation of fluid in the lungs. When air entered the lung cell channel, the channel filled with fluid and then blood clots—exactly what happens in the lungs of patients who develop this life-threatening condition. This proved the chips could provide real world information to scientists studying the effects of new drug compounds.

The project has received support from the National Institutes of Health and the FDA. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency also recently awarded the institute a $37 million grant to create chips representing nearly all systems in the body. Ingber says some scientists are interested in using the chips to conduct research that would be unethical if performed on people, such as studying the effects of gamma radiation on the human body.

Of course, the chips have limitations. “We can’t mimic consciousness; we can’t mimic compression on a joint,” says Ingber.

Danilo Tagle, associate director for special initiatives at the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, a division of the NIH, is spearheading a similar organ-on-chip project. He suspects that in the beginning the chips will be used to “complement and supplement” animal studies, but will eventually become routine practice. The chips will also provide researchers with information on dosing at a much earlier stage in drug studies—particularly helpful because animals metabolize chemical substances at a different rate than humans. “You can go forward with a candidate drug with greater assurance and confidence that it will have the desired effect on humans,” says Tagle. “Biology is very complex.”

Incorporating the chips into drug testing could save millions of dollars and years of time on research. Some companies are already trying out the concept. Janssen Pharmaceuticals Company, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, is using a version of the chips to understand how blood clots in the lungs. The information is essential to reduce the risk for this side effect of oncology drugs.

Though there still aren’t enough data to prove the chips are reliable enough to put rodents out of a job, Ingber says it’s only a matter of time; they hope to have them tested and ready for market in two years. “The FDA has been very supportive,” he says. “They’ve told us if they are as good as animals that they would consider accepting data provided by a drug company from one of these models rather than an animal model.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The Newsweek report generally addresses the costs to put a new drug on the market, and it states that “Incorporating the chips into drug testing could save millions of dollars and years of time on research.”
We’ll reward the story’s impulse to address cost with a Satisfactory rating, but we’d note that the issue is more complicated than readers may appreciate based on the coverage. The article starts by projecting benefits – cost of drug development and time to FDA approval. And only later does it imply that the new technology initially will add to the cost because it will be done along with the old technology (animal studies). Only if it is as good or better may it be a substitute. Then the question is whether it will indeed be cheaper. It may be cheaper if the chips are less expensive than animal studies or if they better identify agents that do or don’t work in humans. But costs are difficult to predict and the totals can add up quickly — for example, a vial of human lung cells costs over $700. This all seems very speculative at this point.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If the high-pitched whir of a dentist's drill as it bores into your molar terrifies you, good news! There could be fewer fillings in your future. A painless way to prevent cavities in adults is gaining traction.

"OK, Alice, we are going to put the fluoride varnish on your teeth," says Marion Manski, director of the dental hygiene program at the University of Maryland School of Dentistry. Fluoride varnish is standard practice for children's teeth, but Manski's patient, Alice Clash, is 91 years old. Like many older patients, Clash is taking medications that cause dry mouth, which puts her at high risk for cavities.

So Manski takes a skinny brush and a little pot of yellowish liquid and paints the varnish on Clash's teeth. "We know that saliva helps us wash away bacteria and food in the mouth," Manski says. "The fluoride varnish will help that."

One way fluoride helps is by seeping into the enamel and drawing the calcium and phosphate that's naturally present in the saliva. The minerals boost the teeth's natural healing process and make them more resistant to future decay. But there are other theories about how fluoride works. It strengthens the enamel before the tooth erupts, which is why it's so important for children. And it attacks the acid-producing bacteria in the mouth. One study shows fluoride makes it more difficult for these bacteria to stick to the teeth.

It takes about a minute, and the fluoride treatment is done. Some patients are also given a prescription for a concentrated fluoride gel that can be used at night.

"These preventative approaches work on adults just as well as they do on children," says Norman Tinanoff, a professor of pediatric dentistry at the University of Maryland. He says part of what's making fluoride treatments popular for adults is a move to make dental care personal, with an individual treatment plan for each patient. To do that, you have to weigh a patient's risk of getting cavities.

One of the biggest proponents of this approach is John Featherstone, dean of the University of California, San Francisco School of Dentistry. Featherstone came up with a comprehensive way of measuring a person's risk for caries, or tooth decay. It includes testing the level of bacteria in the mouth, and looking at dietary habits, medical conditions, medications, saliva flow and history of tooth decay. When Featherstone put his patients on personal treatment plans, he found the strategy worked.

"It really proved that drilling and filling did not fix the disease," Featherstone says. "Putting in a filling fixes that hole in the tooth, but it doesn't deal with the bacteria in the rest of the mouth." Most bacteria are friendly, but a couple of bad actors can cause cavities. These guys feed on sugars and expel acid that eats away at the enamel.

Traditionally, dentists were taught that the only way to deal with decay was to drill it out. That's still important in some cases, Featherstone says, but without fixing the underlying problem of bad bacteria, patients just keep coming back for more fillings. Featherstone saw another way. "It's a little bit like your car is starting to rust," he says. "If you can stop the rust before the rust goes right through the body of the car, then you're in good shape."

Like rust, tooth decay is a slow process. A full-on cavity is a hole that needs to be fixed. But if you catch decay early, Featherstone says, it can be reversed using fluoride treatments like varnish and concentrated toothpaste and gels.

"In the past we believed tooth decay was a rapidly progressive disease. But research shows it's slowly progressive," says Wendell Evans, associate professor of dentistry at the University of Sydney in Australia. He recently published a study that found using these techniques reduced the need for fillings in adults by 30 to 50 percent.

Striking as these results seem, the concept isn't new. This shift to a preventive model of dentistry is decades in the making. "Some of the stuff in our study has been known for 50 years," Evans says, referring to the use of fluoride treatments.

"Prevention has always been a part of the world of dentistry," says Richard Valachovic, president of the American Dental Education Association. "What we're seeing is a generational shift," Valachovic says. As dentists have come to better understand the microbiology of the mouth, more effective preventive techniques have followed.

But cost has been an issue. Insurance companies routinely pay for fluoride treatments for children, but not so much for adults. The National Association of Dental Plans couldn't give a definitive answer about coverage, but calls to some individual carriers and dental offices suggest it depends entirely on the type of plan you have. Some higher-end plans cover two fluoride treatments per year, while cheaper plans tend not to cover any. If you pay out of pocket, a varnish treatment costs from $23 to $55, compared with a filling, which ranges from $86 to $606, according to the American Dental Association.

Cost could also be a factor for dentists. Featherstone and Wendell say some dentists may be reluctant to embrace the preventive methods because they worry they'll lose money if they they do fewer costly procedures.

At this point, Featherstone says, two-thirds of dental schools in the U.S. teach some kind of disease management model based on a thorough risk assessment. And he expects that at some point all dentists will follow a preventive protocol.

"It will happen," Featherstone says. "It's just a matter of time."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does include a discussion of price, reporting that a fluoride varnish treatment can cost $23 to $55, while a filling can cost $86 to $606. That’s enough to be rated Satisfactory.
However, the story also should have stated that those numbers aren’t a head-to-head comparison, since the varnish treatment must be repeated many times over many years–which would add up. In fact, a cost-effectiveness analysis done by one of the quoted experts concluded the “Caries Management System” he advocates costs almost $1,800 for every cavity or lost tooth prevented.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Dec. 7, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Hot flashes, a common curse in menopause, can be especially bothersome after breast cancer. But a new study suggests an existing medication may help.

The drug is oxybutynin (Ditropan XL), long used to treat urinary incontinence.

The study found that women taking the medicine had an average of five fewer hot flashes a week, compared with three fewer among women taking a placebo.

"Oxybutynin is an option that can control these symptoms and improve quality of life," said lead researcher Dr. Roberto Leon-Ferre, an assistant professor of oncology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

There are a couple of reasons for severe hot flashes after breast cancer. Chemotherapy may induce early menopause, and drugs that reduce estrogen levels may make hot flashes worse, the research team noted.

Hormone replacement therapy, which is often recommended for menopausal symptoms, is generally not advised for breast cancer survivors. That's left women who can't take hormones at a disadvantage.

Oxybutynin blocks a substance in the brain, and one of its side effects is decreased sweating, Leon-Ferre noted.

"Because of this, we can take advantage of the 'side effect' and decrease involuntary sweating associated with hot flashes, and decrease the hot flashes as well," he explained.

The drug could be game-changing for certain women, said Dr. Alice Police, regional director of breast surgery at Northwell Health Cancer Institute in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y.

"This is a really important advance in survivorship and compassionate cancer care," added Police, who wasn't involved in the study.

Because oxybutynin is already available for other conditions, Leon-Ferre said doctors could prescribe it off-label.

However, he cautioned that its long-term effects aren't known. Drugs in this class -- called anticholinergics -- have been linked with mental decline, he said.

For example, the drugs may raise the risk for problems with short-term memory, reasoning and confusion, and may also hike the risk for dementia among older patients, studies indicate.

For the new study, Leon-Ferre and his colleagues randomly assigned 150 women who experienced at least 28 hot flashes a week to oxybutynin or a placebo.

Almost two-thirds were also taking drugs to prevent a return of breast cancer, either tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor.

The women were randomly assigned to one of three groups: low-dose oxybutynin twice a day for six weeks; low-dose oxybutynin for one week followed by an increased dose; or a placebo.

Both doses appeared to reduce hot flashes better than the placebo.

And oxybutynin doesn't interfere with the metabolism of tamoxifen, Leon-Ferre said, calling that an important consideration for breast cancer survivors.

Most insurance covers oxybutynin, and a month's supply can range from $21 to $42. With insurance, copays would be less, he added.

Side effects included constipation, mild diarrhea, dry mouth, dry eyes, episodes of confusion and difficulty urinating, the researchers found.

Women taking oxybutynin also reported improvement in work, social activities, leisure activities, sleep and overall quality of life.

These are vital issues, Police said. "I will never forget the first time a patient said, 'Thank you for curing my breast cancer, but you ruined my life,' " she said.

The patient said endocrine therapy had caused hot flashes so severe that she could not sleep. As a result, she was having trouble at work and in all other aspects of her life, Police recalled.

"Her intimate relationship was also suffering, as nighttime had become a battleground between her and her internal temperature control," Police said.

The patient said she was willing to stop her hormone therapy and risk the return of breast cancer rather than live with her current symptoms, she said.

"This study makes me hopeful that these patients may have a way out of their dilemma," Police said. "Instead of just telling them they should be happy to be alive, we may be able to offer a reliable treatment for some of the debilitating side effects of our treatments for breast cancer."

The research was scheduled to be presented Friday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas. Studies presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until peer-reviewed for publication in a medical journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about hot flashes and cancer survivors.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Using the lead researcher as a source, the article states that most insurers cover oxybutynin; that a month’s supply can range from $21 to $42; and that the cost could be less, depending on the type of insurance a patient has.
Kudos to HealthDay for explicitly addressing cost.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, May 19, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A leukemia drug might also effectively treat severe asthma, a small-scale clinical trial suggests.

Gleevec (imatinib) reduced the "twitchiness" of airways, making them less likely to reflexively constrict when exposed to an allergen or asthma trigger, said senior researcher Dr. Elliot Israel.

"We showed we could decrease the amount of airway twitchiness by a third," Israel said. "That's a substantial change, and that was significant compared with the placebo group."

Israel is director of the respiratory therapy department at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

The drug also improved overall airway function, an effect researchers hadn't expected, Israel said.

People whose severe asthma isn't controlled despite use of high-dose steroid medications are at risk of declining lung function and poor quality of life, the researchers said in background notes.

But, this powerful cancer drug can't be recommended for them on the basis of this small study, Israel and other specialists noted.

Gleevec fights leukemia by blocking a specific receptor on cancerous white blood cells, inhibiting their ability to multiply and spread, Israel said.

That same action also affects mast cells, a type of white blood cell distributed throughout the body that promotes inflammation and causes allergic reactions, Israel said.

For example, mast cells in the skin are responsible for hives, while mast cells in the lungs have been associated with severe asthma, he said.

"By blocking the signal that helps keep mast cells alive, we were hoping to reduce the number of these cells," Israel said. "By doing that, we hoped to produce improvements beyond the maximal therapy that these patients with severe asthma are on."

Israel and his colleagues recruited 62 severe asthma sufferers for the study. All received top-notch asthma treatment, and were randomly assigned to take either Gleevec or a placebo pill once daily during the 6-month trial.

Blood tests showed that Gleevec did reduce mast cell activity in patients, Israel said.

Further, allergy challenge tests showed a decrease in airway reactivity among patients taking Gleevec, the researchers reported. Airways became less likely to close off after exposure to an allergen.

Physical examinations showed that people taking Gleevec actually experienced a slight overall widening of their airways, Israel added.

"There was a small but significant improvement in the airway narrowing in these patients, which we didn't expect because we didn't think the mast cells were necessarily promoting that airway narrowing all the time," Israel said.

Side-effects were not as severe as expected, he added. One person dropped out because of a sharp decline in white blood cells, which bounced back after the drug was discontinued. Another person dropped out because of leg cramps associated with the drug.

"All in all, we were expecting a significantly greater pattern of side-effects, and we didn't see it," Israel explained.

According to Dr. Len Horovitz, a pulmonary specialist with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, "This drug represents a new mechanism for the immune modulation of severe asthma." Horovitz was not involved with the study.

"It has been a while since a new approach and treatment for severe asthma has emerged," Horovitz said. "Further studies will be needed to assess its utility in moderate asthma."

Pulmonologist Dr. Theodore Maniatis is medical director of Staten Island University Hospital in New York City. He sounded a more cautionary note.

"This is a very early work that in no way should encourage asthmatics," Maniatis said. "While it is a very interesting study for pulmonologists and immunologists, it is a very small study."

Until now, "this immune-modulating drug has been used only for cancer and is toxic," he added. "It will take years of study to determine the usefulness of this drug in treatment."

Israel agreed that further clinical trials are needed. "Before you go out and recommend this be used in general, you really want to repeat this in a larger population with greater numbers," he said.

It likely will be three to four years before Gleevec could be approved for asthma treatment, Israel estimated.

If proven effective, Gleevec might provide a relatively inexpensive new treatment for asthma patients. Two generic versions of the drug were launched last year, which could make it less pricey than new-wave asthma drugs headed for the market, Israel added.

The study was published May 18 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on asthma, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We were glad the story addressed costs, but actual figures would have been more helpful. It says imatinib “might provide a relatively inexpensive new treatment for asthma patients. Two generic versions of the drug were launched last year, which could make it less pricey than new-wave asthma drugs headed for the market, Israel added.”
While it may cost less than other options, this treatment isn’t what we consider inexpensive, even off-patent. Generic imatinib costs $96.53 to $276.53 per tablet, according to Drugs.com.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
STRATFORD — If it weren't for Ethan Priddy's bionic ears, he might never have built a robot. At least that's what his mother, Glenda Beckham, said.

Priddy is a 17-year-old junior at Stratford High School. He plays trombone and drums for the school band. In his spare time, he recently built a robot with a team of fellow students. His team won the International Rookie All-Star Award at an April robotics competition in Georgia.

Priddy is proud of that achievement, but he is even prouder of something that many youths his age would take for granted: the ability to hear the announcer call his team's name at the awards ceremony. Just two years ago, he feared he might not hear anything again.

Today, Priddy has cochlear implants in both ears and hears rain, birds and the wheels of a shopping basket screeching against the floor in the grocery store. These things are music to his ears.

Priddy was born prematurely and had several lung surgeries before he was 4 years old.

"They told me that, if he lived, he would be totally deaf and totally blind,” Beckham said. Her son never went blind, but his hearing steadily declined. By the time he was 14, he had lost about 70 percent of his hearing and was wearing hearing aids in both ears.

Even with his hearing loss, Priddy was an excellent student, a gifted musician and well-liked among his classmates.

"He could always function despite his hearing problems,” said Bill Naberhaus, one of Priddy's high school teachers.

Naberhaus also suffered from extreme hearing loss, a result of long-term exposure to loud noises. "I was notorious for being the hard-of-hearing teacher, the butt of many jokes,” he said. "But I didn't need to hear perfectly to be a good teacher.”

It was when Priddy's hearing started a rapid decline his freshman year that he decided to visit Dr. Wayne Berryhill, a neurotologist at OU Physicians who specializes in cochlear implants. Berryhill explained how the implants function and their possible risks.

According to Cochlear.com, the implant works by picking up sound through tiny microphones on a sound processor and converting the sound into digital signals.

The implant uses those signals to stimulate hearing nerves in the inner ear and replicate the sound.

Once the internal device is surgically implanted, the patient has to wait four to six week to heal before the device is turned on. It is then that the patient will either hear sounds or not.

Berryhill said the cost of the implant and surgery is in excess of $60,000, but it is covered by most insurance companies as well as Medicare and Medicaid. He warns people that there is a risk the implant will not work and that they may need to have it replaced if it stops working. But the risks are low, he said, and most people who are good candidates for the implant will react positively to it.

"I was still scared to death,” Priddy said. "I had no idea what to expect.”

Despite his fears, within a few weeks, Priddy was in the operating room, nervously anticipating the implant surgery on his right ear.

After the surgery, Priddy awoke and could hear nothing with his right ear.

"Right then, I thought, ‘Oh, why did I do this?'” he said. "I wasn't even really worried about the deafness because it was hurting so bad. The pain was so excruciating at that moment.”

But the deafness typically results after the device is implanted because it has yet to be turned on.

When Priddy's implant was turned on six weeks later, he couldn't decipher the sounds he was hearing, but he was definitely hearing them.

"The first things that you hear are random little noises, buzzing, like you would hear from a computer when you get a cell phone close to it,” he said. "Eventually, the sound literally meshed together and started sounding like the teacher from ‘Charlie Brown' — ‘wah wah wah wah.'”

Because the sounds generated by cochlear implants are different from sounds received naturally by the ear, it takes time to learn to interpret what they mean. But within a month or so, things started clearing up, and over the course of the next year, Priddy adapted to the implant.

Eventually, he decided to get another cochlear implant in his left ear. He was nervous about this because, being left-handed, he favors his left ear and was worried that he wouldn't be able to do one of his favorite pastimes: talking on the telephone. (To girls, late at night, his mother jokingly said.)

But Priddy adapted quickly to his second implant and can now talk on the telephone all he wants. He has never heard the world better.

"I am most happy to hear my music,” he said. In the school band, Priddy always had to play music by feel and vibration. Now, he hears the melodies and harmonies just as well as his bandmates. He has become more active in clubs, including his robotics team. And he has excelled academically; he is a straight-A student.

"After his implant, he just blossomed,” Naberhaus said. "I would say that hearing better kind of completes your personality, and I think Ethan became a complete personality once his hearing came online.”

After witnessing Priddy's miraculous results, Naberhaus was inspired to shrug off his image as the hard-of-hearing teacher and get a cochlear implant.

"Now, I can hear my grandchildren,” Naberhaus said. "We love purple martins and other birds around, and I can hear them now, which I couldn't in the past. They sound different, but that's better than not hearing them at all.”

Priddy said that from his experience as a cochlear implant recipient, he has learned many valuable lessons about himself and the world around him. He plans to one day follow in the footsteps of his new hero, Berryhill, the doctor who changed his life. In the meantime, he hopes to inspire others like him to get cochlear implants.

"It's going to completely change your life.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story cites a physician who says the cost of the device and surgery is about $60,000, and that it is covered by most insurance companies, Medicare, and Medicaid.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dominic Gessler lifts two squirming mice from their cages. Sherri Epstein flinches, but Gessler coaxes her to hold out her hands. He places the small animals in her palms, and they skitter in tiny circles, tickling her skin. “Now,” says Gessler. “Which one used to have Canavan disease?”

A few miles away, at Epstein’s home in Worcester, Massachusetts, a young woman lies in bed, her thin limbs bent and still, her curly red hair splayed across a pillow. This is Rachel, Epstein’s 17-year-old daughter, born with Canavan disease—a debilitating, fatal brain disorder. As a newborn, Rachel opened her mouth as if to scream but made no sound. As an infant, she never moved in her sleep. When Rachel failed to lift her head by six months of age, an early intervention therapist suspected she had cerebral palsy. Epstein wishes it had been so. Instead, Rachel had inherited a mutated version of a gene called ASPA from each of her parents. Without a healthy copy of that gene, her cells could not produce a protein needed to break down acid in the brain. So the acid built up, then slowly ate away at the insulation protecting Rachel’s neurons, turning her white matter into a sponge pocketed with fluid-filled sacs. As a result, Rachel does not talk; she cannot see or control her limbs or other bodily functions; she has seizures and will likely not live to adulthood.

There is no treatment and no cure for Canavan disease. Yet standing in a room at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, Epstein holds a mouse that once had the same symptoms as Rachel—but now runs effortlessly over her outstretched fingers. Weeks before, the mouse was treated with a single intravenous injection of a gene therapy drug developed in the lab of Gessler’s doctoral adviser, microbiologist Guangping Gao. The drug is the fruit of Gao’s 23-year career in gene therapy.

Gao did not always believe the drug would ever make it out of the laboratory, because the field of gene therapy has been plagued with seemingly insurmountable obstacles, including the deaths of test subjects. Over the past five years, however, there has been a resurgence of gene therapy in neuroscience. Scientists now argue it is our best, and perhaps only, chance at curing many diseases of the brain. And attuned to the multibillion-dollar potential of this new class of drugs, large pharmaceutical companies including Novartis, Shire, AstraZeneca and GSK are joining the fray. More than 20 biotech companies are currently developing viral gene therapies while others are working to directly edit genes.

“Gene therapies are coming along fast and furious. They’re going to earn their place,” says Kevin Starr, co-founder of Third Rock Ventures, a venture capital firm invested in three gene therapy companies. “We are probably in the greatest innovative period of understanding human disease and how to make cures ever.”

The concept of gene therapy is straightforward, beautiful even: Fix an illness caused by a faulty gene by replacing or supplementing a healthy new copy of the gene. In other words, use genes as medicine. For example, one of the earliest human tests of gene therapy was in 1990, when two young girls with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) received repeated infusions of their own white blood cells modified to fix a defective gene. It worked—with continued treatments, both children showed signs of a restored immune system and went on to lead normal lives.

Gao first met a Canavan patient in 1993, at a party celebrating his discovery of the gene and mutations that caused the disorder. A family wheeled over their 6-year-old with Canavan disease to the young scientist, who realized that the boy had donated tissue to his research project. “I’d held his DNA in my hands. I had found what was wrong with his DNA,” recalls Gao, then a Ph.D. student. Yet he had no way to fix it. At that moment, “I knew what I would do for the rest of my life—find a cure for the disease,” says Gao. “And other than gene therapy, there was no other way.”

Gene therapy is well-suited for treating inherited brain diseases. First, most drugs can’t get through the brain’s formidable blood-brain barrier, but something small, like a virus with a healthy gene tucked inside, can do it. Additionally, the brain is a closed compartment, so the risks of gene therapy are minimized—other parts of the body, the liver or the lungs, say, are undisturbed.

In the early ’90s, Gao was a student without a lab of his own. So he sought out James Wilson at the University of Pennsylvania, a rising star in the field of gene therapy. For the next 13 years, Gao would work for Wilson, engineering new and better viruses for the therapies, called “viral vectors.” These molecular FedEx trucks can be loaded with healthy versions of genes and deliver them to the correct location in the body.

Gao was in the right place at the right time. By 1999, more than 115 gene therapy clinical trials were approved in the U.S, ranging in illnesses from cancer to blood disorders to graft-versus-host disease. Wilson eagerly moved from the lab into human trials, starting with five studies utilizing a modified version of an adenovirus, a common virus known to cause respiratory infections in people. One of those trials enrolled a teenager named Jesse Gelsinger.

Gelsinger suffered from a genetic liver condition kept under control with pills and diet, but he volunteered for the study to help find a cure for infants with a fatal form of his disorder. When Gelsinger received the gene therapy in September 1999, the adenoviral vector triggered a violent immune response that damaged his liver and shut down his lungs. Four days after the injection, he was dead.

His death shuttered gene therapy funding and research in the United States. Europeans continued on, buoyed by an announcement in 2000 that gene therapy had cured a group of 20 children with SCID. But within a few years, five of them had developed leukemia from the treatment. One died, and scientists fled the field. Gao, who was not directly involved in the clinical trial that led to Gelsinger’s death, doesn’t like to talk about it now, saying only that he doesn’t blame Wilson. Gao kept his head down and quietly continued to work on other types of safer viral vectors.

The most promising candidate was adeno-associated virus (AAV)—a virus that grows in the presence of adenovirus but is a completely different type. AAVs are not quite as efficient as adenoviruses at getting genes into human cells, but they are much safer: The human immune system barely notices the virus’s outer coat or “dress,” as Gao calls it. And AAVs do not integrate into the genome of human cells, which is what caused leukemia in some of the SCID patients.

In 2008, Gao struck out on his own, taking a job as director of a brand-new gene therapy center at UMass. The paint on his office walls was still wet when Sherri Epstein walked in. A part-time administrative assistant in the building next door, Epstein had seen Gao’s appointment in a local newspaper. Epstein introduced herself and told Gao about Rachel and her previous attempt at gene therapy. Five years earlier, doctors running the first-ever Canavan gene therapy trial drilled six tiny holes into Rachel’s skull, inserted thin catheters and delivered their drug to parts of her brain. It was safe, but it didn’t work.

Not long after that initial meeting, Epstein brought Rachel to visit the lab. Once again, Gao was standing in front of a desperate parent and dying child.

At the time, only one gene therapy had been commercially approved in the world: a cancer drug in China. Regulators in the U.S. and Europe were highly skeptical of the safety and efficacy of such treatments. Gao knew he had to be careful and was determined to not repeat the errors of his predecessors by rushing into human trials. Instead, he spent the next eight years methodically producing a novel gene therapy for Canavan disease. He has spent over $2 million in federal and university research funds developing and testing it in hundreds of mice with the disease.

Gao's graduate student Seemin Ahmed initiated the lab work in 2010, and accomplished a proof-of-concept with a first-generation gene therapy that could partially rescue the disease, based on AAV9, an ideal AAV vector to get into the brain. The AAV9 therapy is so good at slipping into the brain that one can deliver the drug intravenously into the blood, and it passes through the blood-brain barrier to penetrate all areas of the brain. No drilling into the skull required. Gessler, a young German scientist studying to be a neurosurgeon, joined the project in 2012 and has since built on Ahmed's work, optimization the therapy with an improved gene construct that produces 10 times as many copies of the needed protein as earlier versions.

Gessler will never forget the first time he tested the optimized therapy in a live animal. He injected it into a young, sick mouse, hunched over with no control over its muscles. When Gessler returned to assess the results, he couldn’t find the mouse. He worried he had mislabeled a cage. He hadn’t. The mouse was there, acting just as healthy as the control mice.

Today, the treatment has cured Canavan disease in two different strains of mice engineered to have the disease. A dozen freezers line the long hallway in Gao’s laboratory, each filled to the brim with preserved tissues and viruses. “We have the therapy. We are ready,” says Gao, grinning like a schoolchild. The last barrier is financial but not impossible to overcome. Gao estimates it will require $10 million to $12 million to launch the first human clinical trials—but the potential profits are already attracting biotech attention. Two companies, which Gao declined to name, have approached him about getting involved in the effort.

The office of Voyager Therapeutics in Cambridge, Massachusetts, epitomizes a trendy startup: glass doors, whiteboard walls, minimalist orange-accented décor and a communal area with free drinks and snacks. It smells like caffeine and money.

But unlike tech startups, this office is flanked on either side by laboratories full of microscopes and viruses. The company is developing gene therapies for a handful of central nervous system disorders, including Parkinson’s, Huntington’s and Lou Gehrig’s disease. Voyager CEO Steven Paul has worked in the pharmaceutical industry developing drugs for brain disorders for over 35 years and witnessed the tribulations of gene therapy. He’s ardent that now is finally the right time.

Investors agree. Venture firms have invested more in gene therapy since 2010 than they did during the whole previous decade, and therapies for the brain far and away lead the pack, according to Dow Jones VentureSource. Last February, when Voyager was just a year old, it inked a deal with Genzyme for $100 million up front and up to $745 million in future milestone payments, including for the company’s severe brain disease programs. Voyager followed that with $60 million in investor financing in April and an $81 million initial public offering in November. Philadelphia-based Spark Therapeutics, developing gene therapies for rare eye diseases, accumulated $268 million in funding after going public in just two years and scoring a sizable licensing deal with Pfizer. Cambridge-based Bluebird Bio ended last year with a whopping $866 million in cash and cash equivalents.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While some therapeutic strategies appear to have been approved in China and Europe, according to the story, none has been approved in the Unites States, suggesting that cost information isn’t yet relevant. But the story does indicate how expensive these therapies might be, by mentioning a breathtaking bit of pricing by one European company: $1.4 million per injection.
This is enough to rate as Satisfactory, though the story could have done more to help patients understand what pricing might look like for gene therapies, which is surely on the minds of the venture capitalists funding the research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An inhaler that protects the lungs against air pollution has been developed by scientists and could help the many millions of people affected by toxic air to avoid its worst effects.

The inhaler delivers a molecule, first found in bacteria in the Egyptian desert, which stabilises water on the surface of the lung cells to form a protective layer. It is expected to be available as an inexpensive, over-the-counter product.

Outdoor air pollution is a global health crisis that kills over 3 million people a year and it has long been linked to lung and heart disease and strokes. But research is also uncovering new impacts on health, including degenerative brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s, mental illness and, this week, diabetes.

The impact of air pollution costs $5tn a year, according to a World Bank report published last week. In the UK, at least 40,000 people a year die prematurely from air pollution, with a cross-party committee of MPs calling it a “public health emergency”.

But the government’s plans to tackle the issue were heavily criticised this week, just as alerts were issued for extreme air pollution across much of northern England. A day later, it was announced that more ambitious plans for London from Mayor Sadiq Khan were overwhelmingly backed by the public.

Vehicles are a key contributor to air pollution but, a year after the VW emissions scandal broke, most new diesel cars still emit far more toxic nitrogen oxides on the road than the official lab-based limit.

Action to clean up air is urgently needed across the world, but cutting emissions for vehicles and other sources will take years, meaning ways to reduce the harm in the meantime could be vital. The new inhaler has been developed by German medical devices company Bitop and is based on a molecule called ectoine, discovered in the 1980s in a desert bacterium which uses the compound to conserve water in 60C heat.

“It is quite an inert molecule that does one main thing, which is bind water, which stabilises cell membrane tissues against physical or chemical damage,” said Dr Andreas Bilstein, at Bitop. “It supports the natural barrier.”

When inhaled, this helps prevent the damage caused by air pollution particles that can lead to asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and lung cancer, Bilstein said: “Damage cannot occur as strongly and there is less inflammatory response, and so disease progression is reduced. The perfect situation is that the patient inhales in the morning and evening at home.”

The inhaler has been tested in three small groups of patients particularly at risk from air pollution, due to asthma, COPD and bronchitis, with the positive results due to be published soon, Bilstein said.

Ectoine does not interact with cell receptors, so it is classed as a medical device rather than a drug. This means large clinical trials are not required for official approval and the inhaler could be on sale soon, at an estimated cost of £17 a month, after Bitop selects a marketing partner. A version of the product for use in nebulisers will be available this year in Germany and Poland, while an ectoine-based nasal spray for allergy relief is already available.

Bilstein said the inhaler could be useful around the world, as particulate air pollution is not just a European problem: “Especially in Asia – China in particular – the demand for such a product is even higher. I was in New York last week, and the air was also not very clean.”

The protective effect of ectoine was discovered by Prof Jean Krutmann and colleagues at the Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, while investigating whether the molecule could protect skin against sun damage. Bitop funded a series of studies, now published in prominent scientific journals.

“The point that it can prevent the lung inflammation induced by ultrafine particles is established – there is no more doubt,” Krutmann said. Antioxidants can also provide some protection but there has been controversy over the effectiveness of such food supplements, he said: “Personally, I think it is much better to eat lots of vegetables and fruit rather than taking any supplements.”

Dr Richard Russell, a consultant respiratory physician in the NHS and medical advisor to the British Lung Foundation, who was not involved in the research, said the inhaler was both credible and promising: “Ectoine is a beautifully elegant molecule and it clearly works by helping water to stabilise, giving you a film of water in times of stress.”

“The work that has been published thus far, in credible, internationally recognised journals, show that this stuff has positive properties, protecting against triggered inflammation,” he told the Guardian. Russell, who also lectures at Imperial College and Oxford University, said it might also be useful for the treatment of asthma, COPD and other lung diseases, not only prevention. “It could potentially do so much more. It is actually quite exciting and there is clearly a lot more to come from this story.”

Krutmann said slashing air pollution remained paramount. “It is very nice to be able to protect people against the detrimental effects, but this should not be used as an argument that we can now stop working on reducing particulate [air pollution]. The best thing is that we have clean air because then we don’t need any prophylactic treatment. But on the other hand we have to be realistic and in many countries you cannot just switch traffic overnight to electric cars and do other drastic things.”

“It will take many more years, especially in countries like China, and I think there is an ethical need to provide something to the general population to protect them,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The expected cost to UK consumers is noted ($17 pounds/month).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Douglas P. Zipes, a professor at the Indiana University School of Medicine in Indianapolis, said the new device could someday displace existing models used in many patients Every month, about 10,000 patients in this country get a defibrillator, either for the first time or as replacements for devices whose batteries have worn out.

In recent years, the safety of defibrillator wires has come in particular focus because a model made by Medtronic has been prone to fracturing. Hundreds of patients who received the model have had to undergo new operations to replace it. Also, scar tissue often builds up around intravenous wires, a process that can make removing and replacing them difficult or dangerous.

Dr. Bardy said in a telephone interview that the deaths of several patients many years ago because of wire-related injuries were a factor in his interest in developing the new device.

“You are looking at a therapy that can avert, we hope, complications and be as effective,” he said.

In the study published Wednesday, Dr. Bardy and others reported that the new device had undergone several successful initial trials, including one in which it was used for a year in about 60 patients.

The device is being developed by Cameron Health, a small company in San Clemente, Calif., that was co-founded by Dr. Bardy. Since the cardiologist began work on the project about a decade ago, the defibrillator he helped design has gone through several iterations.

The device will not be suitable for a significant number of heart patients, particularly those who require units that also include a pacemaker, which regulates a heart that is beating too fast or too slowly.

But Dr. Bardy estimated that the device could work in about 25 percent of patients who now get a defibrillator. These are largely patients at risk, because of genetic factors or certain types of heart diseases, for a type of erratic cardiac rhythm that can cause sudden death. Dr. Bardy said the cost of the new device is about the same as a standard defibrillator. However, he said it could help reduce health care costs, because implanting it is much simpler.

Before the device can be sold here, Cameron Health will have to submit more extensive human trial data to the F.D.A.. Dr. Bardy said a larger study of the device has just begun in this country and overseas and that it will most likely take a year or more to assemble data from it for the agency’s review.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 
The story notes that the cost of the device would be similar to that of existing devices, but that implantation is simpler, which might make those costs lower. It would have been helpful to specify the estimated cost of existing implantable defibrillators.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most Americans hear “colorectal cancer screening” and think “colonoscopy” — the unpleasant cleanse, the snakelike scope, the wobbly ride home. It’s a process that’s undeniably inconvenient, yet one we’re told is unquestionably necessary.

That’s a shame. Because although colonoscopy certainly has its advantages, direct evidence that it’s the best way to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer is not one of them. And the drawbacks of colonoscopy — including the time commitment, not-so-fun preparation, expense and small chance of harm — are probably keeping some people from participating in colorectal cancer screening.

According to public health experts, that’s a bad thing. The United States Preventive Services Task Force says the net benefit for screening adults age 50-75 is “substantial,” adding that colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in the country. But as of 2012, just 65 percent of eligible adults were being screened as recommended, and almost 28 percent had never been screened.

Among those who are screened, colonoscopy is by far the most popular method in the U.S. But there is a menu of options beyond colonoscopies — and they’re not necessarily any better or worse, according to the USPSTF’s recently finalized updated recommendations for screening among average-risk adults. The group said that while some tests are backed by more evidence than others, it found no head-to-head studies suggesting any strategy — including colonoscopy — is better than another. “Choose the one that fits your preferences and lifestyle,” said Douglas Owens, a physician and member of the task force.

Included on the list are two cheap, at-home poop tests intended to be done annually: the guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) and a more sensitive test called the fecal immunochemical test, or FIT. Both look for tiny amounts of blood in the stool that might be shed by cancer or polyps. You get one from your doctor, take a poop sample at home, and then return the sample to the doctor. Only if you get a positive result do you need to have a colonoscopy. (These are different from a new stool-based DNA test, which while on the USPSTF’s list is much more expensive and has been studied less.)

Of the two, Richard Wender, a physician and chief cancer control officer of the American Cancer Society, said the FIT is preferable, both because it’s more accurate and because it requires only one poop sample and no changes in diet. It costs about $25 or less and when done every year, the USPSTF’s models estimate, it will avert 20-23 deaths from colorectal cancer per 1,000 people screened. (Wender doesn’t recommend the OTC tests that are available.)

That’s comparable to the two “scope” tests on the USPSTF’s list, flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy, which have the advantage of both detecting and removing precancerous polyps in one procedure. (Flexible sigmoidoscopy, which looks at the lower part of the large intestine, has been shown by randomized trials to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer but isn’t reimbursed as well as colonoscopy and is on the decline in the U.S.)

Colonoscopy is the most popular test in the U.S. In addition to its polyp-removing ability, if you have a negative test, you don’t have to come back for another 10 years. There is indirect evidence it reduces colorectal cancer deaths, in the form of a large study following people who did and didn’t get the test over time. And it seems logical that if sigmoidoscopy cuts colorectal cancer deaths, the more extensive colonoscopy must provide a similar benefit. But that’s not yet been proved by randomized controlled trials. Based on the available evidence and its modeling, the USPSTF estimates it reduces deaths from colorectal cancer by 22-24 per 1,000 people screened.

But that lack of trial data is why the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care earlier this year recommended against using colonoscopy as a first-line screening method. “They were very clear: We’re going to stick to the evidence, and right now we don’t have evidence for colonoscopy,” said Aasma Shaukat, section chief of gastroenterology in the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Colonoscopy also has plenty of downsides. It’s expensive, running upward of $1,000. (The test is covered without cost sharing as preventive care under the Affordable Care Act.) Most people prefer to have sedation during the procedure, which means time off from work and finding a ride home. There’s variation in the quality of the test, depending on who’s doing it. There’s a small but real risk of harm, such as a perforation.

So why do so many people prefer it to the poop test? For many, because they’ve been told it’s the best test to get. A 2012 study found primary care physicians overwhelmingly said they thought it was the best colorectal screening option. Katie Couric’s on-air colonoscopy in March 2000 boosted awareness and increased colonoscopy rates. There’s also a “more is better” attitude when it comes to medicine among many people, said Shaukat. And colonoscopies are well-reimbursed for the physicians who perform them. Hospitals have focused on marketing colonoscopies rather than alternative tests.

No one is arguing colonoscopy is a bad test. It just hasn’t been shown to be better than an annual FIT, said James Allison, a clinical professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California-San Francisco. He said the public health message is slowly changing to reflect that. The 80% by 2018 campaign from the National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, for example, which aims to increase the rate of screening, emphasizes a suite of options. “People are very motivated to get screened when they hear colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer-related death and if they know there are tests that are affordable and can be done at home,” said Wender.

So if you want a colonoscopy after talking with your physician and digging into all its pros and cons — fantastic. But if you prefer something less invasive but more frequent, you can test your poop every year without feeling like you’re opting for, um, No. 2.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this story a Satisfactory rating in this category since it does mention the $1,000 cost of a colonoscopy and that one of the two at-home screening tests costs about $25.  But readers would benefit more by knowing the average costs of the two alternatives, rather than just the cost of one.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The treatment is also gaining attention from mainstream researchers, including some former skeptics. The National Institute of Mental Health recently sponsored its first study of neurofeedback for A.D.H.D.: a randomized, controlled trial of 36 subjects.

The results are to be announced Oct. 26 at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. In an interview in the summer, the study’s director, Dr. L. Eugene Arnold, an emeritus professor of psychiatry at Ohio State, noted that there had been “quite a bit of improvement” in many of the children’s behavior, as reported by parents and teachers.

Dr. Arnold said that if the results bore out that neurofeedback was making the difference, he would seek financing for a broader study, with as many as 100 subjects.

John Kounios, a professor of psychology at Drexel University, published a small study in 2007 suggesting that the treatment speeded cognitive processing in elderly people. “There’s no question that neurofeedback works, that people can change brain activity,” he said. “The big questions we still haven’t answered are precisely how it works and how it can be harnessed to treat disorders.”

Russell A. Barkley, a professor of psychiatry at the Medical University of South Carolina and a leading authority on attention problems, has long dismissed claims that neurofeedback can help. But Dr. Barkley says he was persuaded to take another look after Dutch scientists published an analysis of recent international studies finding significant reductions in impulsiveness and inattention.

Still, Dr. Barkley cautioned that he had yet to see credible evidence confirming claims that such benefits can be long lasting, much less permanent.

And another mainstream expert is much more disapproving. William E. Pelham Jr., director of the Center for Children and Families at Florida International University, called neurofeedback “crackpot charlatanism.” He warned that exaggerated claims for it might lead parents to favor it over proven options like behavioral therapy and medication.

Neurofeedback was developed in the 1960s and ’70s, with American researchers leading the way. In 1968, M. Barry Sterman, a neuroscientist at the University of California, Los Angeles, reported that the training helped cats resist epileptic seizures. Dr. Sterman and others later claimed to have achieved similar benefits with humans.

The findings prompted a boomlet of interest in which clinicians of varying degrees of respectability jumped into the field, making many unsupported claims about seeming miracle cures and tainting the treatment’s reputation among academic experts. Meanwhile, researchers in Germany and the Netherlands continued to explore neurofeedback’s potential benefits.

A major attraction of the technique is the hope that it can help patients avoid drugs, which often have side effects. Instead, patients practice routines that seem more like exercising a muscle.

Brain cells communicate with one another, in part, through a constant storm of electrical impulses. Their patterns show up on an electroencephalogram, or EEG, as brain waves with different frequencies.

Neurofeedback practitioners say people have problems when their brain wave frequencies aren’t suited for the task at hand, or when parts of the brain aren’t communicating adequately with other parts. These issues, they say, can be represented on a “brain map,” the initial EEG readings that serve as a guide for treatment. Subsequently, a clinician will help a patient learn to slow down or speed up those brain waves, through a process known as operant conditioning. The brain begins by generating fairly random patterns, while the computer software responds with encouragement whenever the activity meets the target.

Dr. Norman Doidge, a psychiatrist at the Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research at Columbia and the author of “The Brain That Changes Itself” (Viking, 2007), said he considered neurofeedback “a powerful stabilizer of the brain.” Practitioners make even more enthusiastic claims. Robert Coben, a neuropsychologist in Massapequa Park, N.Y., said he had treated more than 1,000 autistic children over the past seven years and had conducted a clinical study, finding striking reductions in symptoms, as reported by parents.

Maureen and Terrence Magagnos of Lynbrook, N.Y., took their 7-year-old son, Peter, to Dr. Coben after he was given a diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorder in first grade. “He had classic symptoms of autism,” said Mr. Magagnos. “His speech was terrible, he made very little eye contact and he screamed for attention — literally screamed.”

Their exceptionally generous insurance covered neurofeedback, so they decided to give it a try, with sessions twice a week for the next five years.

At the start of the treatment, Dr. Coben said, he discovered that Peter had been suffering tiny, asymptomatic seizures. He says neurofeedback helped stabilize the child’s brain activity, eliminating the seizures. And within three months, said Mr. Magagnos, a retired police officer, Peter’s teachers were calling to report remarkable improvements.

“Today I’d say he has ‘autism light,’ ” he added. “He still has some symptoms, but he is much more manageable.”

Whether such results can be achieved with other children is a matter of debate. Still, as practitioners lobby for broader acceptance, including insurance recognition, a sure sign of neurofeedback’s increasing popularity is the number of companies selling supposedly mind-altering systems to use at home.

With names like SmartBrain Technologies and the Learning Curve Inc., they offer equipment purported, respectively, to “pump the neurons” and “make lasting changes in attention, memory, mood, control, pain, sleep and more.”

The Food and Drug Administration regulates all biofeedback equipment as medical devices. The only approved use, however, is for “relaxation.”

Peter Freer, a former grade-school teacher who is chief executive of a North Carolina firm called Unique Logic and Technology, says that since he began his business in 1994, he has sold several thousand of his “Play Attention” systems, advertised to improve a child’s focus, behavior, academic performance and social behavior.

The equipment, which costs $1,800, is advertised as “a sophisticated advancement of neurofeedback.” Mr. Freer says his clients include more than 600 school districts. (He adds that his system, as distinct from “clinical” neurofeedback, aims not to change brain waves but rather to put the user in an “attentive state” that makes it easier to learn skills.) Neurofeedback in general is a largely unregulated, with practitioners often devising their own protocols about where on the scalp to place electrodes. Results vary widely, and researchers caution that it is extremely important to choose one’s practitioner with care.

When it comes to to the actual devices, Dr. Kerson, at the International Society for Neurofeedback and Research, cautioned that they should never be used without experienced supervision.

“Oftentimes what people do is find a way to get one of these machines on eBay and use it at home,” she said, adding that unskilled use could interfere with medications or prompt an anxiety attack or a seizure.

“Neurofeedback is a powerful therapy,” she said, “and should be treated that way.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The story provided cost estimates for a couple of neurofeedback treatment regimens.  It also indicated euphemistically that it is not paid for by insurance companies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Sept. 11, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new device meant to help surgeons determine in the operating room if they have removed all cancerous breast cancer tissue may help reduce repeat surgeries after lumpectomy without compromising cosmetic effects, according to a new study.

The device, called MarginProbe, emits an electric field and senses a return signal from the tissue examined. Cancerous tissue provides a different electromagnetic signature than normal tissue, the researchers explained.

"This can potentially decrease having to go back to the operating room and with no real effect on your [cosmetic] outcome," said study leader Dr. Susan Boolbol, chief of breast surgery at Beth Israel Medical Center, in New York City.

The study of nearly 500 patients undergoing breast-conserving surgery found little difference in the volume of tissue removed when the device was used compared to traditional detection methods.

"The reality is, most of the time we leave the operating room and we don't know if we have a clear margin [with all cancer removed] or not," Boolbol said. Doctors wait for the pathology report to find that out, which can take a week or two. With the new device, the wait time is about five minutes.

"Everything still goes through pathology," Boolbol said. But the MarginProbe is another tool that might help reduce the odds of needing a subsequent surgery, she said.

Boolbol is scheduled to present the findings Thursday at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's breast cancer symposium in San Francisco.

In June, the radiation-free device won the blessing of a U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory panel. The FDA usually follows the advisory panel's recommendations, so device approval is anticipated.

For the study, Boolbol and her colleagues randomly assigned 495 breast cancer patients to receive the MarginProbe after lumpectomy or not receive it. Of those, 161 had early cancer known as ductal carcinoma in situ. The others had invasive cancers.

Where the device detected cancer cells near the edge or surface of the sample examined, surgeons removed additional tissue in the same procedure.

Typically, about 40 percent of lumpectomy patients need another surgery because of the difficulty distinguishing between healthy and cancerous cells in tissue around the tumor.

"We looked at whether we could lower the [repeat surgery] rate by using this device," Boolbol said. The patients were followed for two months to see if they needed a repeat surgery. For those with ductal carcinoma in situ, 13 percent of the probe group needed a repeat surgery, compared to 37 percent of the control group.

Among women with invasive breast cancer, 17 percent in the device group and 33 percent in the comparison group required more surgery.

Looking at the volume of tissue excised, the researchers said not much more tissue was removed when the device was used compared to tissue removed in the initial and subsequent surgeries among the control-group patients, Boolbol said.

Dr. Laura Kruper, director of the Cooper Finkel Women's Health Center and co-director of the breast cancer program at City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center in Duarte, Calif., said the device looks promising. However, she thinks more research is needed.

"I would like to see it [used] in a larger population," she said. If the results are repeated in larger studies, it could be a welcome addition to doctors' techniques, she said.

The expected cost of the MarginProbe in the United States, if approved, is not yet known, said Michael Graffeo, a spokesman for its maker, Dune Medical Devices. In Europe, where the device is available, each probe (one per patient) sells for about 600 euros or $760, he said. This is much less than the cost of re-operation, he noted.

The device is also being studied for use with prostate cancer, the company said.

Data and conclusions presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

To learn more about breast cancer surgery, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While the cost of the device in the United States is not known, the story quotes a spokesperson from the manufacturer who points out that the device sells in Europe for 600 euros, or $760.  A new device is needed for each surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Twelve years ago, a car wreck took away Nathan Copeland's ability to control his hands or sense what his fingers were touching.

A few months ago, researchers at the University of Pittsburgh and the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center gave Copeland a new way to reach out and feel the world around him. It's a mind-controlled robotic arm that has pressure sensors in each fingertip that send signals directly to Copeland's brain.

The scientists published details of their work online Thursday in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

"It's a really weird sensation," Copeland, now 30, says in a video made shortly after he first tried the system. "Sometimes it feels, kind of, like electrical and sometimes it's more of a pressure." But he also describes many of the sensations coming from his robotic hand as "natural."

When Copeland touches an object with the robotic hand, he can tell which finger the sensation is coming from and whether an object feels hard or soft, says Robert Gaunt, a bioengineer and assistant professor in the Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation at the University of Pittsburgh.

"But we're really not at the point where we could, say, get him to feel the difference between silk and burlap," Gaunt says.

The success represents an advance that is "absolutely critical in terms of making prosthetics useful," says Mike McLoughlin, an engineer at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory.

McLoughlin is part of a team at Hopkins that developed the Modular Prosthetic Limb that Copeland is using. The research at both Hopkins and in Pittsburgh is supported by the government's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

For several years now, people have been able to control robotic arms using thoughts alone. But they have relied entirely on vision to know whether the arm is going in the right direction or grasping an object with the proper amount of force.

That makes it very challenging to perform simple tasks like grasping a foam coffee cup without crushing it, McLoughlin says.

"Without sensory feedback, somebody would have to actually have to look at the prosthetic, look at the cup, start to close the hand, (and) visually see the cup is starting to deform," he says.

Restoring Copeland's sense of touch was a painstaking process, but the Pittsburgh team knew it was possible.

"His hand has been disconnected from his brain because of his spinal cord injury," Gaunt says. "But the brain hasn't lost its ability to feel."

So the team began looking for a way to send touch sensations directly to Copeland's brain. The first step was to monitor his brain activity using a technique called magnetoencephalography.

"We were able to see the parts of his brain that became active when he was watching videos of a hand being touched," Gaunt says.

Next, the researchers placed tiny electrodes in Copeland's brain that could stimulate the areas corresponding to each finger. Then they waited for the brain to heal, as it adjusted to the presence of the electrodes.

It was several weeks before the team was able to send the first tiny pulse of electricity to Copeland's brain. "When it finally happened, he just very calmly said, 'Yep, I felt it on my index finger,' " Gaunt recalls. "But in the background I was breathing a sigh of relief and other people were cheering."

Of course, mind-controlled robots are still years away from consumer applications, McLoughlin says. At the moment, they are still too expensive, too bulky and too finicky to be used outside a laboratory setting. And there's no good way to control them without implanting electrodes in the brain.

Still, the ability to receive touch sensation from a robotic arm has the potential to help not only thousands of people who are paralyzed, but also people with a wide range of physical disabilities, McLoughlin says. For example, robots that provide sensory feedback could eventually help a disabled person cook a meal or clean up things at home.

"We're on the verge of something here that's going to transform lives," he says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states: “At the moment, they [robotic arms with touch sensitivity] are still too expensive, too bulky and too finicky to be used outside a laboratory setting.”
While the story could have helped provide more context by explaining the cost of the experimental surgery on the patient–even without speculating on the cost of the robotic arm itself–this is enough to merit a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Testing cholesterol in toddlers and babies? Study says it could help

What if a blood test could reveal that your child is at high risk for early heart disease years in the future, giving you a chance to prevent it now? A big study in England did that — screening thousands of babies for inherited risk — and found it was twice as common as has been thought.

The study also revealed parents who had the condition but didn’t know it, and had passed it on to their children. Ninety percent of them started taking preventive medicines after finding out.

Researchers say the two-generation benefits may convince more parents to agree to cholesterol testing for their kids. An expert panel in the United States recommends this test for children between the ages of 9 and 11, but many aren’t tested now unless they are obese or have other heart risk factors such as diabetes or high blood pressure.

For every 1,000 people screened in the study, four children and four parents were identified as being at risk for early heart disease. That’s nearly twice as many as most studies in the past have suggested.

“We really need to pay attention to this,” said Dr. Elaine Urbina, director of preventive cardiology at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center and a member of the US. expert panel. “It’s reasonable to screen for something that’s common, dangerous and has a treatment that’s effective and safe.”

Dr. William Cooper, a pediatrics and preventive medicine professor at Vanderbilt University, called it “an innovative approach” that finds not just kids at risk but also parents while they’re still young enough to benefit from preventive treatment, such as cholesterol-lowering statin drugs.

Statins aren’t recommended until around age 10, but certain dietary supplements such as plant sterols and stanols could help younger kids, Urbina said.

“We’re not talking about putting all these kids on statins,” she said.

The study was led by Dr. David Wald at Queen Mary University of London. He and another author founded a company that makes a combination pill to prevent heart disease. The work was funded by the Medical Research Council, the British government’s health research agency. Results were published Wednesday by the New England Journal of Medicine.

Researchers were testing for familial hypercholesterolemia, a genetic disorder that, untreated, raises the risk of a heart attack by age 40 tenfold.

They did a heel-stick blood test on 10,059 children ages 1 to 2 during routine immunization visits to check for high cholesterol and 48 gene mutations that can cause the disorder. If a child was found with the disorder, parents were tested.

One in 270 children had the gene mutations; others were identified through cholesterol levels alone.

“That’s a pretty common genetic defect,” said Dr. Stephen Daniels, chairman of pediatrics at the University of Colorado School of Medicine and a member of the US expert panel.

But many parents balk at the idea of testing children for a disorder associated with middle age, experts say.

Karen Teber, a media relations specialist in Madison, Wis., was surprised when a doctor wanted to test her 12-year-old stepson. “My reluctance was really born out of lack of information,” she said. “I hadn’t heard of it before.”

The study did not address whether screening is cost-effective. In the US, cholesterol tests cost around $80 and usually are covered by health insurance though much lower prices often are negotiated. The study authors in England estimated that if cholesterol testing costs $7 and gene testing costs $300, it would cost $2,900 for every person identified as having the disorder.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This was a strong point for the story, which did provide some information on cost. “The study did not address whether screening is cost-effective. In the U.S., cholesterol tests cost around $80 and usually are covered by health insurance, though much lower prices often are negotiated. The study authors in England estimated that if cholesterol testing costs $7 and gene testing costs $300, it would cost $2,900 for every person identified as having the disorder.” We wish the story would have noted the cost of gene testing in the U.S. but otherwise found this satisfactory.
The story also could have noted that although statin drugs are generic and relatively inexpensive, the long-term costs of treatment from childhood onward are likely to be significant.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Older women being treated for the most common form of breast cancer who took drugs called aromatase inhibitors for 10 years rather than the usual five had a lower risk of their cancer returning, particularly in the opposite breast, physicians reported Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

In a randomized controlled trial, 959 women were given the drug and 959 a placebo. Thirteen of the women taking the drug for an additional five years developed breast cancer in the opposite breast during the study, compared with 31 taking the placebo; 55 and 68, respectively, developed a recurrence of cancer in the original breast.

For any individual woman, the odds of developing “contralateral” breast cancer — that is, in the opposite breast — are still lower than 200-to-1 per year.

Still, said Dr. Richard Schilsky, who serves as the chief medical officer of ASCO and who was not involved in the study, “there’s a substantial benefit” to continuing aromatase inhibitors out to 10 years to lower the chance of cancer developing in the other breast.

The study did not continue long enough to discover whether the lower risk of developing cancer in the opposite breast translated into a lower risk of death.

The study, which was also published Sunday in the New England Journal of Medicine, was partially funded by Novartis, which sells letrozole — the aromatase inhibitor used in the trial — as the branded drug Femara. Several of the authors have received speaking fees or consulting payments from Novartis, AstraZeneca (which makes letrozole), and Pfizer (maker of the aromatase inhibitor exemestane).

Letrozole is available as a generic for less than $100 a month.

The trial included 1,918 postmenopausal women who had what’s called hormone-receptor positive breast cancer, in which the hormones estrogen or progesterone fuel the proliferation of cells. About two-thirds of breast cancers are hormone-receptor positive, and they have a good prognosis. Aromatase inhibitors block an enzyme that the body needs to produce estrogen.

The women had taken another breast cancer drug, tamoxifen, for several years and then were started on an aromatase inhibitor, which doctors usually prescribe for five years.

After following the women for a median of just over six years, found Dr. Paul Goss of Massachusetts General Hospital and his colleagues, 95 percent of those taking letrozole for the additional five years remained free of breast cancer (meaning the disease had not returned in the original breast or developed in the opposite one). Of those taking an inert pill, or placebo, 91 percent did.

Put another way, the risk of cancer returning in the original or the opposite breast was 34 percent lower in women on 10 years of letrozole compared with those who stopped after five. There was no difference in survival, however: 100 women in each group died during the study.

“The reason this is a milestone trial is that it’s the first to show that 10 years [on letrozole] is better than five,” said Dr. Nicholas Robert, an oncologist with Virginia Cancer Specialists and a co-author of the study. But because the absolute benefits were not huge, and because the drug did cause side effects, it makes sense to consider this for women at the highest risk of a recurrence of breast cancer, he said.

Aromatase inhibitors cause side effects in some women, especially night sweats, hot flashes, and sexual dysfunction. Women receiving five more years of letrozole also had greater loss of bone in their hip, worse osteoporosis, and more fractures.

Experts said the study was significant because some women and their doctors choose to continue aromatase inhibitors past the standard five years. There had been no research on whether that was beneficial.

Dr. Debra Patt, a breast cancer specialist at Texas Oncology who was not involved in the study, called the difference of a few percentage points in the risk of recurrence (95 percent vs. 91 percent) “substantial. If you can tolerate the side effects, I think many women will opt to take the extra years of letrozole, so this study is practice-changing.”

Dr. J. Leonard Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society cautioned, however, that “one has to be cautious in interpreting these results,” partly because “based on what they show, there is no overall change in survival.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions costs. Letrozole, the aromatase inhibitor used in the trial, is available as a generic for less than $100 a month.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
America’s ongoing battle with weight-loss that has led to fad diets and invasive surgeries like gastric bypass and stomach stapling. Now, there is a new solution for people with a body mass index (BMI) between 30 and 40 that want to lose weight called the Orbera gastric balloon.

Dr. Prem Chattoo, a New York based gastroenterologist, told FoxNews.com that the balloon is placed it into the stomach through the mouth. It is then inflated with saline during the procedure that lasts about 45 minutes. Patients are treated in office and are kept under mild to moderate sedation. The balloon remains in the patient’s stomach for six months and is then removed the same way it was inserted, through the mouth.

“The beauty of the procedure is that it is a nonsurgical procedure,” Chattoo said. In addition to eliminating the scarring and risks involved with more invasive options, Chattoo said that the recovery time is also much faster.

The objective of the Orbera system is the make the patient feel partially satiated so they eat smaller, but more nutritious portions. Chattoo also offers patients a nutritionist and trainer with the procedure. The hope is that patients can train their body to eat in a much healthier fashion without feeling overly hungry.

Marie Brown chose to undergo the procedure and credits Orbera for helping her lose over 20 pounds in three and a half months. She told FoxNews.com that the balloon “makes you feel full all the time to the point where you’re not angry about having to lose things like chocolate and cake.”

Brown said that the balloon acted like a “restart button” and retrained her body to adapt to a new lifestyle of healthy eating and exercise.

Orbera is not for the morbidly obese or those who have had surgical procedures affecting the stomach or intestinal lining. It is meant for people looking for an extra jumpstart on a diet, whether the purpose is cosmetic or for health reasons.

“We might be able to prevent young, healthy people from having these chronic diseases like diabetes and hypertension,” Chattoo said.

The most common side effect of installing the balloon is nausea that lasts a few days. Chattoo said that even if the balloon were to pop, the saline would be absorbed and pose no harm to the patient. The balloon would be removed in the same way it is at the six month mark.

Orbera is not covered by insurance and costs $8,000. For more information, click here.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly notes that the device, known as Orbera, “is not covered by insurance and costs $8,000.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philadelphia, PA, June 2, 2016 - Basal cell carcinoma is one of the most common cancers and its incidence is increasing worldwide, putting a significant burden on health services. Topical treatments are available for superficial basal cell carcinoma (BCC) but there has a lack of long-term follow-up data to guide treatment decisions. A three-year randomized controlled clinical trial has found that two topical creams are effective in most primary, low-risk superficial BCC, comparing favorably with photodynamic therapy (PDT), as reported by investigators in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.

More than 80% of all skin cancers are BCC, arising from the basal cells (i.e., small, round cells found in the lower layer of the epidermis). There are over two million cases a year in the U.S. and the lifetime risk of developing a BCC before the age of 85 years is one in five people. The prognosis is excellent, but it can cause significant disfigurement by invading surrounding tissues.

While most types of BCC require surgery, superficial BCC can be treated topically with noninvasive treatments such as PDT, imiquimod cream, fluorouracil cream, cryosurgery or electrodessication and curettage.

Investigators in the Netherlands report the results of a three-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial that compared three noninvasive treatments that included imiquimod and fluorouracil cream. "The main advantages of noninvasive treatments are good cosmetic outcome, preservation of surrounding tissue, and potential for home application of either creams," explained lead investigator Marieke Roozeboom of the Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Center in the Netherlands. "Throughout the last two decades there has been a growing interest in these non-surgical therapies, which offer the possibility of avoiding surgery and reducing demands on busy medical practices."

However, prior to this study there has been a lack of randomized controlled trials with a long-term follow-up that compare the effectiveness of noninvasive treatments. Consequently, there is no consensus in international BCC guidelines on the first choice of noninvasive therapy for superficial BCC.

A total of 601 patients with a superficial BCC participated in this study: 202 patients were treated with methylaminolevulinate photodynamic therapy (MAL-PDT), 198 with imiquimod cream, and 201 with fluorouracil cream. The three study groups had a similar distribution of baseline characteristics, with the exception of tumor size.

Around 80% of patients with superficial BCC were tumor free after imiquimod treatment after three years. The clearance rate was 68% for patients treated with fluorouracil and 58% for individuals receiving PDT.

"Based on our findings, both imiquimod and fluorouracil are effective noninvasive treatments in most primary, low-risk superficial BCC, but the data provide no definite evidence for superiority of imiquimod to fluorouracil," commented Dr. Roozeboom. "Both creams have an equal cosmetic outcome and risk of local adverse events. Fluorouracil has the advantage of being less expensive than imiquimod. However, between one- and three-year follow-up, more recurrences were diagnosed in the fluorouracil group compared with the imiquimod group."

"When choosing a treatment for an individual patient with a superficial BCC, other factors like age, compliance, and patient preferences should always be taken into account. For example, we have found that in superficial BCC on the lower extremities in older patients, PDT should be prescribed rather than imiquimod. Our evidence indicates that a personalized treatment approach is necessary," added Dr. Roozeboom.

"Three year follow-up results of photodynamic therapy versus imiquimod versus fluorouracil for treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: a single blind, noninferiority, randomized controlled trial," by Marieke H. Roozeboom, MD, Aimee H.M.M. Arits, PhD, Klara Mosterd, PhD, Anja Sommer, PhD, Brigitte A.B. Essers, PhD, Michette J.M. de Rooij, PhD, Patricia J.F. Quaedvlieg, PhD, Peter M. Steijlen, PhD, Patty J. Nelemans, PhD, and Nicole W.J. Kelleners-Smeets, PhD (doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.03.043), published online in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology by Elsevier.

Full text of this article is available to credentialed journalists upon request. Contact George Woodward at 1-215-605-3050 or g.woodward@elsevier.com to obtain copies. Journalists who wish to speak with the authors should contact Marieke H. Roozeboom at 31-433-877 295 or mh.roozeboom@mumc.nl.

About the Journal of Investigative Dermatology

Journal of Investigative Dermatology (JID), with an Impact Factor of 7.216, is the leading journal in dermatology*. The journal publishes reports describing original research on all aspects of cutaneous biology and skin disease. Topics include biochemistry, biophysics, carcinogenesis, cell regulation, clinical research, development, embryology, epidemiology and other population-based research, extracellular matrix, genetics, immunology, melanocyte biology, microbiology, molecular and cell biology, pathology, percutaneous absorption, pharmacology, photobiology, physiology, skin structure, and wound healing. http://www. ,org *2014 Journal Citations Report published by Thomson Reuters ©2015

Elsevier is a world-leading provider of information solutions that enhance the performance of science, health, and technology professionals, empowering them to make better decisions, deliver better care, and sometimes make groundbreaking discoveries that advance the boundaries of knowledge and human progress. Elsevier provides web-based, digital solutions -- among them ScienceDirect, Scopus, Elsevier Research Intelligence and ClinicalKey -- and publishes over 2,500 journals, including The Lancet and Cell, and more than 33,000 book titles, including a number of iconic reference works. Elsevier is part of RELX Group, a world-leading provider of information and analytics for professional and business customers across industries. http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release notes that “Fluorouracil has the advantage of being less expensive than imiquimod,” a statement for which we rank this satisfactory. But it would have been more complete if we had been told how much cheaper, and how the topical treatments compare with the cost of surgical removal or photo-dynamic therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Take charge of your biological clock,” the invitation urged.

It beckoned women to an evening seminar in Manhattan. There, they received a coupon for the latest in fertility management: a genetic test marketed as a way to help maximize their chances of becoming pregnant.

The hitch: Top reproductive endocrinologists point out that there’s no evidence the $950 DNA test can actually help women conceive. And even the company’s founder and CEO acknowledges the test can’t provide clear and definitive answers on which treatments women should try next if they’re struggling with infertility.

The Fertilome test hit the market at the start of this year and the company behind it, Celmatix, said more than 50 doctors have already ordered it for hundreds of women seeking scientific guidance on questions such as whether they should freeze their eggs for future use, or whether it’s worth it to try another round of in vitro fertilization. The Celmatix CEO, Piraye Yurttas Beim, said her team has heard of a small wave of “Fertilome babies” on the way.

Some reproductive specialists are enthusiastic. But others caution that Fertilome is just the latest genetic test promising more than it can deliver — and, in this case, playing to the fears of women who are anxious about becoming a mother. (Another example: a new $89 test that claims to tell women how their DNA could influence the level of a beneficial fatty acid in their breast milk.)

The Fertilome test, which must be ordered by a doctor, analyzes a woman’s DNA for 49 genetic variants that have been linked to various conditions that can sometimes cause fertility problems. A couple weeks later, the doctor gets back a long report listing the odds that a patient has certain conditions.

For example, she might be 4.4 times more likely than women without a particular genetic variant to have a condition known as primary ovarian insufficiency, characterized by irregular periods and diminished fertility before age 40.

That sounds alarming, and might prompt a younger woman who’s planning to delay pregnancy to freeze her eggs to be sure she has them available down the road. But the report does not explain that the condition is fairly rare — affecting just 1 in 1,000 women by age 30 and 1 in 250 women by age 35 — so the absolute risk is still very small.

And just because women have an elevated genetic risk for a condition doesn’t mean they actually have it.

Many of the other conditions that the test screens for are also quite rare. But the report doesn’t explain the prevalence.

So a patient may see a table showing that her genetic variants make her twice as likely to have a condition known as recurrent pregnancy loss, defined as repeated miscarriages. But the report doesn’t note that just 1 percent of women have that condition in the first place, making the odds still overwhelmingly in her favor. The doctor ordering the test, or a genetic counselor, is supposed to provide that information.

Without the proper context, “some of this can be very misleading and very frightening to patients,” said Dr. John Petrozza, chief of the division of reproductive medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital.

Petrozza said he worries that women might wrongly interpret a long litany of genetic risks to mean that their hopes to start a family are “doomed.” He also said he sees the test as “very costly for what it’s trying to do — and not really giving, at least at this point, what I would consider meaningful information.”

The Fertilome test was eight years in the making. It draws on more than 5,000 studies that have found associations between particular genetic variants and conditions that can cause fertility problems, company spokeswoman Colleen McMillen said.

Beim, the Celmatix CEO, said the test is already bringing “tremendous” value, in part by providing guidance that can act as a “tiebreaker” to help patients and their doctor decide which treatment to prioritize.

“It will help save a lot of heartache and time if we could know from the very beginning that [a given patient] is at risk for a uterine factor, or if it’s more her eggs,” said Dr. Angie Beltsos, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in Chicago who ordered the Fertilome test for one of her patients for the first time last month.

What the test can’t do: provide evidence-backed answers on what patients should try next. Nor can it tell patients whether they’re wired to get pregnant from IVF — or wired to fail it. “We’re not there. We’re not claiming we’re there,” Beim said.

Beim trained as a molecular genetics researcher. As a Ph.D. student at Weill Cornell in the 2000s, she worked on an early project in what’s now called precision medicine: identifying the specific genetic alterations in the tumors of lung cancer patients that seemed to predict whether they would respond to a certain drug.

After shifting her research focus to embryology, Beim found herself frustrated that the fertility field wasn’t benefiting from the same boom in translational genetics that was reshaping oncology. So she started her own company.

Celmatix also sells software, called Polaris, that pulls from the medical histories of hundreds of thousands of women to try to predict which fertility treatments are likely to work in different circumstances.

Fertilome — not to be confused with a line of weed killers and other gardening products with the same name — launched in January with a $1,900 price tag. Insurers don’t cover it; after it became clear that patients were balking at the bill, Celmatix cut the price in half.

Celmatix is mostly marketing the test to reproductive specialists, who are largely using it in the toughest infertility cases, Beim said.

But the company is also beginning to market directly to women — including younger women who aren’t trying to get pregnant yet.

The company has recently started promoting social media ads, like one that asks: “Are you getting the right fertility treatments for your DNA?” Another asserts: “Over 60% of millennial women are open to #eggfreezing. The Fertilome test can help you decide if it is right for you.”

The company’s website also features testimonials from women who say they have used Fertilome to help guide their decisions. There’s Ella, a 30-year-old with dark hair and stylish clothing who decided to freeze her eggs after taking the Fertilome test. Then there’s Maxine, a 27-year-old medical school graduate with short hair and a warm smile who used the test to help her juggle the timing of starting a family and starting her career.

The wrinkle: The images of Ella and Maxine are actually stock photos, available for purchase online.

After questions from STAT, the company added a disclaimer acknowledging that testimonials are not quite as they were promoted from the start: the names, images, and details of patients’ stories have been changed to safeguard their privacy.

Along with its social media outreach, Celmatix has held several after-work events for New York City-area women. It hosted one, on a Wednesday night in April, in its offices on Wall Street.

And on a Tuesday evening earlier this summer, the company partnered with a women’s group to host a conversation about “proactive steps you can take today to reach your future family building goals.” Appetizers, wine, and beer were served — and, in a gesture to the crowd full of women with pregnancy on their minds, non-alcoholic beverages were on the menu, too.

The company is also trying to reach OB-GYNs whose patients aren’t yet trying to get pregnant — or may be just beginning to try. Celmatix held webinars earlier this summer for OB-GYNs, telling them that the test could help “optimize management plans from the very start.”

Dr. Aimee Eyvazzadeh, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in the Bay Area, is among a few doctors who’ve been given vouchers by the company to offer the test for $500. She’s been ordering the Fertilome test for her patients about five times a week.

Eyvazzadeh said the test recently helped her counsel a patient to forgo a third round of IVF, because the patient had a genetic profile that suggested it would be unlikely to work and wasn’t in a financial position to gamble on such slim odds. (A round of IVF can cost $13,000.) That patient is now considering an egg donor.

Another one of Eyvazzadeh’s patients is 31-year-old Tara Smith.

For Smith, who works as a foster parent providing intensive care in Northern California, there’s nothing more important than family. She’s dreamed of having her own baby since she was a child herself.

That’s why Smith and her husband have spent about $70,000 over the past four years trying, without success, to get pregnant. They’ve seen doctors in St. Louis and Las Vegas, taken countless blood tests, and tried two rounds of IVF and several cycles of intrauterine insemination. Smith has long known that she has a condition called polycystic ovary syndrome, which can make it harder to get pregnant, but no one could figure out exactly why none of the treatments were working.

“It’s gut-wrenching. You’re almost like this alien,” Smith said. “Nobody knows what’s going on, and you can’t fix the problem.”

So when Eyvazzadeh suggested that she take the Fertilome test, Smith jumped at the possibility of finally getting answers. Eyvazzadeh walked her through the results last month before showing her the report, so Smith had an idea of what to expect. Still, Smith said, “my heart sank” when she saw her results for the first time.

She was 2.88 times more likely to have endometriosis, a painful disorder of the uterus, than a woman without a certain genetic variant. She was 1.54 times more likely to have primary ovarian insufficiency. She also carried three genetic variants that elevated her risk of having recurrent pregnancy loss. And she had 24 additional genetic variants that are more weakly associated with various conditions that can play a role in fertility problems.

Despite it all, Eyvazzadeh had a plan. Because many of Smith’s genetic variants were involved in immune response regulation, she instructed Smith to focus on minimizing inflammation.

At Eyvazzadeh’s recommendation, Smith spent about $200 buying dietary supplements like fish oils, turmeric, cayenne pepper, resveratrol, and berberine from Amazon and Walmart. Smith also embarked on a new diet, cutting out dairy and red meat. (A 2015 review of the evidence on the optimal diet to promote fertility — and the utility of supplements — found the data “conflicting.”)

They also plan to have Smith get infusions of intralipids — a cocktail of soy bean oil, egg yolks, and other fatty acids — during her third round of IVF, which she’s embarking on now. (Intralipid infusions are increasingly popular, but the practice was found not to help in a 2016 study of older women with a history of miscarriage.)

Smith has mostly positive feelings about her Fertilome test. Having a concrete plan based on what’s in her DNA gives her a new sense of hope. “Now I feel like we’re armed with information,” she said. But at the same time, she said, knowing what may be wrong with her makes her apprehensive about whether she’ll ever get pregnant.

After all, so far, the test has pointed her only to try nutritional tweaks of uncertain value. It doesn’t offer any definitive answers.

And that’s what gives Dr. Valerie Baker pause. A reproductive endocrinologist at Stanford, she recently suggested the test to a patient with longstanding infertility. The patient asked a good question: What would we do differently if we had this genetic analysis?

“I don’t know,” Baker recalled responding. “I probably wouldn’t do anything differently.”

She did not end up ordering the test.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Cost—since the test is not covered by insurance—gets a prominent spot in this story. Well done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors-in-training face long, stressful hours, sleepless nights and a high risk of depression and suicidal thoughts, but often are too stoic and time-starved to seek help. A study suggests online self-help behavior therapy could be a solution.

Suicidal thoughts were much less common in new doctors who had four half-hour online sessions before starting their first year of training, compared with those who got no therapy.

The research involved about 200 medical interns — residents in their first post-graduate year, which is often one of the most intense periods of doctor training. It often involves 80-hour weeks and overnight hospital shifts dealing with multiple medical crises.

An earlier study of 740 interns found that suicidal thoughts increased almost four-fold during the first three months of residency, said Dr. Constance Guille of the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston. Her research group led both studies.

Sarah Dalechek, a first-year psychiatry resident at that university, said her program requires two month-long rotations of 16-hour overnight shifts in an emergency room. She said she became very depressed but had little time to seek help.

"It's very stressful because you're sleep-deprived, you're not eating right ... you're working back-to-back shifts and you're trying to catch up on sleep but you can't," Dalechek said. She was not involved in the study.

Dalechek said she looked into seeing a therapist but would have preferred a web-based program since it's confidential and requires no appointment. Luckily, her depression subsided when that rotation ended.

Guille said offering web-based therapy routinely to medical residents could be beneficial, if her research results are confirmed in a broader study.

The results were published Wednesday in the journal JAMA Psychiatry.

The study involved interns at Yale University and the University of Southern California. It used a free online program developed at the National Institute for Mental Health Research at the Australian National University in Canberra. Interns who got the sessions were 40 percent less likely to have suicidal thoughts during that first year compared to those who received four weekly emails with information about depressions and where to seek help.

The online program included sessions about how to put feelings of stress or despair into perspective. For example, a poor test grade or bad performance evaluation might lead to feelings of "I'm not good enough," but the lessons encourage more positive thinking about "how many exams have you passed, to put this failure in a more accurate light," Guille said.

The training also encourages seeking out activities or thoughts that bring pleasure, especially when feeling down.

Previous research has shown benefits from similar web-based therapy in other settings.

Guille said medical students and residents tend to be high-achieving perfectionists, but that they need to learn "you can't always be perfect in medicine, you have to figure out how to deal with failure."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says the study involved a free online program developed in Australia. Knowing that it is free may be incentive enough for some individual doctors or their hospitals to look into it — so this is useful information.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Could A Zap To The Brain Derail Destructive Impulses?

Picture this: While reaching for the cookie jar — or cigarette or bottle of booze or other temptation — a sudden slap denies your outstretched hand. When the urge returns, out comes another slap.



Now imagine those "slaps" occurring inside the brain, protecting you in moments of weakness.

In a report published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Stanford neuroscientists say they've achieved this sort of mind-reading in binge-eating mice. They found a telltale pattern of brain activity that comes up seconds before the animals start to pig out — and delivering a quick zap to that part of the brain kept the mice from overindulging.

Whether this strategy could block harmful impulses in people remains unclear. For now the path seems promising. The current study used a brain stimulation device already approved for hard-to-treat epilepsy. And based on the new findings, a clinical trial testing this off-the-shelf system for some forms of obesity could start as early as next summer, says Casey Halpern, the study's leader and an assistant professor of neurosurgery at Stanford. He thinks the approach could also work for eating disorders and a range of other addictive or potentially life-threatening urges.

As a physician-researcher, Halpern specializes in deep brain stimulation (DBS), a surgical treatment in which battery-powered implants send electrical pulses to brain areas where signals go awry.

The Food and Drug Administration has approved DBS therapy for movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease, tremor and dystonia — usually in people who haven't responded well to medications. Occasionally DBS is a last-resort treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).

Another study published Monday in PNAS suggests that DBS could help boost memory and other research is exploring its use for substance abuse and other reward-seeking behaviors.

Years ago, the Stanford team developed a mouse model to test if DBS could curb overeating. Granted, mice don't normally gorge themselves. Yet if offered fattier, tastier chow each day for just an hour, within 10 days the mice realize if they "don't eat this now, that guy's coming back to take it away," Halpern says. So the animals learn to binge.

But when the researchers applied DBS stimulation to a part of the brain's reward circuit known as the nucleus accumbens, the mice quit stuffing themselves.

Trouble is, the moderation wore off in a few days, and the DBS also interfered with the animals' social behavior. That got Halpern thinking about a newer system — one that doesn't stimulate continuously, like DBS, but switches on briefly only after sensing a trouble signal, much like a pacemaker monitors and responds to abnormal heart rhythms.

In 2013, the FDA approved a newer-generation device, known as a responsive neurostimulation system (RNS), that does just that. Implanted within the brain, it senses early epileptic seizures and slows their spread with small zaps to the onset area. The RNS system costs around $40,000. But with medical devices, Halpern says, hospitals pay for the hardware and insurance companies often cover the surgery, if clinical trial data are good and the treatment is FDA approved. In the current study, Halpern and coworkers tested the RNS device in the binging mice.

First, they looked for a biomarker — an electrical blip that appears in the brain just before the animal reaches for fatty food. Next, the researchers programmed the stimulator to deliver a 10-second pulse whenever it detects this biomarker. They rigged some mice to this intermittent stimulator. For comparison, other animals got continuous DBS stimulation or random pulses.

The intermittent system controlled overeating much better than the continuous or random protocols — and nearly as well as in a separate group of mice that got zapped manually by a researcher watching their behavior on video. Plus, the treatment seemed specific to the food addiction. It did not affect anticipation associated with normal behaviors such as meeting a new mouse.

The results point to a real-time biomarker for impulsive behavior, says Dennis Turner, a Duke University neurosurgeon who was not involved in the study but wrote an October review about ongoing research on a range of potential brain stimulation biomarkers. "That's the clear novelty."

Figuring out if this biomarker would also work in people is challenging. Few are willing to undergo brain surgery for the purpose of research. But Halpern had a rare opportunity. One of his patients developed OCD so debilitating that he opted for DBS. He agreed to have his brain recorded during the surgery. Since food isn't allowed in the operating room, the researchers monitored the patient's brain as he anticipated payoffs in a computerized money-making task. As reported in the PNAS paper, the characteristic anticipatory signal appeared when he expected to make $5 but not for smaller sums, suggesting some level of specificity.

Of course, it's hard to conclude much from a single subject. But from other research "we know it's safe to place an electrode in the nucleus accumbens, it's safe to stimulate it electrically, and we expect to be able to tune [the electrode] as we already do with DBS. So it seems like a nice opportunity," says Halpern, noting that addictive disorders haven't had new therapies for decades. "I'm motivated by the clinical need."

Esther Landhuis is a freelance science journalist in the San Francisco Bay Area. Follow her at @elandhuis.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although the article might have been strengthened by including the costs of alternative therapies, it clearly notes the high cost of the implantable device.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The new drugs are not without disadvantages. They cost much more than generic warfarin, roughly $8 a day instead of $1 or less. And Eliquis and Pradaxa require two pills a day, one in the morning and one in the evening, instead of the once-daily warfarin. The study included 18,201 people in 1,034 clinical sites in 39 countries and was consistent worldwide, the sponsors said. Although the study was financed by the drug makers, which raises the issue of bias, it met the gold standard for medical research as a randomized, double-blinded trial in which doctors and patients did not know who took which pill until the end. The drug acts on an enzyme that leads to blood clots.

Dr. Christopher B. Granger, the study’s lead author and a professor of medicine at Duke University, said, “I think this is a profound trial result that will have a major impact on the practice and management of patients with atrial fibrillation. It combines both greater efficacy in terms of prevention of stroke with a substantial reduction to bleeding risk, and that package is one that will be particularly compelling.”

Wall Street has high expectations, too. The companies’ stock soared after they released a brief statement about the stroke and bleeding benefits in June. Barclays Capital said the final results on Sunday were “perhaps the most anticipated R.&D. event of the year.”

“If everything checks out,” Jami Rubin of Goldman Sachs said in an interview, “that will confirm in our minds that Eliquis has potential to take a majority share of the $10 billion anticoagulation market.”

More than 2.6 million people have atrial fibrillation in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. As many as 12 million people will have it by 2020 because of an aging population with longer life expectancy. The arrhythmia in the left upper chamber of the heart can cause slow blood flow and clots, raising the risk of stroke by four to six times on average, the government says.

As many as half of people with the condition, however, are untreated, by varying estimates. Warfarin, a cheap 60-year-old drug sold generically under the brand name Coumadin, requires frequent blood tests to monitor its active level and interacts with some other drugs and foods, including leafy greens. There is great appeal and demand for new drugs that do not vary so much and deliver the same stroke-preventing benefits.

The first new drug, Pradaxa, from the German drug maker Boehringer Ingelheim, was introduced in the United States last fall. In the first seven months on market, about four in five cardiologists and two in five primary care doctors had prescribed it to more than 250,000 people, Wa’el Hashad, Boehringer’s vice president for cardiovascular marketing, said in an interview last week.

Pradaxa inhibits thrombin, an enzyme in clot formation. Other emerging drugs block a related enzyme known as Factor Xa.

Xarelto, from Bayer and Johnson & Johnson, approved by the F.D.A. in July to prevent clots in hip and knee replacement surgeries, goes to an F.D.A. review panel for atrial fibrillation on Sept. 8.

Eliquis is scheduled to be submitted for F.D.A. review later this year. Its New York-based makers are marketing powerhouses with the top two best-selling drugs in the world, Lipitor from Pfizer and Plavix from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Patents on those drugs expire in the next year, making Eliquis even more important to their businesses.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned that it was expected that the drug reported on would cost $8/day as compared with <$1/day for warfarin.
One aspect of costs that were not considered in this story is the difference in monitoring, which would be less with patients using Eliquis. The competing HealthDay story did a better job on this latter point.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finding a ‘silent killer'

A new strategy involving a simple blood test is a ‘step forward’ in detecting ovarian cancer early

Houston researchers have demonstrated a promising new way to detect ovarian cancer early, a long-sought tool in the battle against the disease known as “the silent killer” because it's usually not diagnosed until it's difficult to treat.

University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center researchers Thursday reported the results of a study that showed a simple blood test, tracked over time and followed by an ultrasound if needed, accurately picks up the disease in early, more curable stages. There is no such screening tool currently in use.

“This is an important step forward in the effort to develop an early detection system for this very lethal disease,” said Dr. Karen Lu, a professor in M.D. Anderson's department of gynecologic oncology and the study's principal investigator. “If the study's findings are confirmed in larger studies, I think this new strategy will be practice-changing.”

The method used in the nine-year study of 3,252 initially healthy postmenopausal women caught five ovarian cancers, three of them invasive. There were only a few false positives.

Lu said the study isn't large enough to justify recommending yet. But she added that an ongoing study in the United Kingdom involving 200,000 women should more definitively determine the test's value. That study is due to show results in 2015.

Ovarian cancer, though rare, is the fourth-leading cancer killer among U.S. women. In 2009, according to the American Cancer Society, it was diagnosed in 21,550 women and killed 14,600. More than 75 percent of women are diagnosed when the disease has already become advanced.

The new strategy involves an existing blood test for a protein discovered in the 1980s by an M.D. Anderson researcher and long used for predicting ovarian cancer recurrence. The protein, known as CA-125, has not been good at identifying new early-stage ovarian cancer because it can become elevated for other reasons, leading to false positives.

In the last decade, hopeful of finding a better test, ovarian cancer researchers have invested much time in the investigation of other biomarkers and technologies. But none proved as accurate as CA-125 after a Harvard scientist developed a mathematical model combining trends in test results and a patient's age.

One expert said the study is an important step but definitely needs follow-up work.

“It's a well-done study about which its authors are appropriately careful in their conclusions,” said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy medical director at the American Cancer Society. “But more research and refining needs to be done before it should be implemented. I can remember when doctors all rushed to adopt the Prostate Specific Antigen test, and we still don't know how to use it.”

Lu acknowledged there are comparisons to the PSA test, which has come under fire in recent years for being better at detecting prostate cancer than improving survival. But Lu said that if the UK study replicates her results, the ovarian cancer test would have the advantage of producing much fewer false positives and being able to spot aggressive cancers.

Study participants were grouped as low, medium or high risk based on how much their CA-125 levels changed over time. Low-risk women repeated the blood test in a year, medium-risk women were referred for an ultrasound, and high-risk women had exploratory surgery.

Over the study's nine years, 85 women had ultrasounds and eight had surgery. Three of the eight turned out to have benign tumors.

Among the study participants was Liz Stegall, who enrolled at the request of the family of Linda Nelson Taylor, a friend who died of ovarian cancer that wasn't diagnosed until it was advanced. Stegall had no family cancer history, but six years into the study last year, she was diagnosed with early stage disease after a blood test showed a spike in her CA-125 levels.

“I would say I'm ecstatic,” said Stegall, 59, of Sugar Land, who finished treatment at the end of December and is cancer free. “This new test came too late to save Linda, but thanks to her and it, I should be alive for some time still. And if I can be saved, so can other people.”

The study results were unveiled Thursday in advance of a major cancer conference next month.

More than half of the women in the study came from Houston. Besides M.D. Anderson, the participating institutions were The Woman's Hospital of Texas, Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, Women and Infants Hospital in Providence, R.I., and John Stoddard Cancer Center in Des Moines, Iowa.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention how much the blood test and ultrasound cost. The story could have raised the question of whether this might be too expensive given that thousands of women must be tested in order to find one case of ovarian cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new, non-invasive knee procedure could bring some relief for patients suffering from debilitating chronic pain, for whom surgery is not an option.

The treatment, recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration, is called “cooled radio frequency ablation” and is a less drastic option for people with moderate to severe osteoarthritis pain who are not ready to have knee replacement surgery, or who have health conditions that don’t make them a good candidate for surgery.

Marketed as "Coolief", the procedure uses radio frequency to target and mute the nerves responsible for sending pain signals from the arthritic knee to the brain. Coolief doesn’t repair arthritis in the knee, but eases the pain, helping patients go back to activities without discomfort and fewer medications.

“What we're changing is the wiring of the knee — so we're taking away the pain signal and interrupting it," Dr. Amin Sandeep, a pain specialist at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago who performs the procedure, told NBC News.

One 2016 study compared Coolief to popular cortisone injections, with patients reporting greater, longer-lasting pain relief with the new treatment than injections. Coolief reduces pain for about to 6 to 12 months, depending on how fast the nerves in the knee regenerate.

Related: Common Knee Surgery May Not Help You

Osteoarthritis can affect any joint when the cartilage wears off over time, often striking big joints like the knee, causing pain, swelling and stiffness. According to the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, nearly 10 million Americans had osteoarthritis of the knee in 2010.

The three current recommended approaches for knee arthritis pain are physical therapy, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen, or the opioid painkiller tramadol.

But those didn't help Felicia McCloden, a 65-year-old grandmother from outside of Chicago. The excruciating pain in her right knee made simple tasks like grocery shopping impossible.

“I had inflammation, swelling, and my knee was like the size of a golf ball, McCloden told NBC News. "The arthritis was so bad that I could barely step down without severe pain.”

Because she wasn’t eligible for a knee replacement she tried cortisone injections, physical therapy, medications — nothing relieved her pain.

"I thought I was going to limp for the rest of my life," she said.

Related: What Really Helps Knee Pain? The Answer May Surprise You

In May, McCloden underwent the Coolief treatment and the result was instant.

“I couldn't even imagine first of all, not having the pain," she said. "It erased all of that.”

The outpatient procedure typically takes about 40 minutes, is performed with local anesthesia and doesn’t require an incision. Instead, doctors use specialized needles that emit radio frequencywaves into the knee. The cost of the treatment is between $2,000 and $4,000. Because it was just approved by the FDA in April, the treatment is not widely available yet, but pain centers across the country are beginning to offer it.

Some of the reported risks from the procedure include bleeding and infection. "Though patients have a risk of the physician hitting the wrong nerve, that is extremely rare in the hands of an experienced professional”, Amin said.

Recovery time is minimal, with most patients walking immediately after the procedure and resuming normal activities in a day or two.

For some patients with structural problems of the knee, the procedure won't help, said pain specialist Dr. Edgar Ross, associate professor of anesthesia at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

"But let’s say a patient is younger, instead of going for a total knee replacement early, which might have to be repeated later on, Coolief can postpone the need for the total knee replacement," Ross told NBC News.

Coolief can be repeated if necessary, but it's not a permanent solution. While it reduces pain, it can't stop the progression of osteoarthritis.

"While it can delay total knee replacement, knee replacement may still eventually be necessary in a big number of patients," said Dr. Dennis Cardone, associate professor of orthopedic surgery at NYU Langone Medical Center.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Costs are indeed addressed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Train The Brain: Using Neurofeedback To Treat ADHD

Katherine Ellison's son was 12 when he was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, or ADHD.

"He was getting into fights. He wasn't doing his homework. He was being very difficult with his little brother. And he was just melting down day after day," Ellison says. "So I decided to devote a year to trying out different approaches to see if we could make it any better."

In recent years, more people have been trying an alternative approach called neurofeedback, a type of therapy intended to teach the brain to stay calm and focused. Neurofeedback is expensive, time consuming and still scientifically unproved. But, there's growing evidence that it can help.

Ellison says the idea appealed to her immediately.

"Because I was always wary about using meds as a single approach or for very long, it seemed to be an interesting alternative. It's really like meditation on steroids," says Ellison, a journalist who won a Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting -- and who has ADHD herself.

Ellison has written a book about living with ADHD called Buzz: A Year of Paying Attention. And one chapter of the book is devoted to neurofeedback.

Ellison says she tried meditation, but her mind kept wandering. Neurofeedback is better for people with ADHD, she says, because it provides constant feedback during a session, which is usually done in a therapist's office.

People usually sit in a chair facing a laptop screen. The laptop is connected to electrodes applied to the scalp. Special software monitors the electrical activity in your brain. In particular, it measures rhythmic patterns known as theta and beta waves.

Proponents of neurofeedback say these patterns reveal when the brain is in a focused and attentive state. So the computer software looks for desirable brain wave patterns and changes the image on screen to let people know how they are doing.

The image that worked best for Ellison showed a field.

"When my brain responded the way that it was supposed to, the field would burst into color. I'd hear bird song and beautiful flowers would bloom," she says. "But when I got distracted or when I got a little bit more sped up, the flowers would wilt. It would turn gray, and I'd know that I needed to work a little bit harder."

At first, people can't control their brain wave patterns, at least not consciously. But over time, their brains become conditioned to associate certain patterns with pleasant images or sounds -- a reward for good behavior. And our brains like rewards.

This sort of brain training can take 40 sessions or more, and typically costs thousands of dollars.

Even though there are studies now showing that neurofeedback works for ADHD, all of these studies have serious limitations, researchers say. So the approach remains promising but unproved, says David Rabiner, a researcher at Duke University who writes a newsletter about treatments for ADHD.

"Parents do need to know that relative to treatments like medication treatment, to behavior therapy, at this point, the research base is not as extensive," Rabiner says.

On the other hand, Rabiner says, neurofeedback may offer something other treatments can't.

"The hope for neurofeedback is that after training ends, the benefits that resulted from training will persist -- that in some sense there's been more enduring change in the child's ability to focus and attend and to regulate their behavior," he says.

But it will take better research to figure out whether neurofeedback can live up to that promise, Rabiner says.

"There has been a need for some time to have the kind of carefully controlled study that would provide more definitive answers for parents and for the field," he says.

And that research appears to be on the way.

A team at The Ohio State University has nearly completed a pilot study of neurofeedback for ADHD that was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health.

The team had hoped to announce results last week at a scientific meeting in New York, but Gene Arnold, one of the scientists in charge of the study, says they had to delay that announcement because "we weren't able to get the results analyzed in time," he says.

The results should be out within a few weeks, Arnold says. In the meantime, he says, the study has shown that it is possible to do neurofeedback research that involves a placebo.

The study used a video game involving race cars. For kids who got neurofeedback, he says, "The ability to speed up the car and steer it was contingent on maintaining your brain waves in a more favorable ratio."

But other children got a placebo -- a race car that paid no attention to their brain waves.

Until a large study comes along using this sort of approach, parents and consumers will have to decide for themselves whether neurofeedback is worth the time and effort. Katherine Ellison says that for her and for her son, it was.

"What I noticed in my son was not necessarily that he'd stop losing things at school or do his homework better," she says. "The improvement I saw was that he was easier to live with."

But brain training might not be the only reason, Ellison says. She says it might have been because she and her son spent so much time going to all those sessions together, and had pizza together afterward.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story sidebar estimates that a full course of treatment can cost $3000 or more. It could have added that this treatment is unlikely to be covered by many insurance companies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Much of the buzz over mobile health interventions seems to be about how we can use an ever-growing variety of shiny new smartphone apps and sensors to better manage our health.

But texting, that old-school technology, may deserve some of that spotlight, too.

Getting texts with motivating and informative messages led patients with coronary heart disease to make behavior changes like exercising more and smoking less, according to a study published Tuesday in JAMA, the journal of the American Medical Association. By the end of the six-month study, patients who had received the text messages had reduced their cholesterol, blood pressure and body mass index.

"I have to say, we were pretty surprised that it worked," says Clara Chow, lead author of the study and program director of community-based cardiac services at Westmead Hospital in Sydney, Australia.

And it worked to improve not just one risk factor for heart disease, but many. "These are the things that medications usually do, not text messages," says Chow, who is also an associate professor at Sydney Medical School at the University of Sydney.

In a randomized clinical trial, more than 700 patients with coronary heart disease were split into two groups: half received four text messages per week for six months plus usual care, while the other half received just usual care.

The texts that patients received were semi-personalized, based on background information about each person, such as smoking status and preferred name. For example, vegetarian participants wouldn't receive the text message about how grilling steak is healthier than deep-frying it.

Other texts might include something like, "Hi, Elizabeth. Have you gone for your walk today?" or "Have you taken your medications yet today? It's important to take them at the same time each day."

There's a lot of hype over mobile health interventions these days, Chow says. "Everyone thinks it has a lot of potential, but there's actually very little evidence."

While there are more than 100,000 health-related apps on the market, the evidence to date is lacking as to whether many of those apps are safe or effective, according to Zubin Eapen, a cardiologist and assistant professor of medicine at Duke University School of Medicine.

"We [as physicians] are always looking for evidence to make sure that we are recommending the right things for our patients, whether it's a drug, a device or a digital product, like an app," says Eapen, who is also medical director of the Duke Heart Failure Same-Day Access Clinic.

Eapen coauthored an editorial, which was published alongside Chow's study, with Eric Peterson, the Fred Cobb Distinguished Professor of Medicine in the division of cardiology at Duke and an associate editor of JAMA.

Not only does this research provide evidence that a text-based program can improve heart disease risk factors, but it also shows that a bunch of bells and whistles aren't required for successful health outcomes. A simple, low-cost program of text messaging can do the trick.

"I like to look for things that are able to be used in multiple corners of our world, from low-income settings to high-income settings," Chow says. "Everybody owns a mobile phone these days. You don't have to have a smartphone to text."

That means more access across more sectors of a population. While almost two-thirds of American adults own a smartphone, that number rises even higher when you're talking about plain old cell phones – a full nine out of 10 American adults own some kind of cell phone.

Globally, cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death. "If we are going to reach a global population, we need solutions that are both scalable and affordable," Eapen says. "And mobile health – and text messaging, maybe, in particular – represents both a scalable and affordable approach."

Making healthy changes in behavior can be tough, but for patients with heart disease, it can be vital.

Yet those daily decisions – whether to smoke that cigarette, eat that piece of cake or skip the gym – are often "far removed from the rewards or consequences," Eapen says. It can be hard to view those everyday decisions in light of more distant consequences, like having another heart attack or not living as long a life as desired. Encouraging text messages may help to inform those everyday decisions and keep a bigger goal in mind.

Chow and Eapen say the study has its limitations. It can't tell us whether text messaging could eventually lead to fewer subsequent heart attacks among the patients receiving those messages or whether the positive health outcomes would continue past the six-month study window. Yet patients in Chow's study resoundingly said that the text messaging helped them make the necessary changes – more than 90 percent of the participants found the program useful.

"People said things like, 'It wasn't actually what the messages said, it was that someone was there supporting me, thinking about me,' " Chow says.

And although Chow and her colleagues told study participants that they did not need to reply to the text messages, many of them still did. "Heaps of them replied to us," she says. "They would say, 'Thanks for the message. I've been on my walk, my blood pressure is better.' "
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This is a tricky one. The story does not explicitly address cost, except to call text messaging “a scalable and affordable approach.” For many (or most) patients, the cost of receiving four text messages a week would likely be negligible — covered by an individual’s phone plan or by nominal text rates. However, not everyone owns a mobile phone, a fact that makes access (and cost) a more significant issue. However, the story does deliver on this point. The story discusses both the number of U.S. adults who own mobile phones (90 percent) and the fact that text messages are more accessible than other forms of mobile health communication (such as apps, which require patients to own smartphones or other smart devices). So, while we’d prefer a more in-depth discussion here, we’ll award a Satisfactory rating for the story’s nod in this direction.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A seaweed-based fiber supplement, taken daily before meals, helped people lose weight in a new study.

But that was only the case among people who stuck with the diet study over a few months. More than one-fifth of people dropped out when they couldn’t tolerate the supplement’s taste, texture and side effects.

Researchers have explored the potential of seaweed as an appetite suppressant, but so far products haven’t panned out.

“There have been problems in the past to develop something (that tastes) acceptable,” said Dr. Arne Astrup, one of the study’s authors from the University of Copenhagen and a member of the advisory board to S-Biotek, a Danish company that provided funding for the study.

Previous seaweed-based supplements were slimy and caused bloating, and they also had a fishy taste. The new supplement used in this study is less unpleasant — but there’s still room for improvement, said Astrup.

The supplement is based on the seaweed extract alginate, a thickening agent and a common ingredient in foods like soups and jellies. It’s also increasingly used by the weight-loss industry, marketed as an appetite suppressant.

Packaged in powder form and mixed with liquid, alginate expands in the stomach to form a thick gel, mimicking the effect of a large meal.

“This gel is really like a pudding that will last in the stomach for hours, gradually degrading and disappearing,” Astrup said.

For the study, the researchers randomly divided 96 generally healthy but obese people, aged 20 to 55, into two groups.

One group was given packets of the gel supplement, containing 15 grams of fiber, and the other got a seaweed-free placebo drink. Neither the researchers nor the participants knew who was receiving the seaweed supplement.

In terms of calories, flavor and appearance, the placebo and treatment drink were identical.

For three months, study participants drank the supplements, dissolved in two cups of water, 30 minutes before each meal. They were also told to cut back on calories. By the end of the trial, sixteen people had dropped out of the study, including 10 out of 48 from the seaweed group, according to findings published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

Among people who stuck with the trial, those on the fiber supplement lost 15 pounds, on average, compared to 11 pounds in the placebo group. But when all 96 original participants were included in the analysis, the researchers found no significant difference in weight loss between the two treatment groups.

Previous studies have shown eating a high-fiber diet can help reduce the hunger pangs that may lead to over-eating and derail a healthy diet plan.

Still, the new results should be treated with caution, according to Dr. Maria Vazquez Roque, who has worked on alginate-based gels at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida, but was not involved in the study. Just looking at the effect of the supplement on people who finished the treatment can bias the findings, she said.

For Mette Kristensen, one of the study’s authors, the message seems clear: “If you actually comply with the treatment, you do have the improvement in weight loss.”

However, effects on blood pressure were less promising. Systolic blood pressure — the top number on a blood pressure reading — fell by almost six points on average in the placebo group over the 12-week study, but by just over one point in the treatment group. At times during the trials, systolic blood pressure increased in the alginate group by one to two points.

According to the researchers, the higher sodium content of the alginate drink — a little over one gram per dose, or about half a teaspoon of salt — could have offset any potential blood-pressure reducing effect of the supplement. The American Heart Association recommends that adults eat less than 1.5 g of sodium per day.

Questions remain about the safety of the fiber supplement over the long term. Five people taking the fiber gel left the study due to problems with stomach bloating, nausea and diarrhea. Two people taking a placebo supplement, which didn’t contain the seaweed fiber, experienced similar problems.

There are many different types of alginate, said Richard Mattes, who has studied the effect of alginate fiber on appetite at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana — so the trick is to find the right alginate in the right dose.

And just feeling less hungry due to a supplement won’t make you lose weight unless you eat fewer calories, said Mattes, who was not involved in the new study.

The research group is working on a new supplement that uses 80 percent less alginate, with less sodium, better taste and fewer side effects than the current formula, Astrup told Reuters Health.

Alginate as an aid to weight loss is already commercially available in pill form and costs around $45 for a seven-day supply. These supplements are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, said Vazquez Roque.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that alginate as an aid to weight loss is already available in pill form, selling for around $45 for a seven-day supply.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A first-of-its-kind osteoporosis drug lowers the risk of bone fractures better than some existing treatments, two studies suggest, and could soon add a more expensive but easier to manage treatment option to the booming market.

Amgen Inc. will stress that only two shots of its genetically engineered denosumab, which could be approved for sale this fall, are needed each year. That's important because many patients stop taking other drugs due to side effects or frequent dosing.

Wall Street sees denosumab as a potential blockbuster crucial to Amgen. But with many cheaper, heavily advertised treatments, doctors view its expected high cost as a drawback. Genetically engineered drugs, made by altering a cell's DNA or other genetic material, all cost more than $10,000 a year.

"It'll find a particular niche where it'll be used, but I don't see it as taking over the market," said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a professor and osteoporosis researcher at the Mayo Clinic.

Still, he called the drug a "tour de force of modern molecular medicine" because it is potent and was designed by making antibodies cloned over and over from cells in the lab to block one pathway involved in the how the body naturally breaks down bone cells.

Denosumab would be the first osteoporosis treatment that is such a monoclonal antibody — a type of immune cell cloned from the same parent cell to bind to a specific substance. In this case, it targets a molecule in bones that drives formation of cells called osteoclasts that break down bone, a strategy that greatly reduces bone loss.

The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday released its review of denosumab, with staff citing concerns about increased rates of skin infections and some tumors. That report comes just ahead of a meeting Thursday when outside advisers will weigh the drug's safety and effectiveness and recommend whether to approve it.

Amgen shares rose $1.57, or 2.6 percent, to close at $62.81.

Denosumab, an injection just under the skin, would have to compete against eight major types of pills and injected medicines, including estrogen and generic and brand-name Fosamax pills, long the market leader.

Most of those must be given more often, with pills swallowed once a day, week or month, a nasal spray inhaled daily, and one injection under the skin given daily. But another injection given intravenously is only needed once a year, and estrogen, while out of fashion due to its link to breast cancer, is available in skin patches changed once or twice a week.

Those drugs' annual retail cost can range from $385 for generic Fosamax, to roughly $1,250 for most brand-name pills, to $11,100 for injected Forteo, which must be injected daily.

Global sales of osteoporosis treatments, including hundreds of vitamin brands, hit nearly $8.4 billion last year, according to data from IMS Health. About 10 million Americans have osteoporosis.

Analyst Steve Brozak of WBB Securities said denosumab will pass the $1 billion annual sales threshold for blockbusters, but it's unclear by how much.

"You're going to have blowback by insurers" over how much they will pay, he said, but Amgen might try to charge more than $10,000 per year.

Dr. Lenore Buckley, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University, said all these drugs carry some risks. The studies found denosumab caused eczema in some patients, and a dozen of the women got a serious skin infection, cellulitis, that sometimes required hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics.

"Because this drug affects the immune system, the long-term effects on cancer risk or immune function is still unknown," she warned, saying she expects FDA will require Amgen to track risks over time if the drug is approved.

The effectiveness of denosumab and existing drugs appears to plateau after two or three years, she added.

The two studies were released Tuesday by the New England Journal of Medicine.

Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., paid for both. Nearly all the researchers receive consulting, advisory and other fees from the company and competitors, or are Amgen employees. The biotech company designed the studies, handled data collection and analysis, and helped write the journal reports.

One study included 7,868 women, aged 60 to 90, with moderate to severe osteoporosis. Half got denosumab injections every six months for three years. They had 68 percent fewer spine fractures and 40 percent fewer hip fractures than the study participants who got dummy shots.

The second study included 1,468 men with prostate cancer at increased fracture risk due to cancer hormone therapy, although 556 dropped out for reasons from side effects and cancer progression to the study being extended from two to three years. Denosumab cut the risk of spine fractures 62 percent over three years compared to dummy shots. Spine bone density loss was far smaller for those given the drug.

Until recently, studies of osteoporosis drugs just measured changes in bone density, assumed to equate with lower fracture risk. Newer studies also measure fracture rates, but there are no head-to-head studies on that.

However, based on some prior studies, independent experts say denosumab appears more effective at preventing spine fractures than three older pills — Fosamax, Actonel and Boniva — and calcitonin nasal sprays, which all use various pathways to slow down cells called osteoclasts that break down bone. Experts think denosumab prevents spine fractures about as well as Reclast, an intravenously injected drug that slows bone breakdown, and daily just below the skin injections of Forteo, the only drug that stimulates bone-building cells called osteoblasts. And denosumab appears to prevent fractures of the hip, forearm and ankle about the same as all those drugs.

Dr. Jacob Warman, an osteoporosis expert at Brooklyn Hospital Center, said denosumab might have potential as an add-on to existing drugs to boost results. He expects that would be covered by insurers, who pay for multiple medicines for other conditions.

Amgen spokeswoman Kerry Beth Daly said the company has not yet set a price for the drug, but will try to keep it affordable. She said pricing also will reflect denosumab's twice-a-year dosing.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Pricing for this drug is not yet available; however, the story suggests that it could be expensive, with similarly engineered drugs costing more than $10,000 a year.  In addition, the costs of currently prescribed osteoporosis medications are provided.     
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 15, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Adding computer-aided detection to mammograms finds more early, noninvasive cancers and helps detect invasive cancers at earlier stages, according to a large new study. But the jury's still out as to how worthwhile the extra technology is overall.

For one thing, computer-aided detection (CAD) increases the amount of diagnostic testing among women who turn out not to have breast cancer. And the technology makes mammograms more expensive.

CAD is becoming more widespread, said Dr. Joshua Fenton, an associate professor of family and community medicine at the University of California, Davis, and lead study author. "It's an add-on and now is used in probably three-quarters of U.S. mammograms," he said.

Computer-aided detection systems use a digitized mammogram image from either a traditional film mammogram or a digitally acquired mammogram, according to the American College of Radiology. The CAD software looks for areas that may indicate cancer so the radiologist can then look more closely at the mammogram.

Although it has rapidly become part of mammogram screening, Fenton said there is limited and conflicting research on its effect.

Under Medicare payment rates, doctors get an additional $11 for adding computer-aided detection to a mammogram, said Fenton, citing Medicare data. The Medicare rate for a film mammogram is $81 while a digital mammogram is $139.

His team evaluated more than 409,000 mammograms -- with and without computer-aided detection -- from more than 163,000 women aged 67 to 89. The study is published in the April 16 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Fenton took data from a large U.S. epidemiology database from 2001 to 2006. During that time, computer-aided detection use increased from 3.6 percent to 60.5 percent. Now, with about 75 percent of mammograms adding it, it is even more common, Fenton said.

"In our study, we assessed its impact in the Medicare program," he said. The researchers compared the results when mammograms included CAD to when they did not.

When computer-aided detection was used, doctors found a greater number of early cancers known as ductal carcinoma in situ, or DCIS. "But the [overall] rate of invasive breast cancer diagnosis was no different with or without CAD," Fenton said.

However, among the women who did have invasive cancer, computer-aided detection was linked with a greater likelihood of finding the cancer while it was stage 1 or 2 compared to stage 3 or 4, they found.

"CAD was also associated with increased diagnostic testing among women who turned out not to have breast cancer," he said. These women, because breast cancer was suspected, had to be called back for additional tests, such as repeat mammograms or biopsies.

So is the new computer technology worth it? "Our study doesn't answer that question; it raises that question," Fenton said. The findings, he said, are a mix of potential good news and not so good. The additional tests that turn out to be unnecessary, because no cancer is found, are not desirable, he said.

Some of the very early cancers diagnosed in older women, he noted, may not have caused them a problem during their lifetime. But doctors can't say with certainty which ones will progress and which ones will not.

"Women should recognize that CAD comes with some potential risks," Fenton said. "It has the potential risk of a false-positive mammogram. If you are an older woman, [there is] the risk of overtreatment of noninvasive lesions."

Dr. Daniel Kopans, a professor of radiology at Harvard Medical School and senior radiologist in the breast imaging division at Massachusetts General Hospital, said the study provides additional information to doctors and women, but has some limitations. He was not involved with the study.

"The good news is the use of CAD was related to finding invasive cancers at smaller sizes and earlier stages than before the CAD era," said Kopans, also a member of the American College of Radiology's Breast Imaging Commission. "There should be no argument that finding invasive cancers at a smaller size and earlier stage is beneficial," he said, as they are more likely to be cured.

While he calls finding more DCIS with computer-aided detection also ''likely a good thing," he acknowledged the debate about the possibility that a very early cancer in an elderly woman may not cause a problem in her lifetime. Although the treatment of DCIS is debated among experts, Kopans said, "In my mind, it is always worth it to find additional cancers."

One limitation of the study, he said, is that the researchers cannot say for sure it was the computer-aided detection that made the difference. Other factors could have played a role, such as the radiologists becoming more experienced, he said.

To learn more about mammography, visit the American College of Radiology/Radiological Society of North America.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story points out that Medicare pays an additional $11 for mammography readings that use CAD.  It would also be useful for readers to know that women can’t choose whether to have their mammograms read using CAD or not using CAD.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, July 6, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A scan of calcium deposits inside your arteries can help doctors deduce how long you're likely to live, a new study has found.

The test, called a coronary calcium scan, uses a regular CT scan to look for calcium deposits in the three major arteries that carry blood away from the heart, said lead author Leslee Shaw, a professor of cardiology at Emory University in Atlanta.

People with the largest amounts of calcium in their arteries carry an early death risk that's six times greater than those with no calcium deposits, researchers found in a 15-year study of nearly 10,000 patients.

"If you had no calcium or very small amounts, we were able to track over a very long time that you actually had a very outstanding survival," Shaw said.

Calcium deposits develop as a response to plaque formation along the artery walls, Shaw said.

These plaques, which are caused by blood cholesterol, build up over time and cause arteries to narrow, leading to heart disease as the heart works harder to pump blood through the body.

If a plaque bursts, a blood clot can form on its surface, blocking blood flow and causing a heart attack, according to the U.S. National Institutes of Health. If the clot breaks free, it can flow into the brain and cause a stroke.

To prevent plaques from bursting, the body tries to harden them by depositing calcium salts over and around them, Shaw said.

Doctors learned in the 1990s that these calcified plaques show up on CT scans, and can be used to determine whether a person is suffering from hardening of the arteries, Shaw said.

Up to now, however, there's been little evidence showing that a calcium scan can provide a solid assessment of a person's long-term health risk, the study authors said in background information. Most studies involving these scans have a follow-up of five years or less.

In this new study, doctors referred 9,715 healthy patients in the Nashville area between 1996 and 1999 to a cardiology outreach screening program provided by the military's Tricare Healthcare System. The patients underwent a calcium scan, and also provided a detailed history of their heart risk factors.

Researchers then tracked the participants for roughly 15 years, taking special note of the 936 patients who died.

Analysis revealed that the risk of premature death steadily increased with the amount of calcium deposits found in a person's major arteries.

Patients with small levels of arterial calcium had a 68 percent increased overall risk of death, compared to those with no calcium deposits at all. But people with the largest calcium deposits in their arteries had a death risk six times greater than those with no calcium.

"This is not a new test, but these results emphasize the importance of looking at this marker in addition to the traditional risk factors," said Dr. William Zoghbi, past president of the American College of Cardiology and head of cardiovascular imaging for Houston Methodist Hospital.

Calcium scans are currently used to help doctors determine the best treatment for patients who have no heart symptoms but do have high cholesterol or a family history of heart problems, Zoghbi said. This study confirms their usefulness in that regard, he said.

"Calcium scoring really is the earliest marker in the development of hardening of the arteries in people who have no symptoms," he said. "The best use is in patients who have no symptoms, but the value of the test is not well known."

The results of a calcium scan can be reassuring for people with few or no calcium deposits, and can provide people with high calcium levels with added impetus to take better care of themselves, Shaw said.

"It can be a very potent motivator," she said.

People with many calcium deposits can improve their long-term prospects by eating right, exercising, and taking medication to treat heart risk factors such as high blood pressure, elevated blood cholesterol and type 2 diabetes, Shaw said.

Shaw thinks calcium scans ultimately could become part of a person's regular physical exam, as common as blood cholesterol tests. They generally cost less than $100, she said.

"I think it's headed that way," she said. "We're kind of on the edge of this becoming more accepted."

The findings appear in the July 7 issue of Annals of Internal Medicine.

For more on coronary calcium scans, visit the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story helpfully notes that the CAC test costs about $100, which matches price quotes from other sources, though the price may be higher in some parts of the country. The story would have been even more useful had it noted that the cost of the test may not be covered by insurance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But in many cases it is just not known whether what is seen on a scan is the cause of the pain. The problem is that all too often, no one knows what is normal.

“A patient comes in because he’s in pain,” said Dr. Nelda Wray, a senior research scientist at the Methodist Institute for Technology in Houston. “We see something in a scan, and we assume causation. But we have no idea of the prevalence of the abnormality in routine populations.”

Now, as more and more people have scans for everything from headaches to foot aches, more are left in a medical lurch, or with unnecessary or sometimes even harmful treatments, including surgery.

“Every time we get a new technology that provides insights into structures we didn’t encounter before, we end up saying, ‘Oh, my God, look at all those abnormalities.’ They might be dangerous,” said Dr. David Felson, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at Boston University Medical School. “Some are, some aren’t, but it ends up leading to a lot of care that’s unnecessary.”

That was what almost happened with Mrs. Weinstein, an active, athletic 64-year-old who lives in New London, N.H. And it was her great fortune to finally visit a surgeon who told her so. He told her bluntly that her pain was caused by arthritis, not the torn cartilage.

No one had told her that before, Mrs. Weinstein said, and looking back on her quest to get a scan and get the cartilage fixed, she shook her head in dismay. There’s no surgical procedure short of a knee replacement that will help, and she’s not ready for a knee replacement.

“I feel that I have come full circle,” she said. “I will cope on my own with this knee.”

In fact, Mrs. Weinstein was also lucky because her problem was with her knee. It’s one of only two body parts — the other is the back — where there are good data on abnormalities that turn up in people who feel just fine, indicating that the abnormalities may not be so abnormal after all.

But even the data on knees comes from just one study, and researchers say the problem is far from fixed. It is difficult to conduct scans on people who feel fine — most do not want to spend time in an M.R.I. machine, and CT scans require that people be exposed to radiation. But that leaves patients and doctors in an untenable situation.

“It’s a concern, isn’t it?” said Dr. Jeffrey Jarvik, a professor of radiology and neurosurgery at the University of Washington. “We are trying to fix things that shouldn’t be fixed.”

As a rheumatologist, Dr. Felson saw patient after patient with knee pain, many of whom had already had scans. And he was becoming concerned about their findings.

Often, a scan would show that a person with arthritis had a torn meniscus, cartilage that stabilizes the knee. And often the result was surgery — orthopedic surgeons do more meniscus surgery than any other operation. But, Dr. Felson wondered, was the torn cartilage an injury causing pain or was the arthritis causing pain and the tear a consequence of arthritis?

That led Dr. Felson and his colleagues to do the first and so far the only large study of knees, asking what is normal. It involved M.R.I. scans on 991 people ages 50 to 90. Some had knee pain, others did not.

On Sept. 11, Dr. Felson and his colleagues published their results in The New England Journal of Medicine: meniscal tears were just as common in people with knee arthritis who did not complain of pain as they were in people with knee arthritis who did have pain. They tended to occur along with arthritis and were a part of the disease process itself. And so repairing the tears would not eliminate the pain.

“The rule is, as you get older, you will get a meniscal tear,” Dr. Felson said. “It’s a function of aging and disease. If you are a 60-year-old guy, the chance that you have a meniscal tear is 40 percent.”

It is a result that paralleled what spine researchers found over the past decade in what is perhaps the best evidence on what shows up on scans of healthy people. “If you’re going to look at a spine, you need to know what that spine might look like in a normal patient,” said Dr. Michael Modic, chairman of the Neurological Institute at the Cleveland Clinic.

After Dr. Modic and others scanned hundreds of asymptomatic people, they learned abnormalities were common.

“Somewhere between 20 and 25 percent of people who climb into a scanner will have a herniated disk,” Dr. Modic said. As many as 60 percent of healthy adults with no back pain, he said, have degenerative changes in their spines.

Those findings made Dr. Modic ask: Why do a scan in the first place? There are some who may benefit from surgery, but does it make sense to routinely do scans for nearly everyone with back pain? After all, one-third of herniated disks disappear on their own in six weeks, and two-thirds in six months.

And surgeons use symptoms and a physical examination to identify patients who would be helped by operations. What extra medical help does a scan provide? So Dr. Modic did another study, this time with 250 patients. All had M.R.I. scans when they first arrived complaining of back pain or shooting pains down their leg, which can be caused by a herniated disc pressing on a nerve in the spine. And all had scans again six weeks later. Sixty percent had herniated disks, the scans showed.

Dr. Modic gave the results to only half of the patients and their doctors — the others had no idea what the M.R.I.’s revealed. Dr. Modic knew, though.

In 13 percent of the patients, the second scan showed that the herniated disk had become bigger or a new herniated disk had appeared. In 15 percent, the herniated disk had disappeared. But there was no relationship between the scan findings at six weeks and patients’ symptoms. Some continued to complain of pain even though their herniated disk had disappeared; others said they felt better even though their herniation had grown bigger.

The question, though, was whether it helped the patients and their doctors to know what the M.R.I.’s had found. And the answer, Dr. Modic reported, is that it did not. The patients who knew recovered no faster than those who did not know. However, Dr. Modic said, there was one effect of being told — patients felt worse about themselves when they knew they had a bulging disk.

“If I tell you that you have a degenerated disk, basically I’m telling you you’re ugly,” Dr. Modic said.

Scans, he said, are presurgical tools, not screening tools. A scan can help a surgeon before he or she operates, but it does not help with a diagnosis.

“If a patient has back or leg pain, they should be treated conservatively for at least eight weeks,” Dr. Modic said, meaning that they take pain relievers and go about their normal lives. “Then you should do imaging only if you are going to do surgery.”

That message can be a hard sell, he acknowledged. “A lot of people are driven by wanting to have imaging,” Dr. Modic said. “They are miserable as hell, they can’t work, they can’t sit. We look at you and say, ‘We think you have a herniated disk. We say the natural history is that you will get better. You should go through six to eight weeks of conservative management.’ ”

At the Partners Healthcare System in Boston, spine experts have the same struggle to convince patients that an M.R.I. scan is not necessarily desirable, said Dr. Scott Gazelle, director of radiology there.

“The consensus is that you are a surgical candidate or not based on your history and physical findings, not on imaging findings,” he said.

Dr. Gazelle had a chance last year to test his own convictions. He had the classic symptoms of a herniated disk — shooting pains down his left leg, a numb foot and difficulty walking.

Dr. Gazelle went to see his primary-care doctor but, he said, “I didn’t get an M.R.I.” That decision, he added, “was the right thing to do.”

About three months later, he had recovered on his own.

In 1998, two medical scientists, writing in The Lancet, proposed what sounded like a radical idea. Instead of simply providing patients and their doctors with the results of an X-ray or an M.R.I. scan, he said, radiologists should put the findings in context. For example, they wrote, if a scan showed advanced disk deterioration, the report should say, “Roughly 40 percent of patients with this finding do not have back pain so the finding may be unrelated.”

It is an idea that only would work for back pain, because that is the one area where radiologists have enough data. But it made eminent sense to Dr. Jarvik. “It gives referring physicians some sort of context,” he said.

So, a few years ago, with some trepidation, his radiology group starting including epidemiological data in their reports. “We thought, ‘What’s going to be the reaction among referring physicians?’ ” Dr. Jarvik said. Their fear was that doctors would start choosing other places for M.R.I.’s and that Dr. Jarvik’s group would lose business.

Because of the way the university’s records are kept, it’s hard to know whether the new reporting system had that effect, Dr. Jarvik said. But he was heartened by the responses of some doctors, like Dr. Sohail Mirza, who recently moved to Dartmouth Medical School.

“We often see patients who have already had M.R.I. scans,” Dr. Mirza said. “They are fixated on the abnormality and come to a surgeon to try to get the abnormality fixed. They’ll come in with the report in hand.”

The new sort of report, Dr. Mirza said, was “very helpful information to have when talking to patients and very helpful for patients to help them understand that the abnormalities were not catastrophic findings.”

Others, like Dr. Modic, are hesitant about reporting epidemiology along with a patient’s scan findings.

“It’s an interesting idea,” he said. But, he added: “The problem isn’t what happens after they get their imaging. It’s that they get the imaging in the first place.”

That was what happened with Mrs. Weinstein.

When she started looking up her symptoms on the Internet, she decided she probably had a meniscus tear. “I was very forceful in asking for an M.R.I.,” she said.

And when the scan showed that her meniscus was torn, she went to a surgeon expecting an operation.

He X-rayed her knee and told her she had arthritis. Then, Mrs. Weinstein said, the surgeon looked at her and said, “Let me get this straight. Are you here for a knee replacement?”

She said no, of course not. She skis, she does aerobics, she was nowhere near ready for something so drastic.

Then the surgeon told her that there was no point in repairing her meniscus because that was not her problem. And if he repaired the cartilage, her arthritic bones would just grind it down again.

For now, Mrs. Weinstein says she is finished with her medical odyssey.

“I continue to live with this, whatever they call it, this arthritic knee,” she said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes what insurers pay for the scans.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug, apixaban (Eliquis), appears better than the old standby warfarin in preventing strokes in people with the abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation, a new study finds.

Over 2.6 million Americans are affected by atrial fibrillation, and many take warfarin (also known as Coumadin) to prevent dangerous clots that can cause a stroke. Warfarin is notoriously tricky to modulate, however, and needs to be closely monitored -- usually through monthly doctors' visits. If the drug's activity isn't checked regularly it can trigger severe bleeding episodes, the most serious of which can happen in the brain.

"Warfarin is labor-intensive to manage," said study researcher Dr. Jack Ansell, chairman of the department of medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Sometimes it impairs the patient's quality of life and the outcomes are very dependent on how well the drug dosing is managed," he added. "This [new] drug has a lot of advantages over warfarin."

With apixaban, patients can use a standard dose that doesn't need monitoring and adjusting, Ansell said. Also, unlike warfarin, apixaban has few interactions with other drugs or foods, he added.

The study was funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer, the makers of apixaban.

Apixaban is a so-called Xa inhibitor, a class of anticoagulants (anti-clotting drugs) that work by blocking factor X, a protein involved in blood clotting. Ansell expects drugs in this class will have a major effect on how atrial fibrillation is managed in the future.

Another similar drug, Pradaxa (dabigatran), has been on the market for about a year and many patients with atrial fibrillation have been switched or started on it, he said.

"Once [apixaban] is available it is going to be very difficult to avoid offering this drug to patients," he said.

The issue of cost remains a factor, however. While generic warfarin is just pennies a dose, any new brand-name drug is likely to be much more expensive. According to Laura Hortas, a spokeswoman for Bristol-Myers Squibb, because apixaban is still an experimental drug its price tag remains uncertain.

The new report was published online Aug. 28 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with its presentation at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Paris.

For the trial, more than 18,000 patients with atrial fibrillation and a heightened risk for stroke were randomly assigned to receive either apixaban or warfarin.

Over an average of 1.8 years of follow-up there were fewer strokes or clots among patients taking apixaban (1.27 percent a year), compared with patients taking warfarin (1.6 percent per year), the researchers found.

This means that apixaban prevented six patients from having a stroke, 15 patients from having a major bleeding event and eight patients from dying, the researchers said in a Duke University news release.

The major effect on stroke was preventing hemorrhagic stroke, which is caused by bleeding in the brain and is the most serious type of stroke. According to the researchers, apixaban reduced this risk by 50 percent, preventing four patients from having this type of stroke and two patients from having an ischemic stroke (cause by a vessel blockage) or stroke of uncertain origin.

As to apixaban's expected higher price tag, Ansell said that since the drug does not require monitoring and the incidence of stroke and major bleeding are less, savings in doctors' visits and stroke treatment should more than compensate.

The new trial comes on the heels of another study on apixaban that was stopped early due to safety concerns. In that trial, published in July in the New England Journal of Medicine, apixaban's use was associated with raised odds for bleeding -- without providing patients with any reduction in heart attack risk.

However, "in that case, apixaban was given to patients with coronary artery disease who were also taking two other blood thinners," Ansell noted. "The three of them together showed that the risk of bleeding was just too high and there was no real benefit in that population. But, that's an entirely different problem, compared with atrial fibrillation," he said.

Commenting on the latest study, Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles agreed that "atrial fibrillation substantially increases the risk of stroke and death."

Warfarin reduces the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, but it also boosts the odds of bleeding and is often difficult to manage, he said.

"Apixaban is now the first oral anticoagulant [blood thinner] to show a statistically significant improvement in survival over warfarin in atrial fibrillation patients," Fonarow said. "This represents a very important therapeutic advance in the care of patients with atrial fibrillation."

For more information on atrial fibrillation, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned that apixabane would cost more than warafarin, and included a quote from a company spokesperson to indicate that the exact price is uncertain as the medication has not yet been approved.  The story also presented a reasoned examination of total costs for the use of warafin that accounted not just for per pill costs but also the expenses associated with the routine blood draws to examine warafarin levels.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, May 31, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- At the moment, a diagnosis of autism is based on subjective evaluations, but a new way of using MRI might be an objective way of spotting the disorder, Columbia University researchers report.

Autism is a spectrum disorder that includes repetitive behaviors and impairments in language, communication and social skills. It is estimated that the condition affects one in 110 children in the United States, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

"There is a serious unmet need in the autism world, where diagnosis is currently done by subjective reports, and after the child has missed many developmental milestones," said lead researcher Joy Hirsch, a professor of functional neuroradiology, neuroscience and psychology, and director of the Functional MRI Laboratory at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City.

"It is now possible to develop an objective imaging diagnostic," she said. Indeed, the researchers found a difference between autistic brains and typical brains in the level of responsiveness in language areas, Hirsch noted.

"What we can measure are signals in the brain, in a specific language area, that are depressed in autistic children and normal in typical children," she said.

Although this study was done with school-aged children and teens, the same test can be done with children as young as 18 months, Hirsch noted. "We know this technique can be used on young children," she said.

The report was released in the May 31 online edition of Radiology, in advance of publication in the August print issue.

For the study, 12 children with autism and 15 children without the condition underwent functional MRI (fMRI) exams. Both groups of children ranged in age from 4 to 17 years.

While the children were undergoing the fMRI, the researchers played recordings of their parents talking to them and watched for brain activity in areas of the brain responsible for hearing and understanding language.

The researchers found no differences in the activity in the hearing area of the brain between the two groups. However, in the language comprehension area, there was significantly more activity among typical children than among children with autism, Hirsch's group noted.

To further test this screening approach, another group of 27 autistic children, aged 5 to 17, underwent fMRI and the researchers were able to identify 26 of them as autistic.

Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York in Lake Success, said that "although the investigators did indeed find significant differences on neuroimaging between controls and autistic children, the clinical utility from a diagnostic standpoint is unclear."

There are important limitations to the study, Adesman said.

For one, this study was done in school-aged children, many of whom were actually teenagers, so it is impossible to know if these differences in neuroimaging would also be found in younger patients, Adesman pointed out.

"It is during the toddler/preschool years that autism typically presents and needs to be diagnosed," he explained.

"The other major limitation of this study is that the investigators did not look at whether these brain differences are specific to children with autism, or if they would also be seen, for example, in children with language delays who are not autistic," Adesman said.

Hirsch noted the study is preliminary and, as such, has some limitations. For one, it is not known whether this technique can identify autism across the entire spectrum of the disorder.

"There are questions about how this varies across the severity of autism. Also, can we distinguish autism from other forms of developmental delay?" she asked. "These are things that aren't known."

Further work is needed to refine the test, Hirsch added. "This is not the diagnostic that you can package and send to all community health centers in the United States. This is an announcement that this can be done," she said.

This test costs no more than a standard MRI, which runs around $1,500, Hirsch noted.

Another expert, Dr. Robert F. Lopez-Alberola, chief of pediatric neurology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, said that "it's nice to have an objective measure, but it doesn't really do much."

Ultimately, he said, "the diagnosis of autism is a clinical diagnosis. I see this as having more implications for research into the pathophysiology of autism."

However, if this test could be done in really young children, it might help identify autism so that treatment can begin early, Lopez-Alberola suggested. "We know the earlier we begin interventions, the greater the likelihood of better outcome," he said.

"Although this technique holds promise for identifying infants at risk for autism, it still needs to be determined whether the atypical patterns of brain activation are specific to autism," said Geraldine Dawson, chief science officer for Autism Speaks.

"It is possible that children who have delayed language but not autism would also show the same pattern. Regardless, this research is promising as a method for identifying young children at risk for autism," Dawson said.

For more on autism, visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story deserves high marks for noting the high costs of an MRI. “This test costs no more than a standard MRI, which runs around $1,500, Hirsch noted.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Propping open clogged arteries with a tiny wire-mesh tube called a stent is no better at reducing the risk of heart attack or death in patients with stable heart disease than treatment with medications, according to a large new study that challenges routine use of a procedure that rapidly became standard medical practice.

The study of more than 2,000 patients found that those who underwent the expensive procedure, known as angioplasty, in non-emergency situations were no less likely to suffer a heart attack or die than those who took only aspirin and other medicines to lower blood pressure and cholesterol and prevent clots, along with adopting lifestyle changes.

The study is the first large, well-designed comparison of angioplasty to non-surgical care for patients who are not having a heart attack or in imminent danger of having one. The procedure, often done to relieve chest pain and to reduce the risk of having or dying from a heart attack, has become one of the most common medical procedures in the United States.

"The data are compelling," said William E. Boden of the University of Buffalo School of Medicine, whose findings were published yesterday by the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with a presentation at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology in New Orleans. "We do too many of these procedures."

Several experts said they expect the findings will prompt a major shift in how doctors treat thousands of patients suffering from heart disease -- the nation's leading cause of death.

"These findings are pretty explosive," said Steven E. Nissen, president of the American College of Cardiology. "I think this is going to shake things up pretty significantly."

The findings underscore the danger of rushing to adopt a procedure before careful studies have been conducted to fully determine its benefits, Boden and others said.

"There was just this intuitive belief that it would be beneficial," Boden said. "But no one had ever done a proper randomized trial to see whether it actually improved outcomes. In the meantime, a whole industry has been created around this."

The researchers and others stressed that angioplasty clearly benefits patients who are in the throes of a heart attack or are at very high risk for one. But the findings indicate that for a patient whose condition is stable, medical therapy is just as effective at reducing the major risks. Such patients constitute at least one-third of those undergoing the 1.2 million angioplasties performed each year, and perhaps as much as 85 percent.

Some cardiologists who specialize in the procedures, however, argued that the study did not focus on the sickest patients who are most likely to benefit, and that the main purpose of angioplasty in many is to alleviate chest pain, not to prevent heart attacks.

"I don't think this is going to cause any huge paradigm shift," said Gregory J. Dehmer, president of the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. "This study was limited to a fairly select group of patients with very stable symptoms."

But Boden said that the study did include patients with moderate to severe heart disease and that many such patients undergo the procedure in the belief it will protect them against heart attacks.

In the procedure, doctors thread a tiny balloon into clogged arteries, inflate the balloon to clear the blockage, and insert a stent -- a tiny wire lattice strut that props the artery open. The procedure costs about $50,000 and is considered safe, though it does carry some risks.

The findings come on the heels of questions about the safety of new stents coated with drugs to keep arteries from reclosing. Those concerns had led doctors to curtail their use of the newer devices, and the new findings are expected to have a similar effect on angioplasty overall.

"There was an overexuberance," said William O'Neill, a prominent cardiologist at the University of Miami. "I think we're getting a midcourse correction."

The findings could also help fuel a resurgence of bypass surgery, which has become far less common with the rise of angioplasty.

"There was this sense that angioplasty would produce the same result as bypass surgery," Nissen said. "I think this will cause a tilt toward more patients with stable conditions choosing medical therapy and more people who have more severe disease getting bypass surgery, which both relieves symptoms and reduces the risk for heart attack and death."

The new study, which was funded mostly by the Department of Veterans Affairs, involved 2,287 patients at 50 centers in the United States and Canada who had chest pain or other symptoms because one or more major arteries supplying blood to the heart had clogged. Half the patients received standard medical treatment involving medication and lifestyle changes such as quitting smoking, eating better and exercising. The other half received the same treatment plus angioplasty.

After about five years, the number of patients who experienced a heart attack, were hospitalized or died because of their heart problems was virtually identical in the two groups, the researchers found.

"There was no significant difference," Boden said. "The data are clear."

Although about one-third of patients who initially got medical treatment later turned to angioplasty, the findings show how much medical treatment of heart disease has improved, Boden said.

"The paradigm for the last 20 years for patients like this been: 'Mr. Jones, you need a procedure.' End of discussion," Boden said. "I hope this will make people realize that patients have more options. They can safely choose to try medical therapy first."

Although study patients receiving angioplasty were somewhat more likely to be free of chest pain, known as angina, even that benefit was marginal, Boden said. After nearly five years, 74 percent of those patients were free of chest pain, compared with 72 percent of those who had medical treatment alone.

"One of the unexpected findings is that it's amazing how remarkably good medical therapy was for relieving angina," Boden said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that angioplasty typically costs $50,000.  While it would have been helpful to have a sense for the cost of angioplasty in in comparison to medical therapy, the story does give a sense of the cost burden to the healthcare system by providing procedures that don't benefit a significant proportion of patients.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At issue are controversial spiral CT scans, where a rotating scanner views the lungs at various angles to spot growths when they are about half the size that a standard chest X-ray can detect. Some previous studies have suggested that the earlier detection helps, while other research concluded it may do more harm than good by spotting too many benign growths.

The massive National Lung Screening Trial enrolled 53,000 current or former smokers to try to settle the debate. It found 20 percent fewer deaths from lung cancer among those screened with spiral CTs than among those given chest X-rays, the NCI said Thursday, a difference significant enough that it ended the study early.

The actual number of deaths averted was fairly modest - 354 died in the spiral CT group over the eight-year study period compared with 442 deaths among those who got chest X-rays.

The NCI said it is not clear that all smokers should get the scans, which are not risk-free.

The best advice for avoiding lung cancer remains to quit smoking, said NCI Director Dr. Harold Varmus.

Still, "a validated approach that can reduce lung cancer mortality by even 20 percent has the potential to spare very significant numbers of people from the ravages of this disease," he said.

About 200,000 new lung cancers are diagnosed in the U.S. each year, and the disease kills about 159,000 people annually. It is most often diagnosed at advanced stages, and the average five-year survival rate is just 15 percent.

Many smokers already had sought out spiral CTs, even though the American Cancer Society hasn't recommended the test - citing a lack of clear evidence that they work - and most insurance doesn't cover the $300 to $400 cost.

The scans aren't risk-free: They frequently mistake scar tissue from an old infection or some other benign lump for cancer, leading to unnecessary biopsies or surgery that in turn can cause a collapsed lung, infection or other problems.

The NCI still is compiling rates of false alarms and other risks from the study.

Nor is it clear if the study results are applicable to all smokers. The trial enrolled people ages 55 to 74 who were or had been very heavy smokers and gave them one scan a year for three years.

While the spiral CTs emit less radiation than standard CT scans used to diagnose disease, researchers also will analyze whether the radiation exposures from three scans changes a smoker's lifetime risk of other radiation-related cancers. Letters being mailed to study participants advise them to discuss with their doctors whether they should have additional scans or not.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The story reports that these scans typically cost $300-400 and are not generally covered by insurance. The story would have been better if it had clearly pointed out that the potentially huge cost of such a screening program, because hundreds of smokers had to be scanned to extend one life in this trial and follow-up tests and treatments cost much more than the initial scan. Nonetheless, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion. The New York Times never specified the scans’ costs.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Dec. 9, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The bone drug zoledronic acid (Zometa), considered a potentially promising weapon against breast cancer recurrence, has flopped in a new study involving more than 3,360 patients.

Zometa did not appear to prevent breast cancer from returning or to boost disease-free survival overall. British researchers presented the disappointing findings Thursday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas.

"As a whole, the study is negative," study author Dr. Robert Coleman, a professor of medical oncology at the University of Sheffield in England, said during a Thursday news conference on the findings. "There is no overall difference in recurrence rates or survival rates [between patients who got the bone drug and those who did not], except in older patients, defined as more than five years after menopause."

That was a possible bright spot in the results.

"In that population, there is a benefit," Coleman said. The older women had a 27 percent improvement in recurrence and a 29 percent improvement in overall survival over the five-year follow-up, compared to those who didn't get the drug.

"There was tremendous hope that this [drug] approach would be a major leap forward," Coleman noted. "There have been other trials that suggest this is the case." In one previous study, the use of the drug was linked with a 32 percent improvement in survival and lowered recurrence in younger women with breast cancer.

Other research has found that healthy women on bone drugs were less prone to develop breast cancer, so experts were hoping the drugs had an anti-tumor effect.

Zometa, marketed by Novartis AG, is used to relieve pain when cancers have spread to the bone -- in part, by slowing bone erosion caused by the disease. It is given intravenously, while other bisphosphonates such as Actonel, Fosamax or Boniva can be taken orally.

In the trial, known as AZURE (Adjuvant Treatment with Zoledronic Acid in State II/III Breast Cancer), Coleman and his colleagues evaluated 3,360 breast cancer patients from 174 participating centers, all with stage II or III cancers but no evidence of metastases (cancer that has spread beyond the original site). About half received the bone drugs plus standard therapy; half just got standard therapy.

The focus was on disease-free survival. After five years, about 400 women in each group either died or had recurrences.

When Coleman's team looked at subgroups, however, they found the benefit among older women, a finding they say warrants more study.

"The younger patients are getting no benefit," Coleman said. "If anything, they are doing a little bit worse."

In addition, there were some troubling side effects among women taking Zometa, including 17 cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (a severe bone disease that can result in death of the jawbone).

Dr. Sharon Giordano, an associate professor of breast medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, was not involved in the study but put it in perspective. Bisphosphonates have been used to treat osteoporosis as well as bone complications of breast cancer treatment, she said.

"The role of bisphosphonates in preventing cancer recurrence has been less clear," she said, noting that multiple studies have had conflicting findings.

As for the benefit found in postmenopausal women, she said, "I would consider this hypothesis-generating and not practice-changing."

Other studies underway may provide a clearer answer, she said.

Since the current study was presented at a meeting, its findings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Said Coleman: "Zoledronic acid cannot be routinely recommended for prevention of cancer returning, but it remains a very good drug for patients where the cancer has already spread to the bone."

Coleman disclosed receiving speaker fees from Novartis; the researchers also received academic grant funding from the drug maker.

For more information on bisphosphonates, visit U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We won’t require a discussion of costs in this story because the use of zoledronic acid for early stage breast cancer is still up in the air. However, since the drug is already being sold for other indications, the story would have been better if it had told readers something about the costs of using the drug for approved indications.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Treating more Americans with statins is worth the small risk of side-effects and would be cost-effective, a new report finds.

New guidelines from the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology in 2013 broadened the definition of who should get cholesterol-lowering statins, which are among the most widely prescribed drugs in the world. One of the recommendations was that statins should be prescribed to anyone with a 7.5 percent risk or higher of developing heart disease over the next 10 years.

Patients and doctors alike complained that the new guidelines were confusing. But in the new report, Dr. Thomas Gaziano of the Harvard School of Public Health and colleagues say they’re in fact simpler than the old guidelines, which advised people to aim for a total cholesterol level of less than 200, keeping “bad” LDL cholesterol to 130 for average people and under 100 for those considered at risk of a heart attack.

There’s an online tool that people or their doctors can use to calculate their risk of heart disease, which is based on age, sex, blood pressure and cholesterol levels.

Gaziano and colleagues created a computer simulation to see if giving statins to more people would be worth the risk of side-effects and the extra cost.

It would be, they report in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

“You have to be at extremely low risk before the risk of statins outweighs their significant, profound benefits,” Gaziano said.

Experts estimate that another 8 million to 13 million Americans would get statins if everyone used the new criteria -– with just under half of all adults aged 40 to 75 eligible.

Statins, which include Lipitor, Mevacor, Crestor and Zocor, are extremely popular. They’re prescribed to about 15 percent of U.S. adults, at a cost ranging from about $4 a month for the cheapest generic version to $600 for a pricey name-brand.

They can damage muscle in 5 to 15 percent of patients. In 2012, the Food and Drug Administration updated labeling on statins to include warnings about confusion and memory loss, elevated blood sugar leading to Type 2 diabetes, and muscle weakness.

But even with those risks, it’s worthwhile, Gaziano’s team found. And if even more people were given statins -- if they were given to people with a 3 percent risk of developing heart disease over 10 years -– another 160,000 heart attacks and strokes would be prevented, they estimated.

Limiting factors should be a patient's own preference about taking a daily pill, price and the risk of diabetes, they said.

“There is no longer any question as to whether to offer treatment with statins for patients for primary prevention, and there should now be fewer questions about how to treat and in whom,” Dr. Philip Greenland, an expert in preventive medicine at Northwestern University and a senior editor of the journal, and Dr. Michael Lauer of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute wrote in a commentary.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While the New York Times skipped the cost question, NBC gave readers the numbers they needed to know. It said that “Statins, which include Lipitor, Mevacor, Crestor and Zocor, are extremely popular. They’re prescribed to about 15 percent of U.S. adults, at a cost ranging from about $4 a month for the cheapest generic version to $600 for a pricey name-brand.” That’s a huge cost range and, multiplied out for the millions more Americans who are being encouraged to take statins, represents a significant potential increase in health care spending. To inform readers even more fully, the story could have looked at what those global costs would add up to for the entire country. It also could have explained what researchers mean when they say that the drugs are “worth it” and how the value of treatment was calculated in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For people with toenail fungus, there is no good time to wear sandals. Not even at the beach in July.

Toenail fungus causes nails to become thick, yellow and brittle in a way that looks pretty ugly and can be painful. Sufferers can spend years and hundreds of dollars trying to clear the infection with drugs, topical treatments and home remedies, sometimes to no avail. It tends to be a cosmetic issue for the younger set and a pain issue for older folks.

“The problem is huge. It is bigger than you can imagine,” says Washington podiatrist Stephen J. Kominsky. “I would say 70 percent of the patients who come into my office have fungal infections on their toenails.”

There may be hope. Podiatrists have begun using a laser treatment that combats the infection — or wastes their patients’ money because it doesn’t work, depending on whom you ask.

The treatment, in which the podiatrist aims a laser beam at the patient’s toenails to kill the organisms that cause the fungus, costs about $1,000 and is not covered by insurance because it is considered an aesthetic procedure. The nails aren’t immediately clear after the treatment, which takes up to an hour; the patient must wait for the fungus-free nails to grow out.

Last year, the Food and Drug Administration cleared the first laser, PinPointe, for “temporary increase of clear nail” in patients with onychomycosis, the medical term for a fungal infection of the nail. The FDA cleared a second one, GenesisPlus, in April. Practitioners have been using other lasers on toenail fungus since about 2009.

Kominsky has treated 400 to 500 patients with the PinPointe laser. Compared with oral medication, he says, “the odds of success are better with the laser; plus, there’s no side effects.”

The most common oral treatment, Lamisil, works for about two out of three patients, according to Lamisil’s FDA-approved prescribing information, but it has been associated with rare cases of serious liver problems. Other potential side effects include diarrhea, headache, rashes and changes in taste. According to Lamisil’s manufacturer, Novartis, the relapse rate is 15 percent one year after completing treatment.

In one small study about laser treatment for toenail fungus, which appeared last year in the Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association, “26 eligible toes (ten mild, seven moderate, and nine severe)” were treated with a laser produced by Nomir Medical Technologies, which is still seeking FDA approval. After six months, 85 percent of the toenails had improved.

“I never use the term ‘cured’ with toenail fungus,” Kominsky says. “With a cure, people think there’s no chance for a recurrence. In this case, there is a chance.”

Even John Strisower, the founder of PinPointe USA, says patients should expect at least a minimal reinfection within five years after laser treatment.

Research done by PinPointe, which is based in Chico, Calif., identified more than 100 organisms, including fungi, yeast, mold and bacteria, that work together to cause toenail fungus.

There’s no one route of infection, but sources include pedicures and locker room showers. Fungi love moist, dark environments such as wet shoes, Kominsky says, so people such as lifeguards, landscapers and fishermen are particularly susceptible. Shoes are the reason why toenail fungus is much more common than fingernail fungus, which can also occur.

The elderly are more likely to have toenail fungus than younger people because they have had more years to be exposed to the infection and their immune systems can’t always fight it off, according to Washington podiatrist Lee Firestone. He estimates that about half of people over 70 have toenail fungus.

Last year, Americans spent $354 million on prescription and over-the-counter treatments for toenail fungus, according to IMS Health, a health-care information company.

“I think the laser can improve the appearance of the nail, but it’s only temporary and it needs to be used again and again to maintain that improvement,” says Firestone, who doesn’t use the lasers in his practice. “I’ve had patients come in who have had laser procedures and not seen long-term success.”

Firestone also says that over-the-counter antifungal nail creams and ointments rarely work because they can’t penetrate the nail root. Home remedies such as tea tree oil, bleach and vinegar also don’t work, he says.

Yet even a superficial improvement would be an improvement for many.

Richard, a retiree in Fairfax who did not want his full name associated with toenail fungus, got a laser treatment on all 10 toes in April 2010, and he says his nails were fully cleared of the yellowed, thickened look after a year. To prevent reinfection, he has purchased all new socks and a SteriShoe, a $130 device that uses ultraviolet light to sanitize shoes, at his podiatrist’s recommendation. He has also turned to what he calls “an old wives’ tale” that he read about in a newspaper column: slathering Vicks VapoRub on his toes.

“My doctor said, ‘Listen, it’s not a prescribed treatment, but if it works for you, for heaven’s sake, do it.’ ”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job on this point. It noted that one treatment “costs about $1,000 and is not covered by insurance.” It put this into a larger context by saying, “Last year, Americans spent $354 million on prescription and over-the-counter treatments for toenail fungus, according to IMS Health, a health-care information company.” And it described at the end of the story how one patient has tried to fend off reinfection by buying a $130 sterilization kit for his shoes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - The inexpensive tests that look for hidden blood in a person’s stool are effective for colon cancer screening, a study out Tuesday confirms.

The findings, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, give some extra weight to fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) as a valid option for early detection of colon cancer.

Experts generally recommend that people at average risk of colon cancer start screening tests for the disease at age 50. And they can pick from a number of tests that have all been found to cut the risk of dying from colon cancer.

Along with stool tests — done once a year at home — the choices include two invasive procedures: colonoscopy done every 10 years and flexible sigmoidoscopy done every five years.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally supported expert panel, recommends that people at average risk of colon cancer choose any of the three methods.

FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be a sign of colon cancer or pre-cancerous growths called polyps. Positive results on the screen prompt a follow-up colonoscopy to investigate the source of the blood.

Advances in the stool tests in recent years have made them more effective. A newer version called immunochemical FOBT (iFOBT) is supposed to zero in on colon growths better than an older version known as guaiac FOBT — which often picked up bleeding originating in the upper digestive tract, such as from a stomach ulcer.

Immunochemical FOBT is now largely replacing the older test. But there’s been surprisingly little evidence that it really is highly “specific” to colon cancer, according to Dr. Yi-Chia Lee of National Taiwan University Hospital, one of the researchers on the new study.

So for their study, the researchers followed nearly 2,800 adults who all volunteered to have iFOBT, a colonoscopy and an upper endoscopy to check for problems in the upper digestive tract.

They found that of 28 people confirmed to have colon tumors after a colonoscopy, all but one had also a positive iFOBT result.

“It means that almost every case with colon cancer can be identified by iFOBT,” Lee told Reuters Health in an email. “It is a strong support to iFOBT as an effective screening tool.”

The researchers also found that iFOBT had “specificity” for colon cancer of close to 90 percent, meaning the test would accurately give a negative result to almost 90 percent of people who did not have colon cancer.

Of three study participants who were found to have cancers of the stomach or esophagus, for instance, none had a positive result on the iFOBT test.

Like any screening test, iFOBT does have a risk of false-positive results, which leads to unnecessary invasive testing in some people. In this study, about 10 percent of all participants had a false-positive finding on the stool test.

Among the risk factors for false-positives the authors identified were the use of anticlotting drugs and low levels of the iron-rich molecule hemoglobin in the blood.

In practice, a positive iFOBT result would be followed by colonoscopy, in which a scope is used to investigate the interior of the colon.

Whether used for first-line screening or as a follow-up, colonoscopy has the advantage of allowing doctors to spot and remove pre-cancerous growths called polyps — which means the test can prevent cases of colon cancer.

But as far as cutting the risk of death from colon cancer, stool testing is similarly effective, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

And it’s much cheaper: iFOBT is more expensive than the older stool tests, but it is still roughly $30. A screening colonoscopy averages around $3,000.

The downside of iFOBT being specific to colon tumors is that it is not useful for catching cancers of the stomach or throat.

That’s particularly important in Asia, where those cancers are common.

Lee said researchers there are looking into whether combining iFOBT with the older guaiac test is useful for catching cancers in the lower and upper digestive tract — and whether adding a third stool test, which looks for the ulcer-causing bacteria H. pylori, can help as well. Infection with H. pylori is associated with increased risks of stomach and throat cancers.

In the U.S., cancers of the upper digestive tract are relatively uncommon. The average American has a one in 200 chance of developing esophageal cancer, while the risk of stomach cancer is one in 114.

In contrast, Americans’ lifetime risk of colon cancer is about one in 19, according to the American Cancer Society. More than 50,000 Americans died of the disease in 2010.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Costs of FOBT and of colonoscopy were included.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An emerging treatment for a common hospital-acquired infection could be (slightly) less gross in the future. Researchers have found that delivering a fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) in a pill—a poop pill, basically—is no worse than a similar procedure done with a colonoscopy.

Neither option may sound particularly enticing, but FMTs are wildly effective at treating a very nasty infection called Clostridium difficile. One of the first controlled clinical trials for FMTs in 2013 ended early because the patients who received the treatment were doing so much better than patients who didn’t. In the new study, almost 90 percent of adults treated with the capsules were cured.

“It’s absolutely insane. We just don’t see kind of efficacy with drugs,” Dr. Dina Kao told Newsweek. Kao is one of the authors of the paper and a gastroenterologist at the University of Alberta. Kao and her colleagues published the findings in the Journal of the American Medical Association on Tuesday.

C. difficile infections can set in after a course of broad-spectrum antibiotics, which can wipe out some of the bacterial populations normally found in people’s gut. The transplants work by replacing those “healthy” bacteria. “C. difficile is the single biggest cause of diarrhea in a health care setting,” Kao said. “It is our public enemy No. 1 in hospitals.”

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, C. difficile infects half a million people in the United States per year and kills 15,000 people. But patients may be hesitant to accept this potentially life-saving treatment because there are feces involved. Previous research found that while every part of this treatment was unappealing to most people, being offered the treatment in a pill form made patients significantly more open to the idea. Other efforts to take the “poop” out of the poop pills—to just include the bacteria thought to be behind the benefits—have failed.

The 116 patients used in this study may have been selected in part because they were ideal candidates for FMTs, Dr. Elizabeth Hohmann noted, but she said the paper is solid overall. (Hohmann, a researcher at Massachusetts General Hospital who has also done research on FMTs, was not involved in his research.) “The results are sort of a best-case scenario,” she said. “What I like about this paper is that it validates the upper-GI route and demonstrates that you can get very good cure rates without doing a colonoscopy.”

That’s important because colonoscopies and the anesthesia required for the procedure can put a lot of stress on a person’s body and can be complicated for the people most at risk for C. difficile infections, Hohmann noted

Kao’s study also showed that people found FMTs far less unpleasant when the poop came in a pill. Two-thirds of the 57 patients who got the pills said their experiences were “not at all unpleasant,” while just 44 percent of the 59 patients who received the FMT via a colonoscopy could say the same.

But most importantly, the study found no difference in effectiveness between the two therapies. There was a significant difference in cost. Though the procedures were done in a Canadian hospital, the FMTs delivered by colonoscopy cost nearly $500 USD more than the capsules, which cost about $300.

FMTs are not yet common practice, though Kao noted that it is becoming the standard of care for C. difficile infections. “For this group of patients, nothing else really works,” she said. However, the same cannot be said yet for other conditions. While the FDA said in 2013 that doctors can try fecal transplants in patients with C. difficile infections, the agency noted doctors should only use FMT for other conditions in clinical trials. Over 100 clinical trials are ongoing for various FMT therapies, including ones to treat ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease in children. (New FDA guidelines have been in the works since 2016 but aren’t finalized.)

Despite the FDA’s advice, some people have set up shop as FMT providers anyway. Buzzfeed reported in June that one clinic in Tampa was even providing FMTs as a treatment for autism.

Though physicians think they know how FMTs work, it remains somewhat mysterious. One recent, small study found that even stool samples that are entirely free of bacteria can be effective, perhaps because there are non-bacterial organisms that also help.

“We still don’t understand what’s going on, and in these other conditions it’s not as clear-cut that the disturbance in the bacterial composition is the cause,” Kao said. “Stool is such a complex mixture.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of pointing out one advantage of the pill approach compared to delivery via colonoscopy–the reduced cost. “There was a significant difference in cost. Though the procedures were done in a Canadian hospital, the FMTs delivered by colonoscopy cost nearly $500 USD more than the capsules, which cost about $300.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The drug, finasteride, is available as a generic for about $2.00 a day, and millions of men safely take it now to shrink their prostates, its approved use.

With finasteride, as many as 100,000 cases of prostate cancer a year could be prevented, said Dr. Eric Klein, director of the Center for Urologic Oncology at the Cleveland Clinic.

Dr. Howard Parnes, chief of the prostate cancer group at the National Cancer Institute’s division of cancer prevention, also is convinced. “There is a tremendous public health benefit for the use of this agent,” he said.

While it might seem convoluted to offer a drug to prevent the consequences of overtreatment, that is the situation in the country today, others say. Preventing the cancer can prevent treatments that can be debilitating, even if the cancers were never lethal to start with.

“That’s the bind we’re in right now,” said Dr. Christopher Logothetis, professor and chairman of genitourinary medical oncology at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. “Most of the time, treatment wouldn’t help and may not be necessary. But the reality is that people are being operated on.”

“We are trying to avoid a diagnosis to avoid a prevention whose value is disputed,” he said. With finasteride, Dr. Logothetis added, “we’re trying to overcome our other sins.”

Other experts say, Not so fast. Finasteride might not make much of a difference in the death rate because so few men die from prostate cancer. What the drug’s proponents are advocating is taking a drug to somehow compensate for what many believe is the nation’s overzealous diagnosis and treatment of the disease.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut, explains: While 10 percent of men 55 and older find out they have prostate cancer, the cancer is lethal in no more than 25 percent of them. So if finasteride reduced the prostate cancer’s incidence by 30 percent, about 7 percent of men would get a cancer diagnosis and approximately 1.8 percent instead of 2.5 percent would have a lethal cancer.

“Finasteride might make a difference but only in a very small subset of men,” Dr. Albertsen said.

And, he adds, the study did not look for a decline in death rates, and it is unlikely that any study ever will — it would take too long and be too expensive. Yet the ultimate goal of prevention is to save lives. It remains an assumption that finasteride would have much impact on the minority of prostate cancers that, despite early detection and treatment, still kill.

Finasteride blocks the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, a hormone active mostly in the prostate and the scalp, and that all prostate cancers need to grow.

The drug is available from Merck & Company, as Proscar, and from six companies as a generic to shrink the prostate in older men whose prostates can enlarge, making urination difficult.

Researchers say it turns out that shrinking the prostate also may be good for cancer detection by making it easier to find all tumors, including the most aggressive.

“The data are compelling,” said Dr. Peter Scardino, chairman of the department of surgery at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, a convert who originally thought the drug was dangerous. “Finasteride has to be recognized as the first clearly demonstrated way to prevent prostate cancer with any medication or any oral agent at all.”

Finasteride has had its ups and downs. Its chronicle began in 1993, with the start of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and involving 19,000 men. Half took finasteride pills; the rest a placebo. In March 2003, 15 months before the study’s scheduled end, its directors halted it abruptly. The reason was that the results were overwhelmingly compelling — men taking the drug were not getting prostate cancer.

Yet despite that note of triumph, a troubling finding emerged. The study was designed to look for a reduction in the overall prostate cancer rate. And that is what it found. But, as Dr. Scardino pointed out in an editorial five years ago in The New England Journal of Medicine that accompanied the study, it appeared that 6.4 percent of the men who took the drug got fast growing, ominous-looking tumors. In contrast, such tumors were found in 5.1 percent, of men who took the placebo.

The concern was that the drug might be preventing cancers that never spread. At the same time, finasteride might actually be causing aggressive cancers that can kill.

It would, of course, be the worse possible outcome. Dr. Scardino’s editorial warned healthy men not to take finasteride.

That seemed to leave the drug dead. The study researchers, though, wondered if that conclusion was correct. Maybe, they thought, by shrinking the prostate, the drug was just making it easier to find aggressive tumors.

When doctors do a biopsy for prostate cancer, they probe the gland with a needle, hoping to find cancer cells. But prostate cancer grows as little nests and an aggressive cancer will appear as dangerous-looking cells in some clusters and less dangerous in others. A smaller prostate means a doctor is more likely to hit upon cancer nests and more likely to find aggressive-looking cells.

The researchers had a way to learn if they were correct. Most of the men in the study who had cancer — aggressive or not — chose to be treated and many had their prostates removed. A pathologist could carefully examine every one of those 500 prostates and compare the kinds of cancers found at surgery to those initially diagnosed at biopsy.

It took years, but the analysis showed the hypothesis was right. Now, two groups of independent researchers conclude, in papers in the current issue of Cancer Prevention Research, that finasteride decreases the risk of having any tumor at all — large or small, fast growing or slow growing, by the same amount — nearly 30 percent.

With this new analysis, many prostate cancer specialists, including Dr. Scardino, say their view of the drug has completely changed. The study actually found that finasteride protects against both lethal and less dangerous tumors and could cut prostate cancer risk by nearly a third.

Even the effect on smaller tumors has important implications, said Dr. Ian M. Thompson, Jr., the study’s principal researcher and a urologist at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio.

“The cancers that were prevented were the ones men are having surgery and radiation for today,” Dr. Thompson said.

Now, though, prostate cancer specialists have a new problem: How can they change the drug’s image?

Drug companies are unlikely to be instrumental, Dr. Thompson and others say, because finasteride’s patent has expired, giving companies little incentive to apply to the Food and Drug Administration to market it as a cancer preventative. Without F.D.A. approval, finasteride cannot be advertised as preventing cancer and insurers may not pay for it.

But doctors can prescribe drugs for other purposes at their discretion and Dr. Parnes said that men and their doctors may be persuaded to try it.

In the meantime, GlaxoSmithKline, which has a patented drug, Avodart, to reduce the size of men’s prostates, has a study asking whether its drug can prevent prostate cancer. If it can, and the drug agency approves Avodart for cancer prevention, doctors and patients may have to decide between a generic drug used off-label or a more expensive brand-name drug that does much the same thing.

Some leading prostate specialists, like Dr. Scardino, say they are recommending that men who worry about prostate cancer take finasteride.

He also ponders taking it himself. “I regularly think, Why don’t I take it? Why wouldn’t every man take it?” Dr. Scardino said. He hasn’t done so yet, partly because those years of concern about the drug took a toll.

“I think it’s the difficulty of adjusting to something that originally had a bad reputation,” Dr. Scardino explained.

Dr. Thompson has no such fears.

He is at no particular risk for prostate cancer, but, he reasons, taking finasteride is not that different than taking a statin for a slightly elevated cholesterol level.

“Imagine the marathoner with no family history of heart disease, who’s skinny, doesn’t smoke and has normal blood pressure,” Dr. Thompson says. “Should he take a statin? The amount of benefit he’ll get is not much, but his risk reduction still is 25 or 30 percent.”

Dr. Thompson knows what he will do about finasteride.

“I’m 54,” he said. “The men in the study were 55 and older. So I’ll start taking it next year.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story included an estimated price for the generic version of this medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Scott Faber talks about the plan for an environmental pediatric room at the Children's Institute in Squirrel Hill.

With childhood autism cases skyrocketing and no cure in sight, doctors at the Children's Institute in Squirrel Hill are planning on a Hail Mary pass approach to the mysterious disorder -- housing young patients for weeks at a time in a pollutant-free "clean room," in an attempt to detoxify their bodies.

No cause for autism has been found, and debates rage as to whether the brain development disorder is purely genetic or caused in part by environmental factors, including air and food-borne chemicals.

With roots in autism treatment theories that until now have lived mostly on the Internet, the pediatric clean room plan would be the first of its kind in a mainstream American hospital environment.

The Children Institute's Scott Faber, a pediatrician with several hundred autistic patients and a waiting list six months long, is one of the believers in toxic causes, and the institute is trying to back him with a multimillion dollar test of the novel theory.

Under the plans -- developed with help from Duquesne University -- autistic patients would live for more than six weeks in a 1,000-square-foot room kept mostly free of harmful chemicals and pollutants, using special air-filtering systems, ultraviolet lights and air locks on doorways.

Furniture, paints, toys and floor coverings would be designed to be toxin-free, and food, clothing and water organic and clean. Doctors would seek to rid patients' bodies of chemicals and boost their immune systems through natural means such as nutritional supplements and dietary changes.

Basically, it would be pushing a "reset" button on the child's body, with the hope of wiping autistic symptoms away.

"What we would like to do is have kids live in this wonderful environment where they are exposed to almost none of the Industrial Revolution. And we wonder, if the chemicals come out and the heavy metals come out, will the children start improving?" Dr. Faber said.

"Will they start showing signs of clinical improvement, such as language improvement and socialization improvement? Will they become less obsessive? Less fascinated?"

Autism is one of a group of developmental disabilities disorders that cause substantial impairments in social interaction and communication and are characterized by unusual behaviors and interests. Many people with these disorders also have unusual ways of learning, paying attention and reacting to sensation. Rates have greatly increased in recent years, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, though some of the rise may be due to changes in reporting and diagnosing the disorder.

Planning and fund-raising for the "Environmental Pediatric Room" is in the early stages, with the Alcoa Foundation awarding an initial $200,000 grant April 28. It will require an estimated $500,000 to fully design and at least $1 million in yearly operating support its first three years.

The 106-year-old Children's Institute (formerly called the Rehabilitation Institute) plans to fund the room through the $30 million capital campaign it launched in 2005, after buying out its Shady Avenue site from the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. It completed an expansion last year that doubled its building space and its capacity, from 39 to 82 beds. Almost $24 million of the campaign total has been raised, with fund-raising for the clean room and other programs ongoing.

Clean rooms are common in high-tech manufacturing and research environments and have been used in hospital settings for patients struggling with infectious diseases and transplants. They have also been used to treat children with autism, but only in patients' homes, largely in work by Virginia researcher and nutritionist Karen Slimak.

Dr. Faber noted that Ms. Slimak's clean room work -- like much of the research on toxicity in autism -- "hasn't been written for the main [scientific] literature" but instead has been written mostly for the Internet. The Children's Institute plan would be taking what is arguably a fringe movement into the mainstream: It would be the first autism treatment of this kind staged in an American hospital setting. It will be matched with scientific analysis, sensors and video cameras to study the real impacts of detoxification. The data and findings will be shared openly, he said.

With so many doubts -- and so few answers -- about effective autism treatments among the growing community of families affected by the condition, the institute said openness is vital to the experimental method's success.

"We're not saying this is the full cause" of autism and related illnesses, Dr. Faber said. "Obviously there are multiple causes, and there are going to be found many genetic causes, many environmental causes and many genetic-environmental interactions. But we wonder -- we speculate -- that it's possible if we have children living in a unique environment that has not [previously] been created scientifically that we can make a difference.

"We want to have it be very transparent to the world what we're doing. We want this to be basically an intellectual exercise that's shared with everyone."

Educational, physical, speech and behavioral therapies have long been the traditional treatments for autism, but a growing number of families and researchers have called for further biomedical treatments as well, suspecting there is a chemical side to the disorder.

Families often say their environmental suspicions about the disorder aren't taken seriously.

"I can give you a detailed account of how I know that exposure to toxic mold has caused my son's autism. I have been saying it for years and no one believes me. They think I am crazy, even a [Defeat Autism Now doctor] we once saw," said a message posted by a parent on the AutismWeb.com bulletin board in March

Parents "research anything they can get their hands on and there are so many things saying 'Try this or try that' that aren't necessarily safe. It's a frightening thing," said Kim Aburachis, of Peters, who has twin 10-year-old boys, Nathan and Tyler, with severe cases of autism. Her boys have seen Dr. Faber for more than seven years and are likely to take part in the clean room treatment.

"We're so excited, so enthusiastic, just for the hope of this," she said.

Elliot Frank, the chairman of Pittsburgh's Advisory Board on Autism and Related Disorders, said the proposed clean room should not raise any red flags. Even if it does not work, patients will be in a safe and professional environment, benefiting from passive treatments such as nutrition and clean air.

Among parents of children with autism, Mr. Frank said, "some will say, 'Come on, who are you kidding?' But a significant portion of parents will feel good about this and watch this with incredible interest. Others will watch and say, 'Hmm, let's see what happens.' "

Dr. Faber, 49, is a neurodevelopmental and developmental behavioral pediatrician with 24 years in the field, who came to the institute four years ago from Mercy Hospital. He has been working on the clean room concept for at least two years, alongside Duquesne University chemistry professor and environmental expert Skip Kingston.

He has been trying to build the scientific case that environmental factors such as toxic chemicals do trigger autistic symptoms. His findings are complicated, but basically blood tests show 70 percent of his autistic patients have zinc deficiencies (pointing to problems with processing heavy metals), and the vast majority also have immune system problems of varying kinds.

"We know that the data for this is just emerging, but we feel it's a very safe intervention, and it's empowering for families and very reasonable," he said.

The room would house only one patient at a time and be similar to other spaces at the institute's Center for Autism, with educational and play spaces, and a table for dining. Medical staff, teachers and family would have regular access to the room through an air-locked entrance, and another air lock would separate the room from a kitchen and laundry area. There will be a small bedroom for the child and a couch for a family member to stay overnight.

Traditional therapies would continue during the patient's stay. But by exposing children to a clean atmosphere and toxic-free diet, doctors will also try to slowly release chemicals from the children's bodies, through their skin, urine and stool. In the meantime they will be living in a space that is anything but hospital or scientific-feeling.

"To parents and children it's going to be the opposite of a sterile environment. It's going to be home," Dr. Faber said. "If it's not beautiful and it isn't nurturant, it doesn't fit our research plans."

At the outset, patients would be only the sickest children, who have not responded to other treatments. They would stay six to 12 weeks, allowing an estimated four to six children to be treated per year. (Twenty families have already expressed interest.) After leaving, spaces at each patient's home would be equipped with lower-level clean technology, such as ultraviolet lights and air filters, and children would continue with special diets.

A six-week stay is not uncommon at Children's Institute, said president and chief executive officer David Miles, as patients with traumatic brain injuries, often from car or bike accidents, can stay for months at a time. The average stay in its acute care unit is 23 days.

Still, he said the room poses some unique challenges.

"Talking to architects, the technology to create the room is out there. It's not really a problem," Mr. Miles said. "It's really what you put in the room that is an issue."

Equipment and gear for use in industrial clean rooms are easy to find, but educational materials, toys and normal-looking furniture are not. Most will have to be fabricated from scratch, using the help of students at Duquesne's Bayer School of Natural and Environmental Sciences and other research teams. The institute also has to start from scratch on government permits, insurance issues and other red tape.

Fund-raising is the most obvious challenge facing the proposal. There is also the worry of raising expectations too high.

"We want to explore this hypothesis thoroughly," Dr. Faber said. "But we can't promise we'll make any biologic difference or any kind of physiologic difference. What we want to do is to create a loving, nurturant environment where the kids are a gift to us and we're a gift to them, and it all works very nicely."

First published on May 11, 2008 at 12:00 am
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This article does report costs estimated to design the clean room, $500,000, and that a minimum of $1 million dollars annually will be needed to support operating expenses.  Cost of the experimental approach were not reported and may not be available at this time because the project is still in the planning stage; however, it is estimated the operational costs will support the experimental approach for only four to six experimental subjects per year.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DURHAM, N.C. - Most high-risk lung cancer patients might not need annual low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) screenings if they are cleared of disease in their initial test, according to a study led by a Duke Cancer Institute researcher.

The researchers found that even former heavy smokers appear to have a reduced incidence of lung cancer if their initial LDCT screening is negative, suggesting that less frequent screening might be warranted.

"This has significant public policy implications," said Edward F. Patz, Jr., M.D., the James and Alice Chen Professor of Radiology at Duke and lead author of a study published online March 21, 2016 in The Lancet Oncology journal. "Not screening patients annually could save millions in health care costs and spare patients the radiation exposure and the downstream effects of false positive screenings."

Patz and colleagues analyzed data from the National Lung Screening Trial, a large prospective study that randomly assigned former smokers to either receive three annual low-dose CT scans or three chest radiographs for the early detection of lung cancer. Patients were ages 55-74 who had smoked for the equivalent of 30 years (one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years, etc.).

The researchers identified study participants in the CT-scan group whose initial screening was negative. They then compared those patients to other CT-scan recipients whose screenings detected an abnormality to assess any differences in lung cancer incidence and lung cancer-specific deaths.

Of the initial 19,066 participants with a negative initial LDCT scan, 444 (2 percent) were diagnosed with lung cancer at the time of the last available follow-up. In the first year after a negative screen and before the scheduled first annual screen, 17 patients (0.09 percent of all initial negative LDCT participants) were diagnosed with lung cancer.

An additional 75 patients (0.4 percent of the initial negative group) were diagnosed with lung cancer between the first and second annual screening. The incidence of lung cancer at the first screen among those who were initially negative was 0.34 percent, compared to 1 percent of patients who were diagnosed during the baseline screening.

The researchers determined that eliminating the first annual screening after the initial negative test might have resulted in, at most, an additional 28 lung cancer deaths in the LDCT group (186 vs. 212 deaths per 100,000 per years) over the course of the study.

"Our analysis suggests that annual screens may not be warranted for patients who have had an initial negative scan, and future risk prediction and cost-effectiveness models could incorporate these data to improve screening guidelines," Patz said.

He added that improving the accuracy of LDCT screening for lung cancer would also significantly reduce the number of annual screens. Nearly 40 percent of LDCT patients in the National Lung Screening Trial had false positives sometime during the seven years the study examined

In addition to Patz, study authors include Erin Greco, Constantine Gatsonis, Paul Pinsky, Barnett S. Kramer, and Denise R. Aberle.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release appropriately mentioned that a changed frequency of screening could save millions of dollars in subsequent screenings and “reduced downstream” effects of false positive tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With calcium, adolescent girls may be the only group that is getting too little, the panel found. Older women, on the other hand, may take too much, putting themselves at risk for . And there is evidence that excess calcium can increase the risk of heart disease, the group wrote.

As for vitamin D, some prominent doctors have said that most people need supplements or they will be at increased risk for a wide variety of illnesses, including heart disease, and autoimmune diseases.

And these days more and more people know their vitamin D levels because they are being tested for it as part of routine physical exams.

“The number of vitamin D tests has exploded,” said Dennis Black, a reviewer of the report who is a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at the .

At the same time, vitamin D sales have soared, growing faster than those of any supplement, according to The Nutrition Business Journal. Sales rose 82 percent from 2008 to 2009, reaching $430 million. “Everyone was hoping vitamin D would be kind of a panacea,” Dr. Black said. The report, he added, might quell the craze.

“I think this will have an impact on a lot of primary care providers,” he said.

The 14-member expert committee was convened by the Institute of Medicine, an independent nonprofit scientific body, at the request of the and Canadian governments. It was asked to examine the available data — nearly 1,000 publications — to determine how much vitamin D and calcium people were getting, how much was needed for optimal health and how much was too much.

The two nutrients work together for bone health.

Bone health, though, is only one of the benefits that have been attributed to vitamin D, and there is not enough good evidence to support most other claims, the committee said.

Some labs have started reporting levels of less than 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood as a deficiency. With that as a standard, 80 percent of the population would be deemed deficient of vitamin D, Dr. Rosen said. Most people need to take supplements to reach levels above 30 nanograms per milliliter, he added.

But, the committee concluded, a level of 20 to 30 nanograms is all that is needed for bone health, and nearly everyone is in that range.

Vitamin D is being added to more and more foods, said Paul R. Thomas of the Office of Dietary Supplements at the National Institutes of Health. Not only is it in orange juice and milk, but more is being added to breakfast cereals, and it now can be found in very high doses in supplement pills. Most vitamin D pills, he said, used to contain no more than 1,000 international units of it. Now it is easy to find pills, even in places like , with 5,000 international units. The committee, though, said people need only 600 international units a day.

To assess the amounts of vitamin D and calcium people are getting, the panel looked at national data on diets. Most people, they concluded, get enough calcium from the foods they eat, about 1,000 milligrams a day for most adults (1,200 for women ages 51 to 70).

Vitamin D is more complicated, the group said. In general, most people are not getting enough vitamin D from their diets, but they have enough of the vitamin in their blood, probably because they are also making it naturally after being out in the sun and storing it in their bodies.

The American Society for Bone and Mineral Research and other groups applauded the report. It is “a very balanced set of recommendations,” said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a endocrinologist and the society’s president.

But Andrew Shao, an executive vice president at the Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group, said the panel was being overly cautious, especially in its recommendations about vitamin D. He said there was no convincing evidence that people were being harmed by taking supplements, and he said higher levels of vitamin D, in particular, could be beneficial.

Such claims “are not supported by the available evidence,” the committee wrote. They were based on studies that observed populations and concluded that people with lower levels of the vitamin had more of various diseases. Such studies have been misleading and most scientists agree that they cannot determine cause and effect.

It is not clear how or why the claims for high vitamin D levels started, medical experts say. First there were two studies, which turned out to be incorrect, that said people needed 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood, the upper end of what the committee says is a normal range. They were followed by articles and claims and books saying much higher levels — 40 to 50 nanograms or even higher — were needed.

After reviewing the data, the committee concluded that the evidence for the benefits of high levels of vitamin D was “inconsistent and/or conflicting and did not demonstrate causality.”

Evidence also suggests that high levels of vitamin D can increase the risks for fractures and the overall death rate and can raise the risk for other diseases. While those studies are not conclusive, any risk looms large when there is no demonstrable benefit. Those hints of risk are “challenging the concept that ‘more is better,’ ” the committee wrote.

That is what surprised Dr. Black. “We thought that probably higher is better,” he said.

He has changed his mind, and expects others will too: “I think this report will make people more cautious.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Most people know roughly what a bottle of vitamin D supplements might cost them, so the lack of information on cost is not a significant gap. We appreciate that the story provided data showing the large and growing amount our society is spending on vitamin D supplements ($430 million in 2009), with apparently little health benefit to show for it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For two decades, Patricia DiGiusto struggled with severe asthma. Powerful medications and frequent use of her inhaler could not prevent repeated trips to the emergency room.

On one particularly bad night, Ms. DiGiusto watched from her hospital bed as doctors and nurses prepared to insert plastic tubing down her windpipe to help her breathe. Gasping for air, she was certain she would not survive.

“I’ll never forget that feeling,” said Ms. DiGiusto, 65, a speech pathologist in Braintree, Mass. “The feeling that I’m never going to see my kids or husband again and that asthma is finally going to get me.”

Two years ago, Ms. DiGiusto’s doctor told her about a new procedure called bronchial thermoplasty, the first non-drug therapy approved by the Food and Drug Administration for patients with severe asthma.

During the procedure, a doctor guides a bronchoscope into a patient’s airways. There, it heats the lungs to 149 degrees Fahrenheit — cooler than a cup of coffee, but warm enough to shrink the smooth muscle in the airways, which swells during an asthma attack and restricts breathing. After the procedure, the airways no longer are so prone to constricting, studies show. Asthma patients suffer fewer attacks and need fewer hospital visits.

Ms. DiGiusto had the procedure in March 2011. Since then, she has ended most of her medications and has not had a single asthma attack. “I’m a language therapist,” she said, “but I can’t even think of the word to describe how much better this has made my life.”

Across the country, about 24 million people suffer from asthma. Every year, about 3,400 die because of it.

Avoiding allergens and using inhaled medications are enough to keep asthma under control in most patients. But for the minority with severe persistent asthma, medication and lifestyle changes are not enough. Frequent hospital trips are almost inevitable, and powerful steroids like prednisone — which can cause thinning bones, cataracts, depression and other debilitating side effects — become a necessity.

Nationwide, asthma treatment costs exceed $10 billion a year, and over half of that is spent on severe asthmatics, who make up only 10 percent of the asthma population.

Doctors say bronchial thermoplasty has given them a new weapon in the battle against severe asthma, and many patients call it life-changing. But the procedure is expensive, costing around $20,000, and insurers have been reluctant to cover it. As a result, many people who need it, doctors say, are forced to go without it.

“For those of us in the field who work with severe asthmatics and see how limited they are, it’s frustrating because we have this new therapy, we’ve seen it work, and the data says it works,” said Dr. Roy St. John, a pulmonary disease specialist at Columbus Pulmonary and Critical Care in Ohio. “But the big insurers have all denied it.”

Although bronchial thermoplasty was approved by the F.D.A. only two years ago, clinical studies on it began in 2000. Since then, about 650 patients across the country have had the procedure.

It takes place in three steps, each separated by about three weeks. Each time, a different section of the lungs is treated. Some patients report temporary coughing, mucus and other respiratory symptoms brought on by irritation of airways.

But several five-year studies showed no long-term safety issues. And researchers at Washington University School of Medicine found that compared with a control group, bronchial thermoplasty patients saw their asthma attacks drop by a third, their emergency room visits fall by 84 percent, and the number of days they lost from work and school drop by 66 percent.

“This isn’t a cure, but it is definitely a breakthrough,” said Dr. Pratik S. Patel, director of Interventional Pulmonary Medicine at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center in New Jersey. “It’s not going to get rid of asthma, but it is going to reduce symptoms and hospitalizations and make patients more functional in their daily life.” For now, the procedure is only for severe asthmatics, who — unlike a vast majority of asthma patients — cannot keep flare-ups at bay with standard medications, said Dr. Kyle Hogarth, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Chicago who was involved in clinical studies of the treatment.

“There are millions and millions of asthmatics,” he said. “There will not be millions of thermoplasty patients.”

Still, even patients with severe asthma often are denied insurance coverage for the procedure. Susan Pisano, a spokeswoman for America’s Health Insurance Plans, the industry trade group, said insurers are awaiting the results of an additional five-year clinical trial, required by the F.D.A. when it approved bronchial thermoplasty. That trial will not be completed until at least 2018.

Until then, Ms. Pisano said, many insurers are denying coverage on the grounds the procedure is experimental. “The issue here for health plans is the long-term safety and efficacy have yet to be established,” she said.

But three five-year studies have already been completed. Many asthma specialists believe that insurers are taking a shortsighted approach. The one-time cost of $20,000, they say, is dwarfed by the tens of thousands of dollars in hospital bills and medication costs that a severe asthmatic can easily accumulate in a single year.

One such patient, Alberto Gaulion, 68, a retired importer in Miami, estimated that for much of the last decade, his insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield, spent about $50,000 a year on his medical care.

“Every two or three weeks I had to go to the hospital,” he said, “and I was taking everything that was on the market. I was on a cocktail of drugs.”

Blue Cross would not cover the procedure for him, so Mr. Gaulion paid out of pocket when he had it in 2010. Since then, he has had no hospital visits and no asthma attacks, and takes only one medication instead of five.

“Now I can breathe,” he said, “and I’m saving my insurance company a fortune.”

Dr. Charlene McEvoy, a director of an asthma center run by Health Partners, the largest health plan in Minnesota, believed in thermoplasty enough to push the insurer to start covering it. Dr. McEvoy argued that it made economic sense, and earlier this year Health Partners agreed.

“When plans look at the cost savings, I think they’re going to cover it,” said Dr. McEvoy, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota. “You have to show that there’s a return on investment.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses the high price of the procedure and the unwillingness of most insurers to cover it. One could argue that the story is off base when it suggests that the procedure would be highly cost effective, without citing any supporting evidence or allowing a rejoinder from the opposing camp. However, we’ll give the benefit of the doubt here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, July 13, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A leading group of cancer experts has issued new guidelines on the best way to use two classes of hormone therapies for estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, the most common form of breast tumor.

After a systematic review of medical research on the subject, experts reported that adding an aromatase inhibitor -- a drug that reduces the amount of estrogen produced in the body -- has clearly been shown to reduce the number of tumor recurrences in postmenopausal women compared with the standard drug tamoxifen, which works by blocking the action of estrogen on cancer tumors that are estrogen-receptor positive.

The committee preparing the guidelines recommended, therefore, that all postmenopausal women with this type of breast cancer use aromatase inhibitors either before or after tamoxifen.

They also concluded that women could use them as long as five years after tamoxifen therapy to lower their risk that the cancer will reoccur.

The paper, issued by the American Society of Clinical Oncologists (ASCO) and published July 12 in the Journal of Clinical Oncology essentially brings guidelines in alignment with today's practice.

"This is actually reinforcing clinical practice," said Dr. Crystal Denlinger, assistant professor of medical oncology at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia. "In general, for postmenopausal women, we are offering them aromatase inhibitors based on the single studies that have been referenced [in these guidelines] and what has already been reported in national meetings."

Those studies and presentations, added Denlinger, "have uniformly demonstrated the superiority of aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen or a switching strategy or an extended strategy."

The new guidelines replace previous guidelines issued in 2002, and subsequent updates in 2003 and 2004.

Tamoxifen has been a mainstay of treatment for decades, while aromatase inhibitors are a more recent entry into the field. Both drugs are used as "adjuvant" therapy, meaning they are used after surgery and chemotherapy and/or radiation to prevent the cancer from coming back.

The committee reviewed recent studies which had investigated aromatase inhibitors and/or tamoxifen in women with this particular subtype of breast cancer.

Using an aromatase inhibitor alone or with tamoxifen therapy improved disease-free survival compared with using tamoxifen alone. It also reduced the risk of the cancer spreading to other parts of the body.

Women who are pre- or peri-menopausal when they are diagnosed should be given tamoxifen for five years. Aromatase inhibitors are not effective in this age group, the experts note.

All three aromatase inhibitors on the market - Arimidex (anastrozole), Femara (letrozole) and Aromasin (exemestane) - were essentially equal in their benefit.

The drugs can also cause side effects that need to be taken into account when prescribing.

"We've learned a huge amount about the various side effect profiles of these products," said Dr. Harold J. Burstein, co-chair of the ASCO committee which prepared the guidelines and associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. "Aromatase inhibitors are clearly associated with osteoporosis and with bone and joint [conditions]. They might also be associated with a greater risk of hypertension and high cholesterol."

For its part, tamoxifen is also associated with serious side effects, which can include cataracts and uterine cancer as well as life-threatening blood clots and stroke.

And cost will also be a factor in decision-making.

"Aromatase inhibitors are very expensive. And sometimes we have to make decisions about using drugs that are probably a little less effective but at the same time we have to take into account the financial standpoint," said Dr. Jay Brooks, chairman of hematology/oncology at Ochsner Health System in Baton Rouge. "Are [aromatase inhibitors] better than tamoxifen? Yes, in two areas: preventing recurrent disease in other parts of the body and in preventing a second, separate breast cancer. But the [financial] costs are much more expensive."

According to the new guidelines, 20 milligrams of tamoxifen costs $21.90 a month, while Arimidex can cost $379.80.

On the other hand, Burstein pointed out, the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole recently became available as a generic, which should lower the cost significantly.

Read the full guideline at the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story specifically points out that generic tamoxifen costs $21.90 a month and the aromatase inhibitor, Arimidex®, costs $379.80 a month. The story was also quick to note that a generic form of Arimidex® is now available and costs much less. Going one step further, the story included a discussion of how the cost of treatment can factor into the decision-making process. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Millions of Americans suffer from pet allergies that prevent them from enjoying the benefits of owning a dog or a cat. Thea Joyce is among them, but couldn’t bear the thought of having to give up her two cats, Kirby and Lennon.

“It was really bad,” Joyce, 29, told FoxNews.com. “I was just itchy all the time and sneezing all the time. I was really uncomfortable and miserable.”

Joyce tried over-the-counter medications but couldn’t find relief. She consulted an allergist at Weill Cornell Medicine/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, where a clinical trial involving immunotherapy toothpaste was taking place.

The toothpaste, called Allerdent, works to keep breath fresh and fight cavities while also offering the same benefits as an allergy shot or drops. Researchers found that applying the extracts found in a shot to the lining of a patient’s mouth worked just as well to alleviate symptoms.

“The patients who came in were treated for the very things that they were sensitive to, and that included indoor allergens, like dustmite and pet dander, as well as outdoor allergens such as tree pollen, grass pollen, ragweed pollen,” Dr. William Reisacher, an associate professor of otolaryngology and director of allergy services at Weill Cornell Medicine/New York-Presbyterian Hospital, told FoxNews.com.

Joyce, who lives in the Bronx, New York, signed on for the year-long study that required six of the 12 volunteers to brush their teeth for two minutes using two pumps of the toothpaste in either the morning or night, and the other six to use drops under their tongue. Volunteers using the toothpaste were also required to log their usage in a journal.

Both groups reported a significant decrease in their symptoms, including Joyce, who was in the toothpaste group.

Allerdent is not covered by insurance, meaning Joyce spends about $400 every three months but said the cost is worth it.

“I used to be so irritable because I was so uncomfortable,” Joyce said. “But now I don’t really feel allergy symptoms anymore.”

To find a prescribing doctor for Allerdent in your area or to find more information, visit Allovate.com.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story earns a Satisfactory rating because it says that the toothpaste mentioned in the story costs $400 every three months (or $1,600 per year), and that it isn’t covered by health insurance.  But we would have liked it better had the writer offered comparative costs for a year’s worth of the current allergy treatment of choice.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Eric P. Winer, chief of women’s cancers at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, said that even women who completed their five years of tamoxifen months or years ago might consider starting on the drug again.

Tamoxifen blocks the effect of the hormone estrogen, which fuels tumor growth in estrogen receptor-positive cancers that account for about 65 percent of cases in premenopausal women. Some small studies in the 1990s suggested that there was no benefit to using tamoxifen longer than five years, so that has been the standard.

About 227,000 cases of breast cancer are diagnosed each year in the United States, and an estimated 30,000 of them are in premenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive cancer and prime candidates for tamoxifen. But postmenopausal women also take tamoxifen if they cannot tolerate the alternative drugs, known as aromatase inhibitors.

The new study, known as Atlas, included nearly 7,000 women with ER-positive disease who had completed five years of tamoxifen. They came from about three dozen countries. Half were chosen at random to take the drug another five years, while the others were told to stop.

In the group assigned to take tamoxifen for 10 years, 21.4 percent had a recurrence of breast cancer in the ensuing 10 years, meaning the period 5 to 14 years after their diagnoses. The recurrence rate for those who took only five years of tamoxifen was 25.1 percent.

About 12.2 percent of those in the 10-year treatment group died from breast cancer, compared with 15 percent for those in the control group.

There was virtually no difference in death and recurrence between the two groups during the five years of extra tamoxifen. The difference came in later years, suggesting that tamoxifen has a carry-over effect that lasts long after women stop taking it.

Whether these differences are big enough to cause women to take the drug for twice as long remains to be seen.

“The treatment effect is real, but it’s modest,” said Dr. Paul E. Goss, director of breast cancer research at the Massachusetts General Hospital.

Tamoxifen has side effects, including endometrial cancer, blood clots and hot flashes, which cause many women to stop taking the drug. In the Atlas trial, it appears that roughly 40 percent of the patients assigned to take tamoxifen for the additional five years stopped prematurely.

Some 3.1 percent of those taking the extra five years of tamoxifen got endometrial cancer versus 1.6 percent in the control group. However, only 0.6 percent of those in the longer treatment group died from endometrial cancer or pulmonary blood clots, compared with 0.4 percent in the control group.

“Over all, the benefits of extended tamoxifen seemed to outweigh the risks substantially,” Trevor J. Powles of the Cancer Center London, said in a commentary published by The Lancet.

Dr. Judy E. Garber, director of the Center for Cancer Genetics and Prevention at Dana-Farber, said many women have a love-hate relationship with hormone therapies.

“They don’t feel well on them, but it’s their safety net,” said Dr. Garber, who added that the news would be welcomed by many patients who would like to stay on the drug. “I have patients who agonize about this, people who are coming to the end of their tamoxifen.”

Emily Behrend, who is a few months from finishing her five years on tamoxifen, said she would definitely consider another five years. “If it can keep the cancer away, I’m all for it,” said Ms. Behrend, 39, a single mother in Tomball, Tex. She is taking the antidepressant Effexor to help control the night sweats and hot flashes caused by tamoxifen.

Cost is not considered a huge barrier to taking tamoxifen longer because the drug can be obtained for less than $200 a year.

The results, while answering one question, raise many new ones, including whether even more than 10 years of treatment would be better still.

Perhaps the most important question is what the results mean for postmenopausal women. Even many women who are premenopausal at the time of diagnosis will pass through menopause by the time they finish their first five years of tamoxifen, or will have been pushed into menopause by chemotherapy.

Postmenopausal patients tend to take aromatase inhibitors like anastrozole or letrozole, which are more effective than tamoxifen at preventing breast cancer recurrence, though they do not work for premenopausal women.

Mr. Peto said he thought the results of the Atlas study would “apply to endocrine therapy in general,” meaning that 10 years of an aromatase inhibitor would be better than five years. Other doctors were not so sure.

The Atlas study was paid for by various organizations including the United States Army, the British government and AstraZeneca, which makes the brand-name version of tamoxifen.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Clearly stated.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Viruses are usually thought of as agents of disease. But for the first time, scientists are poised to bring to the US market a virus that can help thwart cancer, a development that could herald a new age of viral therapies.

Approved by the Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday for treating advanced-stage melanoma, the virus — called Imlygic, which was developed in part in a Massachusetts lab — is a modified version of the herpes virus that both attacks the cancer and sparks the immune system into action against tumors.

In clinical trials, it has helped some cancer patients achieve remission with few of the nasty side effects common to existing treatments. And as the first tumor-killing virus to receive the FDA’s blessing, Imlygic could accelerate the development of other viral therapies.

“This is huge for the whole field, and for cancer patients,” said John Bell, a senior scientist at the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute in Canada. “The field is exploding, and this would be another arrow in the quiver that oncologists use.”

Imlygic is part of a new group of immune-stimulating viral therapies that could change how cancer is treated and managed. One involves a genetically tweaked poliovirus being tested in patients with brain tumors, while another, based on a version of the common cold virus, is now under evaluation in people with bladder cancer.

Melanoma is a deadly form of skin cancer that kills around 10,000 people per year in the United States. In a trial of 436 patients with the disease, 16 percent of participants who received Imlygic saw their tumors shrink for at least six months, compared with just 2 percent of those who received an older immune-boosting drug. Among those whose cancer had spread locally but not to internal organs, the response rate was better — 33 percent.

“It’s a low-toxicity treatment, and for the right patients you see quite stunning results,” said Robert Coffin, a virologist who created Imlygic at BioVex, the Woburn-based company he founded.

In 2011, the California biotech giant Amgen bought BioVex — and the rights to Imlygic, known generically as talimogene laherparepvec, or T-VEC — in a deal worth up to $1 billion. Amgen will charge patients $65,000 for a course of treatment, which analysts said is in line with expectations.

“These days in oncology we’ve seen some prices quite a bit higher than that,” said Eric Schmidt, an analyst with Cowen & Company. “And Amgen’s not a company that likes to price gouge.”

Schmidt said Imlygic’s market potential as a standalone drug is “very, very modest. It’s being developed in combination with other immunotherapies, where we think there’s a little more of a commercial opportunity, but we still need to see more data.”

Imlygic is approved for skin tumors that are inoperable in patients whose cancer has returned following surgery.

Sue Bohlin, a retired small-business owner in Farmingdale, N.J., is one of those patients. She received the viral therapy in early 2011 after conventional treatments failed to eliminate the skin tumors that had spread from her back to her breast.

“The first time I took it, I got a really serious case of the chills and a high fever, but only for six or eight hours,” said Bohlin, now 62. “After that, there were no side effects.”

Such muted side effects point to a major benefit of this new approach, doctors and patients said. Aside from chills and fever, the other common symptom cited in the study was skin irritation.

Bohlin’s doctors planned to inject each of her tumor sites every two weeks, but after several rounds of treatments more tumors appeared. In a last-ditch effort meant to jump-start Bohlin’s immune system, they injected her on consecutive weeks. The tumors started shrinking in the following weeks, and about three months later they were gone.

“I think we’re on the cusp of potentially curing patients” with these viruses and other immune therapies, said Dr. Howard Kaufman, chief surgical officer of the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey and a lead researcher on Bohlin’s trial. “But short of that, this might be like diabetes, where we can control it and people live normal lives.”

Imlygic is based on a form of the herpes simplex virus that commonly causes cold sores. It is genetically altered to replicate only in tumor cells while also producing a protein that activates T-cells, the search-and-destroy specialists of the immune system. Those T-cells pick up melanoma cells’ molecular scent and hunt them down before going off in search of tumor cells hiding elsewhere in the body.

“This wakes up the immune system and says, ‘Hey! Active infection here, come check this out!’ ” said Dr. Antonio Chiocca, chairman of neurosurgery at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

In many of the newer experiments, researchers are combining cancer-killing viruses like Imlygic with other immune-activating agents known as checkpoint inhibitors. These therapies typically open gateways that tumors have used to block immune cells.

In one small study of 19 advanced melanoma patients treated with both Imlygic and a checkpoint inhibitor called Yervoy, nearly half of the patients responded. “It’s nothing short of dramatic,” said Dr. Jason Chesney, an oncologist at the University of Louisville, who is involved in running a larger, follow-up study of this combination approach.

John O’Donnell, a retired math teacher in Piscataway, N.J., was one of those who tried the combination therapy, but ultimately responded only to Imlygic. More than 20 years ago, a dermatologist told him not to worry about the two tan, irregularly shaped spots near his clavicle. Three years ago, however, he noticed a small raised area on one of them.

Surgeons removed the melanoma, but it returned last year under his arm and in his lung. O’Donnell, who is 67, started the combination therapy shortly thereafter, then stopped taking Yervoy after developing severe diarrhea, a common side effect of the treatment.

But he kept with the Imlygic, and the lung tumors soon disappeared. The nodule under his arm also grew small enough to be removed by surgery.

Through it all, O’Donnell remained healthy enough to achieve one of his primary goals: to continue to lead Tuesday Bingo night at a local senior center without the residents discovering his condition.

“I know it sounds vain, but I’m too visible, and I’m too close to them,” he said. “They’re old and easily upset, and I can’t look sick.”

Earlier this month, a new scan revealed shadows that could be signs of melanoma. “My doctor isn’t convinced, though, so she said we’ll just sit and wait,” O’Donnell said. “Even if it is something, there are other things to try.”
• WHO advisers say first malaria vaccine needs more real-world study
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story nods to costs when it says the company will charge the patient $65,000 for a treatment. But they actually will be trying to charge insurance companies this amount.  How widely will it be covered and when? How many courses of treatment will be necessary? We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here but the story could have done more to clarify.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study that tracked tens of thousands of midlife and older men for more than 20 years has found that vigorous exercise and other healthy lifestyle habits may cut their chances of developing a lethal type of prostate cancer by up to 68 percent.

While most prostate cancers are 'clinically indolent,' meaning they do not metastasize and are nonlife-threatening, a minority of patients are diagnosed with aggressive disease that invades the bone and other organs, and is ultimately fatal. Lead author Stacey Kenfield, ScD, of UCSF, and a team of researchers at UCSF and Harvard, focused on this variant of prostate cancer to determine if exercise, diet and smoke-free status might have life-saving benefits.

In the study, published today, Nov. 17, 2015, in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, the researchers analyzed data from two U.S. studies: the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study that tracked more than 42,000 males ages 40 to 75, from 1986 to 2010; and a second, the Physicians' Health Study that followed more than 20,000 males ages 40 to 84, from 1982 to 2010.

To gage the effects of lifestyle habits, the researchers developed a score based on the results of the health professionals survey, then applied it to the physicians' study. They assigned one point for each affirmative response to questions about regular intense exercise that induced sweating, body mass index (BMI) under 30, tobacco-free status for a minimum of 10 years, high intake of fatty fish, high intake of tomatoes and low intake of processed meat.

To reduce error, participants had to be free of diagnosed cancer at the start of the study and a four-year lag was imposed to rule out those who unknowingly had lethal prostate cancer, which was determined by evidence of 'prostate cancer death or metastasis to the bones or other organs, excluding the lymph nodes.' Cases were confirmed through medical records and pathology reports, and cause of death was determined by death certificate and medical record, and secondarily by next of kin.

The researchers identified 576 cases of lethal prostate cancer in the health professionals' group and 337 cases in the physicians' group. Participants with 5 to 6 points in the health professionals' group had a 68 percent decreased risk of lethal prostate cancer and a 38 percent decreased risk was observed in the physicians' group for the same comparison. For dietary factors alone, men with three points, versus those with zero points, had a 46 percent decreased chance of developing lethal prostate cancer in the health professionals' group. In the physicians' group this decrease was 30 percent.

While there were fewer cases and less detailed data collected in the physicians' study, the score was similar in both populations, indicating the potential benefit of healthy lifestyle habits in warding off lethal prostate cancer, said the authors.

"We estimated that 47 percent of lethal prostate cancer cases would be prevented in the United States if men over 60 had five or more of these healthy habits," said Kenfield, assistant professor in the Department of Urology at UCSF Medical Center, and formerly of the Department of Medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston, where the study was initiated.

"It's interesting that vigorous activity had the highest potential impact on prevention of lethal prostate cancer. We calculated the population-attributable risk for American men over 60 and estimated that 34 percent of lethal prostate cancer would be reduced if all men exercised to the point of sweating for at least three hours a week," Kenfield said.

The researchers also calculated that lethal prostate cancer among American men over 60 would be cut by 15 percent if they consumed at least seven servings of tomatoes per week and that 17 percent would be spared this diagnosis if they consumed at least one serving of fatty fish per week. Reducing intake of processed meats would cut the risk by 12 percent, they reported. In contrast, the population-attributed risk for smoking was 3 percent, largely because the majority of older American men are long-term nonsmokers.

"This study underscores the ongoing need for more effective prevention measures and policies to increase exercise, improve diet quality and reduce tobacco use in our population," said senior author June M. Chan, ScD, from the departments of Urology, and Epidemiology and Biostatistics at UCSF. "It takes co-operation and effort from multiple areas, like insurance companies, employers, policy makers and city planners, to figure out how to creatively support and encourage more exercise into most busy adults' working day. These lifestyle habits align with other recommendations to prevent diabetes and heart disease."

About one man in seven will be diagnosed with prostate cancer during his lifetime, making it the most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United States, excluding non-melanoma skin cancer. According to the American Cancer Society, in 2015 there will be approximately 220,800 cases of prostate cancer and approximately 27, 540 deaths.

This study was supported by grants from the Prostate Cancer Foundation and the National Institutes of Health.

Co-authors are Erin Van Blarigan, ScD, of the departments of Urology, and Epidemiology and Biostatistics at UCSF; Howard Sesso, ScD, MPH; Edward Giovannucci, MD, ScD; Meir Stampfer, MD, DrPH, and Julie Batista, ScD, all of Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital; Mary Kathryn Downer and Jaquelyn Jahn both of Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, and Brigham and Women's Hospital.

UCSF is a leading university dedicated to transforming health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. Founded in 1864 as a medical college, UCSF now includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with world-renowned programs in the biological sciences, a preeminent biomedical research enterprise and top-tier hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals. Please visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The study evaluated the combined effect of six lifestyle habits on prostate cancer mortality. Those six factors were, as described in the journal article: “not currently smoking or quit 10 or more years ago, body mass index under 30 kg/m2, high vigorous physical activity, high intake of tomatoes and fatty fish, and low intake of processed meat.” It’s tough to put a price tag on those lifestyle choices. How much does “high vigorous physical activity” cost? How much does it cost to avoid eating processed meat? It would be easy to say this category doesn’t apply. But the release does address the issue, saying the study findings underscore “the ongoing need for more effective prevention measures and policies to increase exercise, improve diet quality and reduce tobacco use in our population….It takes co-operation and effort from multiple areas, like insurance companies, employers, policy makers and city planners, to figure out how to creatively support and encourage more exercise into most busy adults’ working day.” Recognizing the need for policies that support these lifestyle changes is important — and addresses the cost issue in a meaningful way.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking high doses of selenium may help slightly lower cholesterol levels — but it’s still not recommended in the United States, where most people get plenty of the mineral, according to the authors of a new study.

Still, the finding is “reassuring” because previous research had linked high selenium with higher cholesterol levels, said study author Dr. Eliseo Guallar, from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore.

The picture of selenium’s health benefits — or possible health risks — has been anything but clear. Last week, a review of prior studies suggested that selenium probably doesn’t help prevent cancer, but might be linked to an increased diabetes risk at high doses (see Reuters Health story of May 11, 2011.)

“We don’t really know where we are,” Guallar told Reuters Health. “In a sense it’s a necessary micronutrient and we need it, but we might be (in) a situation where we have enough — we might even have too much.”

Selenium is found in meat, bread, and some nuts. It’s also available in supplement form, and costs about $2 for a month’s supply.

The Institute of Medicine recommends U.S. adults consume 55 micrograms of selenium per day.

Guallar and his colleagues wanted to look specifically at the link between selenium and cholesterol. They recruited about 500 older adults in the UK to take one of three different doses of selenium daily — 100, 200, or 300 micrograms — or a placebo pill with no selenium.

Researchers measured participants’ cholesterol levels at the beginning of the study and after six months on the selenium supplements or placebo. Their results are published in Annals of Internal Medicine.

Participants had an average starting cholesterol of about 230 milligrams per deciliter of blood. A healthy cholesterol level is less than 200 mg/dL, according to the American Heart Association, while 200 to 239 mg/dL is considered “borderline high.”

In the groups taking 100 and 200 micrograms of selenium daily, total cholesterol dropped an average of 8.5 mg/dL and 9.7 mg/dL, respectively, compared to the group taking a placebo pill.

Taking the highest dose of selenium was not linked to decreases in total cholesterol — but it was the only dose associated with an increase in HDL (“good”) cholesterol.

The authors reported no serious side effects associated with selenium during the study.

While Guallar said the results are “good news” in showing that high selenium intake is probably not a risk for high cholesterol, he wanted to add a note of caution.

The finding “is not generalizable to other patients,” he said. “In a population like the U.S. where selenium levels are adequate, there’s no reason to take extra selenium in supplements.”

The question of the link between selenium and health outcomes, Guallar said, “is a very interesting story that’s still developing.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says a month’s supply of selenium costs about $2. But many people may be getting selenium in their daily multivitamin, and may not need to buy more.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 20, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have developed a blood test that they say could help physicians predict whether pregnant women will deliver their babies prematurely.

The test isn't ready for prime time, however, and it's not foolproof: a study found that it misses some premature births and incorrectly predicts others.

Still, the test "should be an important tool for an obstetrician who currently has no clue" if premature birth is a possibility until it happens, said Brigham Young University (BYU) chemistry professor Steven W. Graves.

Physicians will "be able to use a simple blood test and then know that this woman is at increased risk or reduced risk of a preterm birth," said Graves, whose laboratory performed the research in the study.

About 10 percent of births are premature, and the rate rises to 30 percent among women who have already had a baby prematurely, Graves said. Premature birth can lead to a long list of medical problems and puts babies at risk of dying.

In the new study, the researchers examined blood samples from 80 women who went on to have normal births and 80 who had premature births. They tried to find signs in the blood that indicate what kind of birth the women would have.

The researchers developed a screening method that looked for so-called peptide biomarkers in the blood that -- in tandem with several other proteins -- predicted 80 percent to 90 percent of the premature births at 28 weeks of gestation. The false positive rate -- referring to tests that wrongly indicated premature birth -- was 20 percent.

The test wasn't as effective at 24 weeks of gestation.

"This may simply indicate that some of the causes for preterm birth may not pre-exist before the pregnancy," Graves said. "Most probably don't, but develop or become apparent as the pregnancy progresses. The closer to the preterm birth, the more likely you are to have significant changes in the physiology of the woman that is observed in the blood."

The test may cost $150 to $250, Graves said. It would require several years to go through the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval process. BYU and the University of Utah have a patent on the test and have licensed it.

Even if the test is found to indicate that a birth will be premature, physicians would have limited options. One option is to provide drugs that dampen the immune system so the baby's lungs develop faster, said Dr. Jennifer Wu, an obstetrician-gynecologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Wu said the study results are promising, but more research is needed to confirm that the test is reliable. "If you are going to be alarming a patient by saying that she may have premature delivery, you want to make sure that's truly the case."

The study appears in the May issue of the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

For more about premature birth, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story included an estimate that “The test may cost $150 to $250.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 12, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- School readiness isn't the only benefit young children can gain from Head Start. A new study finds that kids in the U.S. preschool program tend to have a healthier weight by kindergarten than similarly aged kids not in the program.

In their first year in Head Start, obese and overweight kids lost weight faster than two comparison groups of children who weren't in the program, researchers found. Similarly, underweight kids bulked up faster.

"Participating in Head Start may be an effective and broad-reaching strategy for preventing and treating obesity in United States preschoolers," said lead researcher Dr. Julie Lumeng, an associate professor at the University of Michigan Center for Human Growth and Development.

Federally funded Head Start, which is free for 3- to 5-year-olds living in poverty, helps children prepare for kindergarten. The program is designed to build stable family relationships, improve children's physical and emotional well-being and develop strong learning skills.

Health benefits, including weight loss, seem to be a byproduct of the program, said Dr. David Katz, director of the Yale University Prevention Research Center.

"This paper importantly suggests that some of the best strategies for controlling weight and promoting health may have little directly to do with either," said Katz, who wasn't involved in the study.

Head Start might provide a structured, supervised routine that's lacking in the home, Katz suggested. "Perhaps the program fosters better mental health in the children, which in turn leads to better eating," he said.

"Whatever the exact mechanisms, by fostering well-being in one way, we tend to foster it in others, even unintended," Katz said. "The essence of this study is the holistic nature of social, psychological and physical health."

Almost one-quarter of preschool-aged children in the United States are overweight or obese, and obesity rates within Head Start populations are higher than national estimates, the study authors noted. Because obesity in childhood tends to continue into adulthood, experts worry that these children are at risk of future health problems.

For the study, Lumeng's team collected data on more than 43,700 Michigan preschool-age children between 2005 and 2013. More than 19,000 were in Head Start. Information on the others -- 5,400 of whom were on Medicaid, the publicly financed insurance program for the poor -- came from two primary health care groups. Whether those children were in another preschool program wasn't stated.

At the study's start, about one-third of the Head Start kids were obese or overweight, compared to 27 percent of those on Medicaid and less than 20 percent of kids not on Medicaid.

"Even though children in the Head Start group began the observation period more obese, equally overweight, and moreunderweight than children in the comparison groups, at the end of the observation period the initially obese and overweight Head Start children were substantially less obese andoverweight than the children in the comparison groups," the authors wrote.

Lumeng said an emphasis on good nutrition and exercise may partly explain the perceived Head Start advantage.

"Head Start programs must adhere to specific dietary guidelines," she said. "The children may be served healthier meals at Head Start than other children."

In addition, Head Start requires a certain amount of active play each day, Lumeng said. "Thus, children attending Head Start may be getting more opportunities for physical activity than other children," she explained.

The daily routine might translate into less TV time and more regular sleep schedules, she said. "We know that better sleep is linked with less obesity," she added.

"It [also] may be that when kids go to Head Start, it reduces stress in the household and frees up time and resources at home to dedicate to healthier eating patterns," she noted.

The report was published Jan. 12 online in the journal Pediatrics.

For more on childhood obesity, visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states early in the article that the Head Start Program is free to impoverished children ages 3-5.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The gene responsible for cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989. Now, 22 years later, a drug that tries to compensate for the genetic defect might be nearing the market.

Vertex Pharmaceuticals announced Wednesday morning that the drug, VX-770, improved lung function in people with cystic fibrosis in a late-stage clinical trial. The drug also reduced the frequency of disease exacerbations that required treatment with antibiotics.

The caveat is that VX-770 is designed to counter one specific genetic mutation that accounts for about 4 percent of cases of cystic fibrosis. Vertex is working on another drug for the most common mutation, but that one is further behind in development.

Still, the news is expected to be greeted favorably by doctors and patients and by Wall Street.

“I’ve been doing clinical trials for 30 years in C.F. and these are amazing results,’’ Dr. Bonnie W. Ramsey, a lead investigator in the trial, said in an interview.

Dr. Ramsey, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Washington, was briefed on the results by Vertex.

The results were announced by a press release and have not been peer reviewed by experts.

About 30,000 Americans and 70,000 people worldwide have cystic fibrosis, a disease caused by defects in a gene responsible for the transport of chloride ions across cell membranes. People with the disease tend to have very thick mucus in their lungs, which leads to infections and lung damage. Many do not live past age 40.

Two inhaled antibiotics and one drug that loosens mucus are approved to treat cystic fibrosis, but nothing that directly improves chloride ion transport.

 

 In the trial, those who received VX-770 gained 10.6 percentage points more on a lung function test after 24 weeks than those getting a placebo, a difference that statistically was highly significant. Patients continued to take either drug or placebo for another 24 weeks and the improvement was sustained. Lung function, the primary endpoint of the trial, was measured by how much a person could exhale in one second, a standard test.

Investors had been expecting around a 5 percentage point improvement. In a note to clients Tuesday evening, before the results were known, an analyst at ISI Group, Mark Schoenebaum, said that an improvement of 10 percent would be a “home run’’ that could lead to $600 million in annual sales for the drug.

Dr. Ramsey, who has received research grants from Vertex, said that some patients could perceive a 10 percentage point change in lung function. She said other results of the trial were encouraging.

These included fewer exacerbations of the disease in those who got the drug, fewer self-reported respiratory symptoms, and a gain in weight, which is good for people with cystic fibrosis, who often have digestive problems. The saltiness of their sweat — a measure used to diagnose the disease — was markedly reduced, suggesting that the drug was having an effect on chloride ion transport.

The trial involved 161 people age 12 and older, all with at least one copy of the particular mutation, known as G551D. The main side effects, Vertex said, were headache, upper respiratory tract infections, nasal congestion, rash and dizziness.

Vertex said it hoped to apply in the second half of the year for approval of VX-770 in the United States and Europe. The company is awaiting results of a second trial of the drug, this one in younger children.

Vertex has not said how much it will charge for VX-770. But since there are only about 1,200 Americans who are candidates for the drug, the price is likely to be tens of thousands of dollars a year.

Vertex, based in Cambridge, Mass., was founded in 1989, coincidentally the same year the cystic fibrosis gene was discovered. It has not yet had a big commercial success and had a $2.5 billion net loss in the last five years.

The company is hoping that by late May it will win approval to sell a new type of drug for hepatitis C, which analysts expect will be a blockbuster.

The long time needed to develop a drug for cystic fibrosis is a lesson for those expecting a quick payout from the sequencing of the human genome, which was completed a decade ago. It is not enough to know the gene behind a disease. It can take years of research to determine how a mutation actually causes a disease and then to design a drug that corrects the problem.

Vertex received $75 million in financial support from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, one of the first nonprofit disease groups to give money to companies.

“These results are highly encouraging,’’ Robert J. Beall, president of the foundation, said in a statement Wednesday. “They provide scientific evidence that support our long-standing belief that targeting the underlying defect of C.F. may have a profound effect on the disease.’’
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It discusses the drug’s costs, which are expected to be substantial. Given the relatively small population that the drug might be of benefit to, price considerations are important. The story briefly notes both aspects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For 63-year-old Lynn Kaufman, the battle against migraines consumed her life. Since she was 12-years-old, she'd experienced paralyzing pain three to four times a week — each year worse than the one before.

“It felt as though my head was a cement block,” Kaufman told NBC News. “It hurt to move my head from side to side; my tongue felt heavy, my eyes hurt, my sense of smell was off. My entire head throbbed and stung.”

Kaufman, who lives in Los Angeles, visited dozens of doctors, trying every option, including pain clinics, holistic remedies, Botox shots, and even hypnotherapy. Nothing helped.

Finally, Kaufman met neurologist Dr. David Kudrow in Santa Monica, California, enrolling in one of his clinical trials for people with headache disorders.

Kudrow is one of hundreds of doctors investigating a new class of drugs that block calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), a molecule that spikes during a migraine attack. The aim of the medication is to stop a migraine before it even starts.

“If we can block CGRP, then we can abort a migraine attack,” says Kudrow. “It's not a pill, it's an injection that stays in the system for a long period of time and is continuously blocking that CGRP mechanism of migraine.”

Results from several pharmaceutical trials are expected either later this year or in early 2018. If approved by the FDA, the drug could be available in 2018.

However, the price tag could be as much as $10,000 a year.

According to UCSF Medical Center, more than 35 million Americans suffer from migraine attacks. About 4 million sufferers have chronic migraine, with headaches for 10 to 14 days a month. Most migraines are benign, although they can be disabling. While some people are helped by over-the-counter medications like ibuprofen, others need prescription medications that may cause side effects, such as dizziness.

Related: Placebos Help Kids with Migraine as Well as Drugs Do

Kudrow says that there is a reduction in the frequency and intensity of the headaches for a large number of his patients taking the new class of drugs, but not all. Another advantage: it could lead to a decrease in the amount of medications used by patients to handle headaches acutely.

Preliminary studies sponsored by one drug maker shows patients had three to four fewer migraine days each month.

Kaufman receives regular injections once a month, for the past several months, and now experiences only one or two migraines a month. She feels like a different person who no longer has to shy away from social commitments.

“It’s life-changing," Kaufman said of the new medication. “The idea that I can go through life and not have that be an issue in my life is incredible.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story tells us the drug, if approved, may cost $10,000 a year. This is very useful context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, March 27, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- When taken as a supplement, unroasted -- or green -- coffee-bean extract can help people shed pounds, according to a small preliminary study.

The research, which is being presented this week at the national meeting of the American Chemical Society in San Diego, involved just 16 overweight and obese patients who were given daily doses of green coffee extract in capsule form.

All the patients were instructed to maintain their usual dietary habits, while the study team monitored them for weight loss over a period of nearly six months.

The apparent result: Daily consumption of a small amount of green coffee extract translated into a nearly 11 percent drop in body weight, on average.

The study was conducted in India and funded by Applied Food Sciences, the American manufacturer of two green-coffee-extract products. It has not been published in a journal, and therefore has yet to undergo peer review.

Supplements of this kind, however, are not subject to the rigorous U.S. Food and Drug Administration safety and efficacy testing typically applied to all pharmaceutical medications.

"This was indeed a small study," acknowledged corresponding study author Joe Vinson, a professor of chemistry at the University of Scranton, in Pennsylvania, but he noted that prior research has been conducted in both France and Japan. "Those studies demonstrated that patients experienced somewhat mild weight loss. But here, with higher extract doses than have been used before, the patients experienced what I would call rather large weight loss."

"While this of course needs to be confirmed with follow-up, I do think the subject is absolutely worthy of further exploration," Vinson added.

Vinson said his team was not focused on the weight-loss impact of caffeine as much as that of unprocessed, unroasted coffee's primary ingredient: chlorogenic acid.

"That's the main natural compound in unroasted coffee, and roasted coffee has much, much less of it than unprocessed coffee," Vinson said. "So we're not talking about something that is interchangeable with the coffee we drink," which is produced by roasting beans at a temperature between 464 and 482 degrees Fahrenheit.

Green coffee-bean extracts are sold online at prices ranging from about $10 to $20 for 60 capsules.

The study was broken into three six-week sections. In one section, study participants, who were all between the ages of 22 and 26, consumed a capsule filled with 700 milligrams of green coffee extract. In the second section, participants took a 1,050-milligram capsule. The third section had participants taking a placebo. Each patient ultimately cycled through each section.

While maintaining their pre-study dietary and exercise regimens, the patients lost an average of 17 pounds by the study's close. On average, patients lost 10.5 percent and 16 percent of their body weight and body fat, respectively.

"Basically, there was steady weight loss, without side effects, while the active green coffee extract was being taken at either dose," Vinson said.

A follow-up study involving 60 patients is now in the planning stages.

Lona Sandon, a registered dietitian and assistant professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Texas Southwestern in Dallas, cautioned that the study is short on specifics, making it difficult to draw any conclusions.

"First of all, you need more than 16 people to have any statistical significance attached to these findings," Sandon said. "And we really have no idea how this might be working. For example, the patients were allowed to continue with their regular diet. But did this extract in any way influence their hunger and what they wanted to eat, and then what they actually ate? We don't know. What we have here is basically just a hypothesis that there's something about this compound that could be helpful."

"Just because it might cause weight loss doesn't mean it's healthy," she warned. "Because supplements are not regulated as drugs, they can be put on the market with no safety or efficacy testing. They don't even necessarily have to be tested for purity."

"That means that in the past, various weight-loss supplements have been found to contain weight-loss drugs or other drugs at higher doses than what would be allowed in a prescription dose," Sandon added. "So while people might have this perception that it's all natural since it's coming from a coffee bean, with supplements in general it's still a buyer-beware market."

For more on dietary supplements, visit the Office of Dietary Supplements of the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: “Green coffee-bean extracts are sold online at prices ranging from about $10 to $20 for 60 capsules,” according to the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Coping with an aching back isn't easy. Neither is figuring out the cause of chronic back pain a lot of the time.

But researchers at Johns Hopkins suggest that a common diagnostic technique doesn't help doctors much for patients whose chronic lower back pain appears to be due to arthritis of the joints in the spine.

Doing away with a painkilling injections, or nerve blocks, as a test to determine the root cause of the back pain didn't hurt patients who went on to have their pain treated by zapping nerves with electrodes. Skipping the diagnostic nerve blocks can save $10,000 in medical costs.

The results appear in the August issue of Anesthesiology.

Because the diagnosis of pain can be imprecise, doctors often order multiple tests before treatment. In doing so, they may weed out patients who would actually benefit from treatment, according to the study. Of about 150 patients, the group that got radiofrequency treatment immediately had more people who felt better.

Almost everyone suffering from back pain says something like, "I want to feel better, I want to play golf again, or I want to be able to play baseball with my grandkids," anesthesiologist and lead author Steve P. Cohen tells Shots. Patients don't care much about the finer points of diagnostic accuracy. They just want relief.

But some pain experts defend the value of the diagnostic tests. Dr. Nikolai Bogdu at the Newcastle Bone & Joint Institute in Australia told Reuters that further cost analysis is needed to account for millions of patients who might not get pain relief from the radiofrequency treatment.

The study's suggestion on how to manage back pain also runs counter to current guidelines from major medical groups. The American Chronic Pain Association for example says that a block test determines who should get radiofrequency treatment.

Cohen, who serves as a colonel in the U.S. Army Reserves, tell us he's seen immediate treatment work on soldiers, who need to quickly return to their posts, so there's no reason why skipping straight to radiofrequency treatment shouldn't also work on civilian patients.

Doctors may not change their approach anytime soon, however. For one thing, Cohen says insurance companies typically cover radiofrequency therapy only after a patient has gone through at least one diagnostic test.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story said that "skipping diagnostic nerve blocks can save $10,000 in medical costs." 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Menstrual cramps are the bane of many women, but new research suggests that a form of vitamin D may one day be added to the meager list of pain relievers for the sometimes disabling condition.

A small study in Italy found that a single, high dose of cholecalciferol -- also known as vitamin D3 -- was linked to a marked reduction in menstrual cramps, with the largest benefits observed in women reporting the most pain at the beginning of the study.

U.S. experts cautioned that it's too early to recommend vitamin D3 to those experiencing cramps -- estimated to occur in at least half of all reproductive-age women -- because the study didn't delve into possible long-term risks of taking high doses.

"It's provocative in the fact that the results are pretty amazing," said Dr. Robert Graham, an internist and vitamin D expert at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "But the dose [given] is a lot more than conventionally given for any condition."

The study was published Feb. 27 in the Archives of Internal Medicine.

In the study, 40 Italian women were split into two groups: one receiving a single oral dose of 300,000 IUs of vitamin D3 and the other getting a placebo five days before the expected start of their menstrual periods.

After two months, average pain scores dropped 41 percent for women assigned vitamin D treatment, while no difference in pain was reported in the placebo group.

Also, the women who took vitamin D reported no need to use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), such as the pain reliever ibuprofen, to manage their pain in the two-month study period, while 40 percent of those assigned to placebo reported using an NSAID at least once.

Menstrual cramps, known by the medical name dysmenorrhea, typically begin just before or at the start of a woman's menstrual period and can last several days. Experts attribute the pelvic pain to prostaglandins, a hormone-like substance that contributes to the contraction and relaxation of muscles and blood vessels.

Vitamin D3 apparently helped hamper prostaglandin production in study participants, easing their pain, said Dr. Jill Rabin, chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, N.Y. The vitamin is also known to have anti-inflammatory effects, Rabin added.

"The bottom line is, it looked like it worked," said Rabin, also head of urogynecology at the hospital. "It was a very well-done study, but my comment is, it was one study. It asks more questions than it answers, which is the sign of a good trial."

The 300,000 IU dose of vitamin D3 given in the study also far exceeds the daily intake of 600 IUs recommended for American women of reproductive age, both Graham and Rabin said. And since the study period lasted only two months, there was no way to tell whether such a high dose produced any toxic long-term effects.

Currently used methods of controlling menstrual cramps include NSAIDs and -- among those with severe pain -- birth control pills. But both have potential risks: NSAID users can experience stomach or kidney troubles, for example, while birth control pills are linked to blood clots in certain women. The cost of vitamin D supplements would be roughly comparable with both of these remedies.

Vitamin D use has also been widely studied as a possible preventive for many other conditions, including heart disease, certain cancers and autoimmune disorders.

The Italian study participants all had blood levels of vitamin D measuring in the lowest 25 percent of normal at the study's outset, although the researchers didn't report the womens' blood levels afterward. Experts wondered if women with higher blood levels would experience such dramatic cramp relief as observed in the study.

Graham and Rabin agreed that much larger trials should be done before they would recommend vitamin D3 use to any of their patients for cramp relief.

"From a symptomatic standpoint, it's something to be considered, but more studies are needed to see the risks and benefits," Graham said. "Studies like this are starting to show that vitamin D is ubiquitous in receptors in our bodies . . . but it needs further explanation."

To find out more about painful menstrual periods, head to the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did explain that “The cost of vitamin D supplements would be roughly comparable with (NSAIDS or birth control pills).”  It didn’t give a ballpark cost, but we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt for nodding in the direction of addressing cost.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hoping to reduce her thighs and midsection without the risks and inconvenience of liposuction, she paid $2,300 for six treatments from a chiropractor in the Denver area. Even though she continued to diet and work out, she had no change in her thighs, belly and hips. Her doctor offered her three more sessions at no cost. Still, no change.

Since most aesthetic medicine is elective, and not covered by insurance, marketing plays a major role in capturing the minds and wallets of consumers. The concern is that promoting innovations for indications that the Food and Drug Administration hasn’t approved will fuel patient expectations that clinical data may not substantiate.

Zeltiq Aesthetics, based in Pleasanton, Calif., is a cautious wallflower that aims to get the data behind its device approved by the F.D.A. before it makes too rowdy an entrance to the party. Its slogan is “More Science. Less Fat.”

Meanwhile, Erchonia Medical, based in McKinney, Tex., has aggressively marketed its Zerona laser as “the first non-invasive body contouring procedure to effectively remove excess fat” even though it has yet to receive F.D.A. clearance to promote this use. (In general, the F.D.A. must sanction a medical device for a specific use before a company can market that use. But doctors are free to use devices off label. )

Nonetheless, a brochure for Zerona states patients can collectively “lose up to 9 inches without the pain or down time of surgery.” Nationwide, medical spas, chiropractors, cosmetic surgeons, plastic surgeons and dermatologists now offer Zerona for $1,700 to $3,800 for six sessions. Part of the reason the device has made inroads during these strapped times is that doctors don’t buy it outright, but pay per use.

So how is Zerona supposed to work? The low-level laser causes “fat to seep out of a cell, almost like a balloon being struck by a needle,” said Ryan Maloney, medical director for Erchonia Medical. The fat enters the lymphatic system, and is eventually used as energy, Dr. Maloney said.

Zeltiq uses controlled cooling to target and eliminate fat cells, a process called selective cryolipolysis. Skin isn’t damaged, but subcutaneous fat, which is more sensitive to targeted cold, begins a two-month death march soon after exposure to Zeltiq.

Doctors on the advisory board for Zeltiq Aesthetics have put the word out about it on television news segments. But at this stage, the company itself has been careful not to promote its device directly to consumers since its F.D.A. clearances for, say, pain reduction during dermatologic treatments don’t encompass fat reduction. Gordie Nye, the chief executive, sent an e-mail message declining to be interviewed for this article.

The company has clinical data that has been submitted to the F.D.A. for approval, according to a few doctors who were principal investigators. Data relayed at a meeting of the American Society of Dermatologic Surgery showed a 22 percent reduction of the fat layer as measured by ultrasound.

Erchonia Medical has published the results of its clinical trial in Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. Thirty-five patients in the treatment group lost an average of 3.5 inches total in hips, thighs and their midsection according to the company’s clinical trial. The company has promoted Zerona as “a new body-sculpting procedure designed to remove fat and contour the body without invasive surgery.” But the F.D.A. has not sanctioned marketing this use. It has cleared the Zerona laser for pain reduction 24 hours after breast augmentation or as a way to decrease the pain associated with recovering from liposuction.

In general, Karen Riley, a spokeswoman for the F.D.A., said “it is considered off-label promotion if you are marketing to the public a use that has not been cleared.” Steven Shanks, the president of Erchonia Medical, said, “Since we use the exact same power for liposuction and breast augmentation, we self-certified the device.” He said that in January 2009, the company had applied for a 510K clearance — which is based on the notion that an older device is substantially equivalent to a new one — and had yet to receive it. (Such a delay is atypical, Ms. Riley said, adding, “most 510Ks are cleared within six months.”)

Last month, Dr. Robert B. Seltzer, a dermatologist in Pasadena, Calif., ran an advertisement in The Los Angeles Times for an informational seminar that called Zerona “the holy grail.” In a phone interview, however, he said, “I’m not 100 percent convinced” and planned to return his Zerona if he didn’t continue seeing results in his patients. (So far 5 out of 6 have been pleased.)

After reviewing Erchonia Medical’s clinical study, Dr. Brian M. Kinney, a plastic surgeon in Los Angeles, said, “I can’t prove that it works.” His concerns are that the tape measure method of gauging circumferential changes “isn’t consistently reliable.” What’s more, study participants and the placebo group were assessed only two weeks after their last treatment, not long enough to measure adequately whether results last.

Dr. Kinney doesn’t have a Zerona or a Zeltiq cooling device, though in the case of the latter, he said, “it is well documented that freezing fat tissue aggressively enough can lead to fat necrosis,” or, fat dying, over a few months.

Patient selection for any body contouring procedure is crucial, said Dr. Jeffrey M. Kenkel, vice chairman of plastic surgery at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. Dr. Kenkel, who recently replicated results of Zerona’s clinical trial in 12 of his patients, doesn’t offer Zerona to obese patients, or to ones who have had surgery in the area they want treated. “It’s critical to be evaluated by a doctor,” he said.

Success is also dependent on diet and exercise, he said. If you’re sedentary and not eating healthy food, he said, then once fat is leaked after Zerona treatments, “your body will just store it again.”

How the body rids itself of fat, and how quickly, after any noninvasive body slimming procedure is unclear, said Dr. Lawrence S. Bass, a plastic surgeon in Manhattan who started using a Zeltiq device last July. That includes, he said, forthcoming devices like UltraShape and LipoSonix, which employ ultrasound waves to single out fat. It’s a “sticking point with the F.D.A. with all these things,” he said. Dr. Bass was not a clinical investigator for Zeltiq, but he said, “I’m convinced both on the science and clinical experience, it’s able to eliminate fat noninvasively.”

Nadine Tosk, a publicist for Zeltiq, explained that the rollout of the device was “very limited right now.” Dr. Jeffrey Dover, a dermatologist in Chestnut Hill, Mass., who advises Zeltiq and participated in its clinical trial, said a few board-certified plastic surgeons and dermatologists were “handpicked” because “we know they do good work.” Restraint is key, he said, because a doctor could apply Zeltiq to “the same spot” in the same day, which isn’t how it’s meant to be used. Hourlong treatments are best spaced out by two months, said Dr. Dover, who charges $700 per spot.

That said, a doctor with a Zeltiq device isn’t hard for patients to find. More than five dozen “Zeltiq specialists” can be found by ZIP code at body-contouring.com, which is a patient guide not sponsored by manufacturers of body-slimming devices. Dr. Jason N. Pozner, a plastic surgeon in Boca Raton, Fla., appears topless in a YouTube.com video that shows his left flank being suctioned and cooled as he reads his Kindle. (His partner, Dr. David J. Goldberg, was an investigator for Zeltiq.)

Ms. Bonvouloir hasn’t given up on Zerona. Recently, she paid $2,100 for six treatments at Parker Day Spa in Parker, Colo. This time, each session is followed by a massage that supposedly speeds the release of fat. “I still have three more sessions,” Ms. Bonvouloir wrote in an e-mail message. “Again, they are convinced I will lose some inches. I’d like to know when!!!”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states the price for the Zerona device: $1,700 to $3,800 for six sessions. The price of Zeltiq is also reported but is not as clear: We learn only that one doctor charges "$700 per spot"–but not how many treatments are provided or needed, what constitues as "spot," and so on.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Giving the antidepressant drug Prozac to people who have just had a stroke could help them to regain more control over their movements and allow more of them to live independently, scientists said Monday.

In the largest study yet of the effect of this type of antidepressant on stroke recovery, French researchers found that stroke patients given Prozac improved their scores in motor skills tests more than those given a placebo, or dummy pill.

Experts commenting on the findings said they had “enormous potential to change clinical practice” and raised the question of whether most stroke patients with motor skill problems should be treated with this relatively cheap type of antidepressant.

Stroke is the single largest cause of adult disability and the third-largest cause of death in the developed world.

The cost of caring for its victims, who often have motor function difficulties like paralysis or weakness on one side, puts a heavy burden on already stretched healthcare systems.

A few previous small trials had already suggested that giving drugs like Prozac, which belongs to a drug class known as selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), might improve motor skill recovery after stroke.

Prozac was developed by Eli Lilly and is now available in a cheaper generic form as fluoxetine.

Hemiplegia — paralysis to one side of the body — and hemiparesis — weakness on one side of the body — are the most common disabilities after stroke and scientists believe SSRIs might help improve movement by increasing the level of the brain chemical serotonin in the central nervous system.

“The positive effect of the drug on motor function... suggests that the neuronal ... action of SSRIs provides a new pathway that should be explored further,” said Francois Chollet of Toulouse University Hospital, who led this research.

In the study, conducted between March 2005 and June 2009 and published in The Lancet Neurology journal Monday, 118 patients in France were given either Prozac or a placebo for three months starting between five and 10 days after they had suffered a stroke.

All patients were also given physiotherapy, and had their motor skills tested at the start of the trial and on day 90.

Significantly greater improvements in motor function were recorded after three months in patients taking Prozac, where the average test score improved by 34.0 points, than in the placebo group, where the average improvement was 24.3 points.

There were also more independent patients and depression was less common in the Prozac group than in the placebo group, and side effects of the drug were rare and mild, researchers said.

Commenting on the study, Robert Robinson and Harold Adams from the University of Iowa in the United States, said it could change the way doctors treat stroke victims in future, but more research is needed to see if the effects continue over time.

Roger Bonomo, director of stroke care at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, said another way to look at the implications of this trial would be as justification for treatment of post-stroke depression before it progresses.

“Depression after stroke is a common enough complication to have raised the question of treating with antidepressants early after stroke,” he said in an emailed comment. “If motor function is also more likely to improve, then treating before symptoms of depression emerge is likely to be even more beneficial.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It mentions that the drug is available generically and is generally inexpensive. It also discusses the economic impact of stroke, teeing up the potential downstream cost savings, in terms of disability care avoided, if the benefit of fluoxetine in this setting proves to durable.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 16, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug appears to reduce the risk of bone fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis better than a placebo and the currently available drug, a new study finds.

In this phase 3 trial funded by the drug's maker, Radius Health, fewer women on the injectable drug abaloparatide had spine fractures (0.58 percent) than women receiving a placebo (4.22 percent) and slightly fewer than those taking a similar injectable drug, teriparatide (Forteo) (0.84 percent).

"If this gets approved, and there is no reason to think it won't, this will be the second drug available for the treatment of high-risk osteoporosis," said lead researcher Dr. Paul Miller of the Colorado Center for Bone Research.

Forteo has been in use for the past 16 years, he said. Abaloparatide works differently from Forteo and improves bone density more than Forteo, Miller said.

Women taking abaloparatide also had fewer other types of fractures (2.7 percent) than those who got a placebo (4.7 percent) and slightly fewer than those on Forteo (3.3 percent), the researchers found.

Miller said many spine fractures are painless. Patients are often unaware they have happened until a doctor measures their height and finds they are up to an inch shorter than before, he said.

Abaloparatide and Forteo are synthetic peptides that help grow and strengthen bone, Miller said.

Along with building bone density, they are the only ones that increase bone quality, he said. "Bone quality is an important aspect of bone strength -- the ability to withstand a break," Miller said.

He predicts that when abaloparatide is on the market, it will compete with Forteo, driving down the price of both drugs.

"I am hoping that having a second drug available, that it will help reduce the cost," he said. "Forteo costs about $2,500 a month if you don't have insurance." Even if a patient is insured, monthly copays can range from $30 to $400. Forteo is covered by Medicare, Miller said.

The report was published Aug. 16 in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

A study based on 2010 U.S. Census data estimated that more than 3 million women between the ages of 50 and 69 have osteoporosis. A 60-year-old woman has a 44 percent lifetime risk of fracture due to low bone density.

For the study, Miller and colleagues randomly assigned nearly 2,500 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis to receive daily injections of abaloparatide, Forteo or a placebo for 18 months. Their average age was 69.

Among the nearly 2,000 women who completed the trial, increases in bone mineral density were greater with abaloparatide than placebo, the researchers found.

In addition, fewer cases of hypercalcemia (abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood) occurred among women taking abaloparatide (3 percent) than Forteo (6 percent). Hypercalcemia can weaken bones, cause kidney stones and interfere with heart and brain function.

There were no differences among the groups in other serious side effects, such as nausea and heart palpations, Miller said.

Dr. Caroline Messer, director of the Center for Pituitary and Neuroendocrine Disorders at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, is eager for further research. There needs to be a large head-to-head trial between Forteo and abaloparatide, she said, to really see which drug is better.

"Everybody is going to want to know if this is inferior or superior to Forteo," she said, adding that this is an early study. "It shows more bone building and fewer fractures than Forteo, but whether it will replace that drug is still up in the air."

An editorial accompanying the study said which drug is selected may be less important than identifying and starting an approved treatment.

"The bar is high for any preventive treatment -- in the efforts to prevent a fracture that may or may not ever occur, prescribers do not want to prescribe a therapy that causes a new problem. The way forward for fracture prevention involves not only the development of better therapies . . . and easier delivery systems, but also improved adoption of existing osteoporosis therapies for patients with prior fractures and minimization of adverse effects, particularly those associated with long-term use," the editorial said.

The editorial was co-written by Dr. Anne Cappola of the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, associate editor of JAMA, and Dr. Dolores Shoback of the University of California, San Francisco.

To learn more about osteoporosis, visit the American College of Rheumatology.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although it is not known how much abaloparatide will cost at this stage, the article does discuss the cost of its would-be competitor, Forteo, which costs about $2,500 a month for those without insurance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alex Pierce, 25, took up distance running with great enthusiasm a couple of years ago. Then she developed knee pain so severe that she could not climb stairs.

So Pierce, a doctoral student in food science, went to see physical therapist Matt Briggs at The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center in Columbus. He performed deep massages, suggested changes in her running form and taught her how to exercise her thigh and gluteal muscles to better protect her knees. She believes all of that helped.

But Pierce, like a growing number of patients, had another treatment she is convinced helped even more. It’s called "dry needling," and it involves the insertion of thin, non-medicated solid needles into muscles or connective tissues. Proponents say it can reduce pain and improve movement. Pierce has had the procedure more than half a dozen times and believes it is one reason she will be able to run her fourth marathon in November.

“This has kind of changed my life,” she says.

Testimonials like that are a big reason dry needling has caught on with some physical therapists, athletes and other patients, Briggs says. But testimonials are not scientific proof.

And there, Briggs says, is where dry needling is lacking. While some studies have shown promise, he says, “the quality of the evidence is not strong.” That’s why Briggs and his colleagues are starting a study looking at dry needling in “runner’s knee,” the condition that has plagued Pierce. Their goal, and the goal of other researchers now looking at dry needling, is to produce results rigorous enough to show whether it really works.

For now, here’s what consumers should know:

Physical therapists say it is not, “though superficially, it may look the same,” says Justin Elliott, vice president of government affairs for the American Physical Therapy Association. For one thing, he says, dry needling as performed by a physical therapist is not rooted in ancient Chinese medicine — there’s no talk about redirecting the body’s energy flow by placing needles at certain points in the body. Instead, needles are placed directly in problem areas.

Elliott says dry needling also is practiced by some chiropractors, naturopathic physicians and nurses, which puts it outside the realm of any one specialty.

Acupuncturists beg to differ. “What is being called dry needling is clearly a form of acupuncture” and should be done only by professionals extensively trained in that discipline, says Thomas Burgoon, a West Chester, Pa., physician who is president of the American Academy of Medical Acupuncture. He says many acupuncturists do exactly what the physical therapists describe, with the same kind of needles.

Burgoon’s group has persuaded some states to bar physical therapists from the practice. 



How might it work?

One theory is that the needles cause tight muscles to twitch, then relax. The needles may also increase blood flow or set off nerve responses that alter pain perception, Briggs says.

Another possibility: It’s a placebo effect, an improvement triggered by the expectation that a treatment will work rather than by the treatment itself. To look for that possibility, the Ohio State study will compare patients who get the real needle treatment to those poked with sham needles that don’t pierce the skin.

Mark Crislip, an infectious-disease doctor in Portland, Ore., who recently wrote about dry needling for Science-Based Medicine — a website critical of alternative medicine — says the version practiced by physical therapists doesn’t “come with the mystical baggage that accompanies acupuncture.” But he says it may well be a “theatrical placebo.”

What do published studies say?

“It’s a mixed bag,” Elliott says. In a 2011 review, the physical therapy association rated the evidence for dry needling a 3 out of 5, based on the best studies. A formal analysis of 35 trails on acupuncture and dry needling for chronic lower back pain was published by the Cochrane research group in 2005. It found they “may be useful” additions to standard treatment. But it said higher quality studies were needed.

What are the risks?

Needling can produce minor bleeding and some soreness, but in trained hands, and with the use of sterile needles and gloves, “it’s a very safe procedure,” Briggs says.

In rare cases, deep needling can lead to a punctured lung or injuries to nerves and blood vessels, and acupuncturists fear non-specialists will be more likely to make such mistakes, Burgoon says.

Will insurers pay for this?

Many will not. Charges for patients can range from $10 to $75 per session, says Edo Zylstra, CEO of KinetaCore, a company that offers intensive three-day weekend courses in dry needling to physical therapists.

Do all physical therapists offer this?

No. The physical therapy association tells members in seven states to steer clear because of recent court or regulatory decisions or language in existing licensing laws. They are: California, Florida, Hawaii, Idaho, New York, South Dakota and Washington.

And most of the nation’s 200,000 licensed physical therapists are not trained in the technique. About 6,000 have taken courses in dry needling in the past few years, Zylstra says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story nicely calls out different questions that readers might have, including whether insurance will pay for the therapy. It answers, “Many will not. Charges for patients can range from $10 to $75 per session, says Edo Zylstra, CEO of KinetaCore, a company that offers intensive three-day weekend courses in dry needling to physical therapists.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 9, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Scientists report positive results in early testing of a wireless pacemaker that's placed in the heart instead of being connected to it via wires from the upper chest.

There are still many questions regarding the pacemaker, produced by Nanostim Inc. It's only been implanted in a few dozen people who were studied for a matter of months, limiting information about its long-term use and safety. It's also not clear when the pacemaker may be publicly available, and its cost is unknown. And the existing version of the device won't work for most pacemaker patients because it lacks some key features.

Still, a new company-funded study shows that "this is now a possibility" that could reduce infections and the severity of pacemaker surgery, said study author Dr. Vivek Reddy, director of the Cardiac Arrhythmia Service at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City. "This is going to be the future," he said.

Pacemakers zap the heart with low levels of electricity when the heartbeat becomes too fast, too slow or too irregular. Some are combined with defibrillators, which give the heart a major jolt when needed.

Currently, pacemakers include two components: a battery-powered generator that produces the electrical "prompts" that the wires deliver to the heart when needed, Reddy said. These wires can break or become infected, he explained, making the idea of a wire-free pacemaker appealing.

The new pacemaker is about the size of a AAA battery and provides jolts to one chamber of the heart, Reddy said. Most people with pacemakers require jolts to both chambers, so the pacemaker in its current form wouldn't work for them.

In the new study, researchers implanted the pacemaker in 32 people for the first time through a puncture in the skin; in 10 patients, they had to reposition it. The researchers reported positive results at up to three months. However, one patient died of a stroke while convalescing after suffering a heart injury during implantation and another had the pacemaker replaced with a defibrillator.

Why get a wire-free pacemaker? "For patients with heart problems, this could potentially mean fewer infections related to leads and less discomfort during the implant procedure," Reddy said. And children who get pacemakers wouldn't face chest scarring, he added.

Dr. Saman Nazarian, a cardiologist and assistant professor of medicine at Johns Hopkins Hospital, said the findings are promising and "the new technology has enormous potential." He expects the pacemaker "will likely be utilized for some select patients" after more testing.

Still, he said, the new device will probably be more expensive than other pacemakers, and may pose special risks of its own.

Dr. Harish Doppalapudi, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, added that there are unanswered questions regarding replacement of the new pacemakers.

"When the battery of the implanted leadless pacemaker is exhausted, a new implant is necessary, with all the potential risks associated with this," Doppalapudi said. "It is not known if it will be feasible to safely retrieve the old device. If the old device is left in place, it is not known what the long-term effects of this will be."

Study author Reddy has received grant funding from Nanostim, and works for the company as a consultant. He also has received stock options from the company.

The study was to be presented Wednesday at the Heart Rhythm Society annual meeting in Denver. Findings presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

For more about pacemakers, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that this is in the “early testing” phase, so it’s understandable that a cost estimate might not be given.
In the second paragraph, the story states that the cost is unknown.
And an independent expert postulated that “the new device will probably be more expensive than other pacemakers.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The article reports that the device provides clear visualization of the surgical site where the tumor was removed, thereby improving communication between the surgeon and radiation oncologist. The study also noted that the device provides a helpful guide for post-treatment mammograms and other long-term follow-up to check for any cancer recurrence in these patients.

A second study, presented at the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) 2016 annual conference, describes the extra utility that BioZorb can provide, by significantly reducing the amount of normal breast and surrounding tissues that are exposed to radiation treatment.

The World Journal of Surgery article, by lead author breast surgeon Michael J. Cross, concluded that the 3-D marker is an "effective method for delineating the tumor bed with a significant utility for RT (radiation therapy) planning."

In the course of this three-year study, Dr. Cross and colleagues also documented a favorable shift toward use of hypo-fractionated radiation treatment, a shorter form of radiation associated with a substantial reduction in treatment costs.

"Through our experience with this marker, we've observed that its use results in less radiation dose to the patient compared to whole breast radiation, plus a better overall cosmetic outcome," said Dr. Cross, a nationally known breast surgeon at Breast Treatment Associates, in Fayetteville Ark. "We were also pleased to note in our research that there were no device-related complications in this group of patients, and that none of them had a recurrence of cancer."

The BioZorb device is placed during lumpectomy surgery, which removes the cancer and preserves the breast. It is the first and only device that identifies in a reliable way the 3-D region where the tumor was removed. It is particularly effective because by suturing the implant to the tumor bed, the surgeon can more precisely indicate to the radiation oncologist where the cancer was located. Dr. Cross notes that because of the marker's unique configuration, it can also assist with reconstructing the surgical region during the healing process.

The implantable marker consists of a framework made of a bioabsorbable material that holds six titanium clips. The framework slowly dissolves in the body over the course of a year or more. The tiny marker clips stay in place so the surgical site can be viewed for long-term monitoring such as mammograms.

As part of the research for the World Journal of Surgery study, 108 patients with early-stage breast cancer were prospectively implanted with the marker during "reconstructive lumpectomy," a method of oncoplastic surgery to remove the cancer while reconstructing the remaining breast to improve cosmetic outcomes. The average age of women in the study was 63 years.

The authors concluded that the marker was helpful for several different types of physicians involved in the care of women with breast cancer: surgeons, radiation oncologists who plan and oversee radiation treatment, and radiologists who follow women after breast cancer treatment.

The article also noted that there was a shift during the three-year course of the study toward increasing use of hypo-fractionated radiation methods. These methods decrease the time it takes for patients to complete radiation treatment -- and are estimated to cut the cost of treatment by approximately 25%. The authors said use of the marker facilitated their shift toward these shorter courses of radiotherapy.

Use of the marker allowed physicians to be more confident in their targeting and rely less on "ambiguous planning targets such as the seroma and surrounding tissue changes." Seroma is a collection of fluid that builds up in the area of tissue injury after surgery.

While seromas have customarily been targeted for radiation treatment, they do not always reflect where the cancer was and can overestimate the size of the target areas in need of radiation. By more precisely marking the tumor bed, the article said, BioZorb can reduce the amount of healthy tissue that would otherwise receive unnecessary radiation.

The second recent study, presented at the 2016 annual ASTRO conference in Boston, described a collaborative approach between a radiation oncologist and breast surgeon. They studied the question of whether the marker could better identify the true lumpectomy cavity and thereby reduce the amount of tissue that is irradiated.

The authors – radiation oncologist William Hall, M.D., and breast surgeon Cary Kaufman, M.D. -- combined their analysis of 10 cases in which BioZorb was used.

They concluded that the tissue marker could significantly reduce radiation of healthy breast tissue (an average of 65% reduction), as well as avoid irradiating inadvertent seromas that are more common with oncoplastic procedures. By providing better targeting, they said, the marker could also play a role in facilitating the use of external beam partial breast irradiation.

"The process of delivering radiation treatment is substantially streamlined by having the 3D marker in place," said Dr. Hall. "The marker tells us where the tumor was and helps us determine appropriate forms of treatment, whether with partial breast irradiation or standard whole breast irradiation and a boost dose at the end of the treatment process."

Dr. Hall is a radiation oncologist in the Department of Radiation Oncology at PeaceHealth St. Joseph Medical Center (Bellingham, Wash). Dr. Kaufman is Medical Director of the Bellingham Regional Breast Center and past chairman of the National Accreditation Program for Breast Centers.

Focal Therapeutics is a medical device company based in Aliso Viejo, Calif. The company's BioZorb marker is a proprietary bioabsorbable device that provides radiographic marking of soft tissue sites. The BioZorb device is placed at the time of surgical removal of tissue, such as during breast surgery, and the device's three-dimensional array of marker clips has unique clinical utility for patient imaging. BioZorb has received 510(k) clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The device is available in a range of sizes to accommodate a variety of clinical situations. For more information about the company, call (U.S.) 650-530-2394 or email info@focaltherapeutics.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release declares the cost of treatment will be cut “by approximately 25%” without indicating a starting cost for treatment without the implant.
But the release does go in to some detail on how cost savings were estimated: During the three-year span of the study, the marker facilitated many physicians to shift from traditional external beam radiation to the shorter course hypo-fractionated radiation therapy, which results in a cost savings. The patient outcomes remain similar, however.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alcoholics see hope in new pill Migraine drug may curb drinking but comes with some side effects

CHICAGO — A migraine pill seems to help alcoholics taper off their drinking without detox treatment, researchers report, offering a potential option for a hard-to-treat problem.

The drug, Topamax, works in a different way than three other medications already approved for treating alcoholism.

Experts said the drug is likely to appeal to heavy drinkers who would rather seek help from their own doctors, rather than enter a rehab clinic to dry out. The drug costs at least $350 a month, plus the price of doctor's visits.

It's unclear whether the findings will make a dent in an addiction that affects millions of Americans.

Addiction specialists not involved in the study said the findings are promising, although side effects such as trouble concentrating, tingling and itching caused about one in five people to drop out of the study. Drowsiness and dizziness are also problems.

"The size of the treatment effect is larger than in most of the other medications we've seen," said Dr. Mark Willenbring of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. "And all the drinking variables changed in the right direction."

The study, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, was funded by the maker of the drug, Johnson & Johnson Inc.'s Ortho-McNeil Neurologics.

The study followed 371 heavy drinkers for 14 weeks. About half were randomly assigned to take Topamax, also called topiramate, in gradually increasing doses. The others took dummy pills.

All volunteers were encouraged — but not required — to stop drinking.

At the start of the study, they drank, on average, 11 standard drinks daily. That's about two six-packs of beer each day, or two bottles of wine, or a pint of hard liquor.

By the end of the study, 27 of the 183 people, or 15 percent, who took Topamax had quit drinking entirely for seven weeks or more. That compared to six out of 188, or 3 percent, in the placebo group.

Others cut back. The Topamax group cut back to six drinks a day, on average, assuming everyone who dropped out of the study relapsed into heavy drinking. That compared to seven drinks a day for the placebo group.

"You can come in drinking a bottle of scotch a day and get treatment without detox," said Dr. Bankole Johnson of the University of Virginia, who led the study, which was conducted at 17 U.S. sites from 2004-2006.

It's unclear how many relapsed after quitting the pill.

Tom Wolfe, 44, a carpenter from Earlysville, Va., said he felt "a little light-headed" at first until he got used to the drug. "It's been a miracle to me," Wolfe said.

The drug works by inhibiting dopamine, the brain's "feel-good" neurotransmitters that are involved in all addictions, said Stephen Dewey, a neuroscientist at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provided an estimate for the cost of the treatment as well as the reminder that the costs for the doctor’s visit also needed to be factored in.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Chicago — A single breath may be all it takes to identify the return of lung cancer after surgery, according to a study posted online today by The Annals of Thoracic Surgery.

Exhaled breath contains thousands of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that vary in composition and pattern depending on a person’s health status. A subset of four VOCs—called carbonyl compounds because of their carbon base—have been discovered in the exhaled breath of lung cancer patients. Being able to identify this lung cancer “signature” through a simple breath test has emerged as one of the most promising ways to diagnose the disease. Now the test is being used to monitor for disease recurrence.

Erin M. Schumer, MD, MPH, Victor van Berkel, MD, PhD, and colleagues from the University of Louisville analyzed breath samples collected before and after surgery from 31 lung cancer patients and compared their carbonyl VOCs levels with samples from 187 healthy patients.

The researchers found a significant decrease in overall carbonyl VOC levels following surgery; in fact, three of the four carbonyl VOCs normalized after surgery, matching levels in the control group.

“The rapid normalization of almost all of the four compounds after surgery provides strong evidence that they are directly produced by the tumor environment,” said Dr. Schumer. “This study confirms that the technology is accurate.”

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death. The American Cancer Society (ACS) estimates that more than 224,000 Americans will be diagnosed with lung cancer this year, and more than 158,000 lung cancer patients will die—that translates to 433 lung cancer deaths per day in the United States.

Dr. Schumer said those grim statistics underscore the need for early detection, “We hope that breath analysis will allow us to diagnose patients with primary or recurrent lung cancer long before they suffer from symptoms, when we have more options for treating them, giving them the best chance for cure.”

Currently, lung cancer patients are followed after surgery with chest computed tomography (CT) scans, which can be inconvenient, expensive, and expose the patient to radiation. “We hope that the breath analysis can serve as the primary screening tool for cancer recurrence and a CT scan ordered only if the breath test suggests that there has been a change,” said Dr. van Berkel.

How the Breath Test WorksThe process of breath analysis is relatively simple. The patient blows a single breath into a specialized balloon. The balloon is then connected to a pump that pulls the breath over a small microchip (smaller than a quarter), trapping the chemicals. The microchip is sent to the lab, where the chemicals are analyzed within hours. Breath collection can be performed in the doctor’s office. The pump is reusable; the balloon, microchip, and lab test together cost around $20, all supporting the increasing acceptance of breath tests as a cost-effective, easy-to-perform, non-invasive, and rapid option for the diagnosis of lung cancer.

“The great potential with breath analysis is detecting lung cancer at any point, both as a primary screening tool and to follow patients after disease has been treated,” said Dr. van Berkel. “The technology is pretty robust. Our next step is getting approval from the FDA.”

Note: This work was supported by the Coulter Foundation, V Foundation, National Science Foundation, and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. In addition, Drs. Bousamra, van Berkel, and Fu disclose a financial relationship with Breath Diagnostics, Inc.

For a copy of The Annals article, contact Jennifer Bagley at 312-202-5865 or jbagley@sts.org.

Founded in 1964, The Society of Thoracic Surgeons is a not-for-profit organization representing more than 7,200 cardiothoracic surgeons, researchers, and allied health care professionals worldwide who are dedicated to ensuring the best possible outcomes for surgeries of the heart, lung, and esophagus, as well as other surgical procedures within the chest. The Society’s mission is to enhance the ability of cardiothoracic surgeons to provide the highest quality patient care through education, research, and advocacy.

The Annals of Thoracic Surgery is the official journal of STS and the Southern Thoracic Surgical Association. It has a 5-year impact factor of 4.104, the highest of any cardiothoracic surgery journal worldwide.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does mention that the cost of materials to conduct the test is “around $20” which is considerably less than the cost of CT scan imaging which is now being used. It is unclear, however, how much patients would be actually charged. The release should’ve been clearer about the actual cost to patients. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TRENTON, N.J. — Cardboard boxes certainly aren’t new technology. But when they’re linked to a practice that started in Finland decades ago to help babies sleep safely, they’re taking on a new purpose as so-called baby boxes make their way to the U.S.

Parents are beginning to take baby boxes home from hospitals along with their newborns. A Los Angeles-based company has partnered with health officials to give the boxes away for free and an online initiative offers advice aimed at reducing sudden unexpected infant deaths. New Jersey and Ohio were the first to participate statewide in the program.

‘‘To new moms: (SUID) was one of my biggest fears and then it happened,’’ said 35-year-old Chauntia Williams, of Maple Heights, Ohio.

Williams is an advocate for safe sleeping and the boxes after she unexpectedly lost her 33-day-old daughter Aaliyah nine years ago. Williams said her daughter went to sleep in a crib with cushiony bumpers, stuffed animals and an added blanket beneath the fitted sheet and never woke up. She said the coroner determined the bedding caused the death.

She now uses a box with her son, Bryce, though he’s getting a little too big for it. Her message to new parents: Educate yourselves on safe sleep habits.

‘‘Open your mouth and say I’m concerned about this so you can get the assistance,’’ Williams said.

Sudden unexpected infant death is a broad category that includes sudden infant death syndrome and accidental suffocation and strangulation that could come from overcrowded bassinets or cribs. The boxes aren’t the only option for safe sleeping, of course, but health officials say they’re a useful part of a broader safe-sleep education program.

Ohio on Wednesday joined New Jersey in offering the cardboard boxes, which double as bassinets, for free. Each box comes filled with a mattress, fitted sheet, onesie and diapers.

The Baby Box Co. is also handing out the boxes in Minneapolis, Phoenix and San Francisco, with the goal of expanding to all 50 states. The for-profit company also operates in Canada, Ireland and the United Kingdom. Baby Box University, Baby Box Co.’s educational platform, maintains a website that coordinates the educational component of the program.

The idea for baby boxes started in Finland in the 1930s, and is tied to a sharp drop in sudden infant deaths, according to Dr. Kathryn McCans, a pediatrician who chairs New Jersey’s Child Fatality and Near Fatality Review Board. The boxes provide a clutter-free sleep space that has been shown to reduce accidental and unexpected deaths, she said.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says the U.S. rate of sudden unexpected infant deaths has been declining since the 1990s when public health officials began recommending parents put infants to sleep on their backs. About 3,700 sudden unexpected infant deaths were reported in the country in 2015.

The boxes are a new idea for many Americans.

‘‘The thought of putting the baby in a box, I was like ‘wow that’s weird,’’’ said Dolores Peterson, of Camden, New Jersey, who became a first-time mom recently and was among the first to bring home a box.

Peterson’s daughter, Ariabella, just turned 3 months old. She said the program was eye-opening for how much information she learned about how to prevent sudden unexpected infant death.

McCans says the complimentary items like diapers and onesies are nice, but the more important objective behind the boxes is bringing down infant deaths and grounding parents on safe sleep practices: Place babies on their backs to sleep; Don’t use bumpers in cribs; Keep stuffed animals and blankets out of infants’ sleep spaces; Avoid sleeping in the same bed as infants.

‘‘No one brings their baby into bed with them because they want their baby to die,’’ she said. ‘‘They do it because they want to be nurturing and they are, but it’s not safe.’’

To get the boxes, prospective moms can register through babyboxuniversity.com, watch a handful of videos on sleep safety and pass a quiz. Parents can then take their digital or printed-out certificates to a participating hospital for their boxes. The boxes can also be sent in the mail, if a nearby hospital is not designated as a distribution center.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does say that these boxes are being distributed for free, but by a for-profit company that requires parents to “register” at a website in order to receive one.
We think the collection of information on new parents may benefit the for-profit company. The story would have been stronger if it faced that issue squarely. See more on this under the funding and conflicts of interest criteria section below.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If you're over 50 or have a family history of colon cancer, you've probably already heard the nagging about why you should get a colonoscopy.

You've probably heard that colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in the United States.

And you've probably heard about how early screening means early detection and removal of polyps before they turn into cancer. And that early screening also means that colorectal cancer can be treated more effectively.

But all of this hasn't been enough to convince a lot of people make those appointments. Fear of doctors, the prospect of being poked and prodded in strange places, a lack of insurance to cover the costly test -- or a combination of all three -- are to blame for as many as half of the over-50 crowd putting off or avoiding the screening test altogether.

That's why the American Cancer Society, which estimates there will be about 108,000 new cases of colon cancer and 40,700 new cases of rectal cancer this year, added the stool DNA test to its screening guidelines this spring. It joins six other tests, including the traditional colonoscopy and the new CT colonography, or virtual colonoscopy.

Dr. Sanford Markowitz, a cancer genetics expert at the Ireland Cancer Center of University Hospitals Case Medical Center, has helped develop the technology behind the stool DNA test.

Five years ago, Markowitz, who is also on the faculty at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, and his research team discovered a specific DNA change that takes place in colon cancers. They then created techniques for detecting the DNA change when it expelled from the body in feces.

With the discovery of the gene marker Vimentin comes a new way to significantly increase the rate of detection of colon cancer.

While colonoscopy is still viewed as the best screening agent, it's not effective if it's not being used, he said.

"Clearly by itself, it is not reaching other people," said Markowitz, who sits on the medical advisory board of the National Colorectal Cancer Research Alliance. CBS Evening News anchor Katie Couric, whose husband died of the disease, co-founded the group.

"Our idea was that if you had an inexpensive test that was easy to use and wasn't invasive, you could reach a lot of people and prevent deaths from happening every day of the year," Markowitz said.

Unlike a traditional colonoscopy, one doesn't need to go through an extensive bowel cleaning through changes in diet and medication or take time off work.

All it takes is collecting a stool sample -- use your imagination here -- and sending it off to a lab for testing.

Two Massachusetts-based companies have a license to develop a practical screening test based on Markowitz's work.

Up until June 1, LabCorp of America had a product on the market. Since 2003, the PreGen-Plus kit could be ordered through a physician or other licensed health care provider for $800, although some insurance and health plans covered the cost partially or in full.

LabCorp has said it will come out with a new test this year.

Exact Science Corp. is in discussions with the FDA to develop a test that could hit the over-the-counter market sometime in 2009, pending FDA approval, said company president Jeffrey Luber.

That test, which looks at two different DNA markers (instead of the one marker used by PreGen-Plus), is the one with which Markowitz is more familiar. It will be geared toward use in the privacy of one's home.

Not since 1998, when the FDA approved the PSA test for early detection of prostate cancer, had new technology been created in early cancer detection until the stool DNA test.

Compared to more invasive procedures, the test still might miss some polyps and cancers and may need to be repeated more often. If results are abnormal, a colonoscopy would still be required.

But it's a huge step forward, especially for those who are skittish about a trip to the doctor.

"Right now, we think we can detect about 80 percent of cancers," Markowitz said. "Our goal is to reach 100 percent."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that one test that was available through June 1 costs about $800. It also mentioned that some insurance and health plans covered the cost partially or in full.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"I am the mother to a beautiful 30-year-old woman, she was diagnosed with a meningioma tumor," said Glenda Wimberly.

When Rianta Wimberly started going blind from an inoperable brain tumor, her mother Glenda got on the Web, found a radiation treatment called proton beam therapy and sent a desperate email to doctors at Massachusetts General Hospital, CBS News' Dr. Emily Senay reports.

"She has lost her peripheral vision and is experiencing difficulty seeing," Glenda wrote.

Just weeks later, Rianta was getting the therapy and the tumor was shrinking.

"With four treatments left, I have 98 percent of my vision left," Rianta said.

And with no side effects. That's because proton beam radiation is highly targeted - delivering its dose only to the tumor and sparing the surrounding tissue, which is important for certain rare cancers.

"It's a real delight to be able to offer patients proton therapy you see that during the treatment they have less side effects," said Jay Loeffler, the chair of radiation oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center.

But proton beam therapy is at the heart of the debate over rising health-care costs. It's the most expensive device in medicine today.

The technology is two decades old, but Mass. General is one of five proton centers, and there are eight others in the works.

The massive facility at the University of Pennsylvania - soon to be the world's largest - will cost $140 million.

"This is three stories. This gantry that spins around the patient; this rotates completely around the patient," said Dr. James Metz of the University of Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center.

"Close to a million tons of equipment," Metz said.

"So this is the cyclotron itself, this is a 200-ton piece of machinery that accelerates the protons to 230 million electron volts," Metz said.

Huge magnets direct the beam of radiation the length of a football field into treatment rooms.

"Now we're leaving the cyclotron area and walking along the beam line," Metz said. "The beam will travel thru these magnets and that will steer the beam into the different rooms."

Radiation oncologist Dr. Richard Stock, of Mt. Sinai Hospital, says competitive pressure is driving the building boom.

"It's kind of a vicious cycle because if one center opens up, other centers and other hospitals surrounding it have to try to compete for patients," Stock said.

And while there's little disputing the value of proton beam for certain rare cancers, increasingly it is being used for more common cancers like prostate. At double the cost of standard treatments, many experts say it's being used without proof it's more effective.

"There is no good evidence, medical evidence that it is better than the current state of the art intensity modular radiation therapy," Stock said.

Is this a better treatment for adults than conventional?

"In my opinion it's a better treatment. the bigger issue though is, is the increased costs associated with protons worth it to society? in my opinion it's worth it if we can reduce the initial costs of building proton centers," Loeffler said.

But while the cost is extraordinary … so are the results for this family.

"This was my only option, thru unbreakable faith I'm here," Rianta said.

Glenda said: "She has unbreakable faith, I have unspeakable joy."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the problem of the costs of proton beam therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The pocket-watch-sized device is billed as "a pacemaker for the brain," the newest cutting-edge treatment for as many as 4 million adults whose severe depression is not relieved by psychotherapy, drugs or even shock treatments.

Since its approval under unusual circumstances eight months ago by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), more than 550 Americans have undergone surgery to have a vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) implanted in their chests to activate parts of their brains. Another 7,000 people -- aided by a network of nurses hired by Cyberonics, the Houston-based manufacturer of the device -- are seeking approval from their insurance companies for the $25,000 operation.

More than 3,700 psychiatrists, including doctors affiliated with Suburban, Georgetown, Sheppard Pratt and Howard University hospitals, have been trained in the use of VNS, the first device ever approved to treat depression. It consists of a battery-operated generator attached to an electrode implanted in the vagus nerve in the neck. The generator emits regular pulses of electricity that are supposed to stimulate serotonin and other brain chemicals believed to regulate mood, according to Cyberonics.

Yet despite the imprimatur of the FDA and an aggressive marketing campaign mounted by the company, the most basic question about the treatment remains unanswered: Does it work? Is VNS a lifesaving treatment for chronic depression, as some patients and doctors maintain, or an unproven and potentially harmful treatment based on flimsy science, as critics contend?

At the heart of the debate is this: The only rigorous clinical trial of the device -- which is approved to treat severe epilepsy -- failed to demonstrate effectiveness in alleviating depression. That study involved 235 patients, all of whom received the device, which was turned on in only half the group. At the end of three months, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups.

A second study of 174 VNS recipients found that 30 percent showed significant improvement after one year. Because that study lacked a control group and because patients received other depression treatments after the device was implanted, there is no way to know whether the device was responsible. For years experts have known that depression -- unlike, say, type 1 diabetes -- can get better without treatment.

Last July, a top FDA official, citing the lack of alternatives for severely depressed patients, overruled unanimous opposition by 20 members of his staff and approved the device as a depression treatment for adults who had failed four other treatments.

FDA spokesman Stephen King said that VNS met federal standards for medical devices, which are less stringent than those governing drugs, and might help adults who had exhausted other options and were at a high risk of suicide. Cyberonics officials testified that 30,000 people commit suicide annually, most of whom were diagnosed with severe depression. The same rationale had led an FDA advisory panel in 2004 to approve the device by a 5-2 vote.

To Philadelphia psychiatrist Richard P. Malone, a member of the panel who voted against approval, such arguments are specious.

"Pancreatic cancer is a hopeless condition" with a much higher death rate than chronic depression, said Malone, a professor of psychiatry at Drexel University. "And we have as much evidence that this works for pancreatic cancer as it does for depression. Why not use it for that?"

Some patients with chronic depression say they were willing to try anything that promised relief. Graphic artist Colleen Kelly decided in 2000 that she had nothing to lose by enrolling in an experimental study of VNS. Now 42, Kelly, who lives in Prince George's County, said dozens of medications had not helped her for long or had caused severe reactions. Nearly three dozen electroshock treatments failed to work and wiped out years of memories, she said.

VNS gave Kelly three "very good years," she said, and then her depression returned. "The past year has been abysmal," said Kelly, who urged the FDA advisory panel to approve the device. "I still keep hoping it's going to help me in some way."

But critics say they are not persuaded by Cyberonics's theory of how VNS works. The company's Web site says that "preliminary imaging studies suggest that VNS Therapy affects many areas of the brain implicated in mood regulation."

But Malone called the theory "all speculative."

"This almost has a feel of 18th-century psychiatry -- having a device and not being able to show how it works," he said.

Washington psychiatrist Wayne Blackmon agreed. "Psychiatry has been burned again and again by overextravagant claims" about devices and psychosurgery, said Blackmon, a lawyer and a past president of the D.C. Medical Society. "The history of psychiatry is plagued by psychiatrists jumping the gun because these poor people are suffering and the argument is we have to do something."

The device has also attracted attention on Capitol Hill, where the Senate Finance Committee has spent two years looking into decision-making at the FDA.

Last month committee chairman Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), whose panel issued a report highly critical of the agency's approval of VNS, said he was concerned that patients and their doctors were not being adequately informed about the risks of VNS, which include cardiovascular problems that can be life-threatening.

Grassley questioned whether Medicare and Medicaid should pay for the device, which costs $15,000 and must be replaced every five years or so when the battery runs low. So far neither the federal government nor private insurers have agreed to cover VNS for depression on a routine basis, although many have approved individual cases.

Last week, BlueCross BlueShield of Alabama announced it would pay for VNS treatment in chronically depressed patients who had failed four previous treatments.

Two recent technology assessments by major insurance companies have concluded there is insufficient evidence to find that VNS works for depression. A report by Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, an influential mental health insurer in Boston, called it "experimental, investigational and unproven."

Robert "Skip" Cummins, Cyberonics's CEO, dismissed such criticism and said his company, whose sole product is VNS, faced similar skepticism after the device was approved for epilepsy in 1997.

He noted that VNS is now accepted by insurers as a treatment for intractable seizures, which can be fatal if they are not controlled. About 35,000 epilepsy patients have received the implant.

Many FDA "regulators, politicians and third-party payers" know little about resistant depression, Cummins said. "Hundreds of psychiatric thought leaders and patients are rallying around the device" for "the worst of the worst" cases of depression, he said.

"There is nothing out there as safe and effective," Cummins said, adding that a company-financed study showed that the effectiveness of VNS improved over time. He added that he has a personal interest in intractable depression because his mother and grandfather committed suicide.

New York psychiatrist T. Byram Karasu, chairman of the task force that writes the section on depression for psychiatry's diagnostic and statistical manual, said that even though the effectiveness of VNS is uncertain, it appeals to patients and their psychiatrists.

In its marketing campaign, Cyberonics notes that VNS treatment does not cause the weight gain associated with antidepressants and the confusion and memory loss common after electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), psychiatry's term for shock treatments.

"VNS has a quality of cardiac surgery to it, a certain cachet," and it lacks the stigma of shock treatments, said Karasu, adding that six of his patients adamantly refused ECT and opted instead for VNS. "No one would know you didn't get a defibrillator."

For Paulo Negro's patients, the issue is not stigma, but options. Negro, chief of behavioral health services at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, said his VNS patients have tried everything, but their depression always recurred.

"What would you do if you've not been getting better for years?" asked Negro. "It's a chance to get better. I'd take it."

That's what Charles E. Donovan III did. The St. Louis resident credits the implant he received five years ago with saving his life. At the time, the Georgetown University graduate said he was so depressed he told his doctor he hoped to die on the operating table.

But in the weeks after surgery, Donovan said, he started to feel better. Although he takes antidepressants, Donovan said, he is sure drugs are not responsible, because they hadn't helped him previously.

Donovan, who is featured on the Cyberonics Web site, said he has no financial relationship with the company. He recently self-published a book about his experiences, entitled "Out of the Black Hole," and runs a pro-VNS Web site for patients. "I am so humbled by this treatment and grateful," he said.

Others have had far less positive experiences. Among them is Katherine V. Coram, 58, of Silver Spring who got the implant in the same study as Donovan. Coram said she knew she was in the group with the activated device because she could feel it going off, she said. She frequently lost her voice while she was talking and felt a persistent constriction in the back of her throat. Both are common side effects of VNS treatment.

Coram said the device seemed to help a bit at first, but when the doctor turned up the settings, she felt suicidal for the first time in years. Worsening depression and suicide attempts were reported by one-third of patients in one study funded by Cyberonics, according to data presented to the FDA.

Last year Coram said she had the generator removed from her chest because it wasn't helping. The electrodes in her neck must remain forever; doctors tell VNS patients that removing them is too risky because tissue grows around them As a result, VNS recipients cannot undergo a full body MRI or therapeutic ultrasound.

"I'm still angry about the whole thing," said Coram, who said she regrets getting the implant and currently relies on the standby treatments: psychotherapy and antidepressants.

"You get desperate when you've been depressed for years," she said. "This sounds benign, like a pacemaker. My crusade is for people to know a lot more about it before they sign up." ·
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains the cost of the device and of the implantation procedure. It also explains that some insurers are reluctant to reimburse for this technology. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Brain surgery for children whose epilepsy is resistant to drug therapy can produce a 10-fold increase in the odds of being seizure-free after one year and can do it without affecting IQ, according to a new Indian study of 116 patients in The New England Journal of Medicine.

Seventy-seven percent of the children were free of seizures at one year after the surgery, compared with seven percent in a control group of youngsters who received medical therapy alone while waiting for surgery. Behavior and quality of life also improved.

But surgery also produced serious adverse effects in one-third of the children, most frequently a weakness on one side of the body, known as hemiparesis. The researchers said that was to be expected and, without surgery, patients probably would have experienced similar problems as a result of their continuing seizures.

“What the study clearly shows is surgery for children produces seizure freedom compared to children not operated on for similar conditions,” senior author Dr. Manjari Tripathi, a professor of neurology and epilepsy at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences in New Delhi, told Reuters Health in a telephone interview.

Not only “does it reassure us that several surgical procedures are effective,” she said, it demonstrates that surgery “should be done as early as possible” once it becomes clear that a child is not responding to two anti-seizure medications.

About 50 million people worldwide suffer with epilepsy and drugs can’t control the seizures in approximately 30 percent of the cases.

“This is the first randomized study to look at surgical outcome in children,” said Dr. Donald Schomer, director of the Comprehensive Epilepsy Program at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. He was not involved in the research.

“The results are impressive,” he told Reuters Health by phone. Adults who undergo surgery often suffer from the collective effect of years of uncontrolled seizures. “The study in kids shows if you reduce the time from the onset of seizures from the 15 to 20 years you see in adults down to four to five years, the outcome is much better. It’s documentation that these techniques really work.”

Although 77 percent were judged by the Tripathi team to be seizure-free at the end of the study, some of those children actually had seizures immediately after surgery. Yet the cases were judged to be a success because the seizures decreased in frequency over time. Ultimately, 37 percent never had a seizure in the year after surgery.

When all seizures were taken into account, children who did not have surgery were four times more likely to have a seizure during that year than youngsters in the surgery group, the researchers calculated.

Success rates ranged from 87 percent to 100 percent depending on the type of surgery used to correct the child’s particular brain abnormality.

Surgery improved quality of life and social well-being, and it didn’t affect IQ, something that can decline with ongoing seizures. But Dr. Schomer said the children were only followed for one year, and “that may be too soon to see a noticeable change” in the intelligence quotient.

Post-surgery weakness was seen in 15 of the 19 patients who had a serious side effect following surgery.

The weakness “is significant,” Dr. Tripathi said. “The child may not be able to ambulate by his- or herself. But with physical therapy, all regain the lower and upper limb function within six months. The only thing that does not improve is the wrist and the fingers. They are left with this minor deficit. But even before surgery, some of them have this weakness.”

Other side effects depended on the area of the brain that was removed or disconnected from the rest of the brain.

In contrast, 16.5 percent of the children waiting for surgery had a serious injury as a result of their continuing seizures.

The surgery “had a transforming effect on how they get along in life,” Dr. Tripathi said. “Many could go back school earlier or go back to being tutored, and get on with their life.”

But a major problem facing these children is getting insurance companies to pay for such surgeries, said Dr. Schomer of Beth Israel.

Rather than pay $35,000 to $50,000 on surgery that might cure the problem and prevent further damage to the child, insurance companies prefer to demand that more drugs be tried, even if the odds of them working in drug-resistant cases is small, he said.

“Studies like this lend credence to the idea that the earlier you do it, the better the outcome,” he said. “I hope insurance companies will look at this and realize that early detection and surgery, if appropriate, will ultimately save them money in the long term.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/2gVClQv The New England Journal of Medicine, online October 25, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article does an outstanding job of noting the cost of surgery, although the article could have been stronger if it had pointed out the estimated costs of drug therapies, hospitalizations and sometimes institutionalization of children and adults who are severely disabled by some forms of seizure disorders.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eylea outperforms Avastin for diabetic macular edema with moderate or worse vision loss

NIH-funded clinical trial shows Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis perform similarly when vision loss is mild.

A two-year clinical trial that compared three drugs for diabetic macular edema (DME) found that gains in vision were greater for participants receiving the drug Eylea (aflibercept) than for those receiving Avastin (bevacizumab), but only among participants starting treatment with 20/50 or worse vision. Gains after two years were about the same for Eylea and Lucentis (ranibizumab), contrary to year-one results from the study, which showed Eylea with a clear advantage. The three drugs yielded similar gains in vision for patients with 20/32 or 20/40 vision at the start of treatment. The clinical trial was conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), which is funded by the National Eye Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health.

“This rigorous trial confirms that Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all effective treatments for diabetic macular edema,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D. “Eye care providers and patients can have confidence in all three drugs.”

Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all widely used to treat DME, a consequence of diabetes that can cause blurring of central vision due to the leakage of fluid from abnormal blood vessels in the retina. The macula is the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The drugs are injected into the eye and work by inhibiting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a substance that can promote abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage. Although the drugs have a similar mode of action, they differ significantly in cost. Based on Medicare allowable charges, the per-injection costs of each drug at the doses used in this study were about $1850 for Eylea, about $60 for Avastin, and about $1200 for Lucentis.

DRCR.net investigators enrolled 660 people with DME at 89 clinical trial sites across the United States. When the study began, participants on average were 61 years old with 17 years of type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Only people with a visual acuity of 20/32 or worse were eligible to participate (to see clearly, a person with 20/32 vision would have to be 20 feet away from an object that a person with normal vision could see clearly at 32 feet). At enrollment, about half the participants had 20/32 to 20/40 vision. The other half had 20/50 or worse vision. In many states, a corrected visual acuity of 20/40 or better in at least one eye is required for a driver’s license that allows both day- and nighttime driving.

Each participant was assigned randomly to receive Eylea (2.0 milligrams/0.05 milliliter), Avastin (1.25 mg/0.05 mL), or Lucentis (0.3 mg/0.05 mL). Participants were evaluated monthly during the first year and every 4-16 weeks during the second year. Most participants received monthly injections during the first six months. Thereafter, participants received additional injections of assigned study drug until DME resolved or stabilized with no further vision improvement. Subsequently, injections were resumed if DME worsened. Additionally, laser treatment was given if DME persisted without continual improvement after six months of injections. Laser treatment alone was the standard treatment for DME until widespread adoption of anti-VEGF drugs a few years ago.

Among participants with 20/40 or better vision at the trial’s start, all three drugs improved vision similarly on an eye chart. On average, participants’ vision improved from 20/40 vision to 20/25.

Among participants with 20/50 or worse vision at the trial’s start, visual acuity on average improved substantially in all three groups. At two years, Eylea participants were able to read about 3.5 additional lines on an eye chart; Lucentis participants were able to read about three additional lines, and Avastin participants improved about 2.5 lines, compared with visual acuity before treatment. Eylea outperformed Avastin at the one- and two-year time points. While Eylea outperformed Lucentis at the one-year time point, by the two-year time point gains in visual acuity were statistically no different. At the end of the trial, average visual acuity was 20/32 to 20/40 among participants in all three groups.

“The results of the DRCR Network’s comparison of Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis will help doctors and their patients with diabetic macular edema choose the most appropriate therapy,” said John A. Wells, M.D., the lead author of the study and a retinal specialist at the Palmetto Retina Center, Columbia, South Carolina. “The study suggests there is little advantage of choosing Eylea or Lucentis over Avastin when a patient’s loss of visual acuity from macular edema is mild, meaning a visual acuity of 20/40 or better. However, patients with 20/50 or worse vision loss may benefit from Eylea, which over the course of the two-year study outperformed Lucentis and Avastin.”

The number of injections participants needed was about the same for all three treatment groups. Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis participants on average required nine injections in the first year of the study and five in the second year.

The need for laser treatment varied among the three treatment groups. By two years, 41 percent of participants in the Eylea group received laser treatment to treat their macular edema, compared with 64 percent of participants in the Avastin group and 52 percent in the Lucentis group.

The risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from a cardiovascular condition or an unknown cause by end of the trial was higher among participants in the Lucentis group. Twelve percent of Lucentis participants had at least one event, compared with five percent of participants in the Eylea group and eight percent of participants in the Avastin group. This difference in cardiovascular rates has not been seen across all other studies, and therefore may be due to chance. Continued assessment of these serious cardiovascular events and their association with these drugs is important in future studies. Cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke are common complications of diabetes. The occurrence of eye complications, such as eye infections and inflammation, was similar for all three drugs.

Results of the study were published online today in Ophthalmology, the journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology. Eylea and Lucentis were provided by drug manufacturers Regeneron and Genentech, respectively. Additional research funding for this study was provided by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, also a part of NIH.

“This important study would not have happened without funding from the National Institutes of Health and the cooperation of two competing companies,” said Adam R. Glassman, M.S., principal investigator of the DRCR.Net Coordinating Center at the Jaeb Center for Health Research.

The DRCR.net is dedicated to facilitating multicenter clinical research of diabetic eye disease. The Network formed in 2002 and comprises more than 350 physicians practicing at more than 140 clinical sites across the country. For more information, visit the DRCR.net website at http://drcrnet.jaeb.org/.

The study was funded by grants EY14231, EY14229, and EY18817.

The study is registered as NCT01627249 at ClinicalTrials.gov.

Macular edema can arise during any stage of diabetic retinopathy and is the most common cause of diabetes-related vision loss. About 7.7 million Americans have diabetic retinopathy. Of these, about 750,000 have DME. The NEI provides information about diabetic eye disease at http://www.nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic. View an NEI video about how diabetic retinopathy can be detected through a comprehensive dilated eye exam at http://youtu.be/sQ-0RkPu35o.

NEI leads the federal government's research on the visual system and eye diseases. NEI supports basic and clinical science programs that result in the development of sight-saving treatments. For more information, visit http://www.nei.nih.gov.

The NIDDK, a component of the NIH, conducts and supports research on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, nutrition and obesity; and kidney, urologic and hematologic diseases. Spanning the full spectrum of medicine and afflicting people of all ages and ethnic groups, these diseases encompass some of the most common, severe and disabling conditions affecting Americans. For more information about the NIDDK and its programs, visit http://www.niddk.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release states that based on Medicare allowable charges, each injection of Eylea costs $1,850, Lucentis is $1,200 per injection and Avastin is $60 per injection. Patients received nine monthly injections, on average. This is good detail, although total costs of all treatments (medication plus laser) would have been even more helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A popular dietary supplement called SAMe may help depressed patients who don’t respond to prescription antidepressant treatment, a new study shows.

SAMe stands for S-adenosyl methionine, a naturally occurring molecule that is widely used in Europe for depression, arthritis and other ailments. It is found throughout the human body, with high concentrations in the liver, adrenal glands and brain.

The latest research, conducted by investigators at Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, is important not only because it suggests another treatment option for patients with depression, but because it also offers news clues into the physical pathways of depression that could ultimately lead to more effective treatments.

“There are many directions in research that this opens up,” said Dr. George I. Papakostas, director of treatment resistant depression studies at Mass General and the study’s lead author. “It provides clues to new treatments, and it provides clues to understanding what causes depression as well as what goes on biochemically when people get better from depression.”

The researchers studied the use of SAMe or a placebo in 73 adults with depression who were not responding to prescription antidepressant treatment. All of the study subjects continued to take the prescription antidepressant, but 39 of them were randomly assigned to receive SAMe for six weeks. The remaining 34 patients received a placebo in addition to their regular prescription treatment.

After six weeks of treatment, 36 percent of the patients taking a combination of SAMe and an antidepressant showed improvement, compared to just 18 percent of those taking the antidepressant and placebo. And about 26 percent of patients in the SAMe group experienced a complete remission of symptoms, compared to just 12 percent in the placebo group, according to a report published in The American Journal of Psychiatry.

The research offers hope to patients who haven’t been helped by traditional antidepressant treatment. Studies suggest that for more than half of depressed patients, antidepressants alone don’t eliminate symptoms. As a result, doctors are looking for additional treatments to help these patients, referred to as “nonresponders.”

Modern antidepressants essentially work by building up concentrations of neurotransmitters, which amplifies their effect on the brain. It’s not clear exactly how SAMe works to curb depression, but researchers have several theories. SAMe may influence the expression of genes involved in depression or alter the function of different receptors and structures that transport neurotransmitters in the brain. The molecule also may be directly involved in the creation of neurotransmitters.

“Most antidepressants we use are acting on neurotransmitters in the brain,” said Dr. J. Craig Nelson, professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, and author of an editorial accompanying the study. “It may be that SAMe is facilitating the synthesis of the neurotransmitters that the drugs then act on. That’s probably the best hypothesis.”

Other studies have suggested that SAMe can relieve symptoms of depression. A 2002 analysis of depression trials conducted by the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality found that SAMe use resulted in clinically meaningful benefits to depressed patients compared to placebo, and that the supplement worked as well as tricyclic antidepressants, a category of prescription drugs.

In his editorial, Dr. Nelson notes that SAMe is typically not covered by insurance companies, and that although the cost is relatively low, it is still more than the drug co-payments required by most health plans. A monthly supply of the same brand of supplement studied would be about $143, the editorial notes.

Dr. Nelson, who was not involved in the Harvard study, said the results need to be replicated in a larger study, and that more information is needed on dosing, side effects and long-term treatment with SAMe, among other things. Dr. Papakostas agrees the study “needs replication” but said he is hopeful about the potential for future research.

“It’s a huge advancement in terms of expanding the types of medications we have to treat depression,” Dr. Papakostas said. “In the last 60 years of depression research, all the treatments have focused on similar mechanisms of action. This is one of the first few studies that suggests a different mechanism. It’s a medication that works differently than everything else.”

The study was funded by a grant from the National Institutes of Mental Health, but the SAMe pills and placebo pills were provided by the dietary supplement maker Pharmavite. Dr. Papkostas, Dr. Nelson and other researchers involved in the study all disclosed several financial relationships with makers of prescription antidepressants.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There’s a nice summary of costs and lack of insurance coverage, citing the editorial.
 However, we were surprised to see in this summary that “the cost is relatively low” when the cited editorial states “SAMe is relatively expensive.” This mistake may have been unintentional, and while it’s the exact opposite conclusion of the one in the source, we are inclined not to dock the article a point because the rest of the summary provides balance about copays and, most importantly, tells its readers the absolute monthly cost of the supplement.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New investigation advises doctors to recommend cranberry products as first line of defense against repeated urinary tract infections (UTIs)

CARVER, Mass., September 19, 2017 - A thorough review of dozens of studies led scientists to conclude that healthcare professionals should be telling their patients to have cranberry products as a first step in reducing recurrent UTIs. The comprehensive meta-analysis and assessment of human clinical trials, published in the official journal of the American Urological Association, The Journal of Urology®, assures practitioners and their patients that cranberry products are a low cost, low risk and effective way to help prevent recurrent UTIs.1

To answer the question, "Can Cranberries Contribute to Reduce the Incidence of Urinary Tract Infections?" a total of 28 studies showing results from nearly 5,000 patients were considered. Authors found a statistically significant risk reduction in repeat UTIs overall, but not significant for any particular subgroup. However, patients with recurrent UTIs who ingested cranberry products and had undergone gynecological surgery, experienced a significant reduction in UTIs.

"Our investigation supports that cranberry products can be a powerful tool to fight off frequent UTIs," explains lead author, Dr. Ângelo Luís. "While recommendations for dosage and duration of treatment require further study, the efficacy of the medicinal properties of cranberry products has been well-established."

The review explains that the medicinal properties of cranberries may be attributed to their unique polyphenol, proanthocyanidins - or PACs, for short. Their ability to keep infection-causing bacteria from sticking to the urinary tract walls may be the major reason for their effectiveness in limiting infection growth and recurrence.

According to the authors, scientists and practitioners continue to explore the use of alternative therapies in the prevention of common infections as part of the global movement to reduce antibiotic use and resistance. It is estimated that one third of women in the United States will get a UTI by the age of 24.2

"Findings like this," adds Dr. Luis, "give practitioners a viable, inexpensive, non-antibiotic option to help patients reduce the recurrence of an uncomfortable and potentially debilitating infection."

"As one of the oldest alternative therapies and U.S.-born berries, independent research such as this not only provides public health benefits, it revitalizes the enthusiasm for cranberry products year-round. The industry appreciates the efforts of these researchers and takes pride in the healthy attributes that cranberry products provide to consumers around the world," comments Terry Humfeld, executive director of the non-profit research and education-focused organization, The Cranberry Institute.

This review was funded by Universidade da Beira Interior and bank Santander/Totta protocol post-doctoral research fellowship BIPD/ICI-FC-BST-UBI 2016 (ÂL).

The Cranberry Institute is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1951 to further the success of cranberry growers and the industry in the Americas through health, agricultural and environmental stewardship research as well as cranberry promotion and education. The Cranberry Institute is funded voluntarily by Supporting Members that handle, process, and sell cranberries. Supporting Members are represented in national and international regulatory matters and research efforts are done on their behalf. For more information about the Cranberry Institute, along with the health benefits of cranberries and current scientific research, visit http://www. .

1. Luis A, Domingues F and Pereira, L. Can cranberries contribute to reduce the incidence of urinary tract infections? A systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of clinical trials. J Urol 2017; 614-21.

2. Foxman B, Barlow R, D'Arcy H, Gillespie B and Sobel JD. Urinary tract infection: self-reported incidence and associated costs. Ann Epidemiol 2000; 10:509-515.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that “cranberry products are low cost,” which is fair enough and is sufficient to earn this a satisfactory rating. The issue of cost is, however, complicated by the fact that the release offers no information on what sort of cranberry products a patient may use. Is one glass of cranberry juice per day sufficient? Does one need to consume the whole berries? Or should patients take over-the-counter cranberry-based supplements? Costs would vary depending on how one chooses to pursue the vague directions discussed in the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The last five years have been exhausting for Andrea Turner. Lights out for the 69-year-old meant sleeping for a couple of hours before being jolted awake in the middle of the night and lying there electrified.

“I was exhausted all the time, from the time I woke to the time I went to bed,” says Turner. “It was like how can I make it through this day because I am so tired? I thought since I'm older so that's what it is.”

It wasn’t until a mother-daughter vacation that Turner’s daughter noticed something interesting when her mother slept. Turner would make little gasping sounds throughout the night. This discovery, and the unrelenting exhaustion, led Turner to Stanford University where she underwent a sleep study. The doctors measured everything from brainwaves to breathing — what they found surprised Turner.

“It was 41 times per hour that I would stop breathing,” says Turner. “And then the doctors looked piece by piece, and realized that what I have is sleep apnea.”

Turner’s nightly interrupted breathing increased her chances of heart attack or stroke by three to four times, according to Dr. Robson Capasso, associate professor of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery at Stanford University.

Roughly 18 million Americans suffer from sleep apnea and as many as 90 percent are undiagnosed, because gasps and choking sounds aren't always so severe they wake someone up. The condition more commonly affects men, as well as people who are overweight, over 40, and have large necks. Women with sleep apnea may suffer poorer heart health than men, according to a recent study.

Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when the soft tissues of the mouth and airway, especially the tongue, block air flow into the lungs. This causes breathing to stop multiple times throughout the night, and oxygen levels in the body to fall —which was happening to Turner. The drop in oxygen while sleeping is a significant risk factor for cardiovascular disease, say experts.

After being diagnosed, Turner tried an external continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine, which proved too cumbersome for her continued use. What's more, a recent study in the New England Journal of Medicine found that the bulky CPAP machines — standard treatment for many patients with sleep apnea — doesn't help prevent heart attacks or stroke, although it does help patients sleep better and improve mood.

Instead, Turner underwent a relatively new procedure: implanting a pacemaker-like device called Inspire for obstructive sleep apnea. Approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2014, the device is a remote-controlled chest implant plus two thin wires that runs under the skin monitoring a patient’s breath, delivering a mild electric current at night.

A clinical trial of Inspire therapy found a 78 percent reduction in the number of sleep apnea events per hour for patients.

“This is definitely an interesting solution for a good number of people,” said Capasso.

Inspire is an invasive procedure, so it is not recommended as a first-line treatment and not everyone is a candidate.

The price tag for the Inspire device is $20,000, with surgery costing extra. Insurance companies are reviewing requests on a case-by-case basis.
• should be over the age of 22
• have a diagnosis of moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea
• be unable to use or get consistent benefit from CPAP

Dr. Sanjeev Kothare, professor of neurology at NYU Langone Medical Center, cautions about using Inspire unless sleep apnea patients meet the requirements for the procedure. For Kothare, the out-of-pocket expense for the device, the risks of surgery, plus the potential for the mechanism —which moves the tongue forward — to break, doesn’t make it a viable option for everyone.

The main side effect from the device is that people can wake up with a sore tongue. But for Turner that’s a small price to pay for a goodnight’s sleep.

“Before, I'd be awake constantly, but when I sleep now, I am asleep. I'm not waking up.”

Signs of sleep apnea, according to the National, Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, include:
• Dry mouth or sore throat when you wake up
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We learn: “The price tag for the Inspire device is $20,000, with surgery costing extra. Insurance companies are reviewing requests on a case-by-case basis.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 4, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- People suffering from restless legs syndrome may find some relief by taking one of several drugs approved to treat the condition, a new review confirms.

The medications, which include Requip (ropinirole), levodopa, Neurontin (gabapentin) and Lyrica (pregabalin), appear to reduce symptoms of the syndrome in more than 60 percent of patients, researchers report. The first two drugs raise dopamine levels in the body, and the last two drugs reduce the amount of calcium reaching brain cells and trigger the production of other chemicals that help reduce pain. Dopamine is a brain chemical that regulates movement and mood.

"Physicians and patients now have better information on the effectiveness and harms of two types of drug treatments for patients with at least moderately severe restless legs symptoms in which to guide treatment choices," said review author Dr. Timothy Wilt, core investigator at the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Restless legs syndrome causes a person to feel a powerful urge to move his or her legs. The legs become uncomfortable when lying down or sitting, and the condition can disrupt sleep and take a toll on the quality of life, the researchers said.

One expert, Dr. Martin Niethammer, a neurologist at the Movement Disorders Center of North Shore-LIJ's Cushing Neuroscience Institute in Manhasset, N.Y., said this study is merely a review of the current treatments for restless legs syndrome.

"There is nothing new here at all," he said. "It doesn't add anything to the field."

This is just a compilation of evidence that follows guidelines that have been long established in both Europe and the United States, Niethammer said.

"These are the only treatments approved by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," he added.

The report was published in the March 4 online issue of JAMA Internal Medicine.

For the analysis, Wilt's team reviewed 29 clinical trials. The researchers found that 61 percent of those taking dopamine agonists showed at least a 50 percent improvement in their symptoms, compared with 41 percent of those taking an inactive placebo.

In addition, those taking dopamine agonists slept better and scored higher on measures of quality of life. Dopamine agonists were originally developed to treat Parkinson's disease.

Side effects of dopamine agonists can include euphoria, hallucinations, weight loss, nausea, insomnia, tiredness or weakness, dizziness and drowsiness.

There are generic versions of Requip that cost far less, running between $11 and $22 a month. Insurance covers the treatment in most cases, so actual out-of-pocket costs will vary by insurance plan. The same is true for levodopa, Wilt said.

Neurontin and Lyrica also helped relieve symptoms in 61 percent of patients, compared with 37 percent of those taking a placebo, the researchers found.

The most common side effects of these drugs include fatigue, swelling in the legs, dizziness and weight gain.

Without insurance, Lyrica costs can run more than $100 a month, but again co-pays will vary by plan, Wilt said. The same is true for Neurontin, which can cost $117 to $135 a month without insurance.

Wilt noted there is no information on the effectiveness of treatments in pregnant women, young or old patients, those with milder symptoms or those with other serious medical conditions. "We urge caution in extending our conclusions to these individuals," he noted.

"Treatments for restless legs syndrome is now frequently advertised direct-to-consumer, and thus while this may enhance awareness it may result in patients seeking treatment for milder or other conditions not well-studied," he explained.

The harms of medications may outweigh benefits for these individuals, Wilt said. "Up to 25 to 50 percent with even moderate to severe and longstanding symptoms stop taking these medications after more than a year due to either side effects or lack of benefit," he noted.

Nonetheless, for people with moderate to severe restless legs syndrome symptoms, these medications provided important benefits, at least in the short term, Wilt said.

Patients should tell their doctors if they have bothersome sensations in their legs that include distressing, irresistible urge to move them that is relieved by rest, Wilt said.

"This may be due to restless legs syndrome or other conditions. An accurate diagnosis is important. Effective treatments for restless legs syndrome are available, and in patients with more severe symptoms may include medications," he said.

For more on restless legs syndrome, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provides monthly cost information for the drugs discussed, and notes that out of pocket expenses will vary depending upon insurance coverage. One note is that neurontin is available generically and is less costly than the brand name described.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are lung cancer scans really ready for prime time?

News that annual CT lung scans can reduce the risk of lung cancer death among former and current heavy smokers was celebrated by national heath officials this month. A major government study found the screening scans saved the life of one person for every 300 current or former smokers who were scanned.

But now cancer and screening experts are worried that the limited findings will be used by private screening centers to promote the test to a broader group than was studied. That, in turn, could lead to thousands of unnecessary lung scans, causing excess radiation exposure and unnecessary biopsies and surgery.

Dr. Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, said he was stunned to hear a radio advertisement for an Atlanta screening center cite the study just a few days after the government had announced the results. The wording of the ad seemed to be aimed at a broad group, ranging from heavy smokers to women who had never smoked, Dr. Brawley said.

“We really need to weigh the harms associated with screening,” he said. “The scientific community still needs to digest this. To take a trial that involves people at high risk for lung cancer and to extrapolate it and say it’s good for people with intermediate or low risk is not appropriate.”

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, focused on a specific high-risk group: 53,000 current and former heavy smokers, aged 55 to 74, who had smoked for at least 30 pack-years. That means someone who smoked one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years or three packs a day for at least 10 years would qualify for the study.

Former smokers who had accumulated 30 pack-years were included only if they had stopped smoking within the previous 15 years.

The smokers and former smokers were given either annual CT lung scans or chest X-rays. Compared with conventional X-rays, the CT, or computed tomography, scans create a detailed three-dimensional image of the lungs. The study was stopped when it was found that the scanning group had a 20 percent lower risk of dying from lung cancer than those being screened with X-rays.

But the early results also showed a downside of scanning: one of every four lung scans showed an abnormality, which often led to additional worry, radiation exposure from follow-up scans and, sometimes, lung biopsies and even risky surgery. But because the study was stopped early, a full analysis of the harms caused by screening scans is still months away.

Reading the scans is tricky because harmless nodules can be misinterpreted as suspect lesions. In the study, even experienced radiologists at major cancer centers had a high rate of false positives, suggesting that the rate would be even higher in the real world.

“There is a learning curve to reading spiral CTs,” Dr. Brawley said. “I’m concerned that some radiologists might be early in that learning curve and some patients may be harmed because of it.”

While the study found a benefit to scanning a specific group of high-risk smokers, that doesn’t mean other groups will get the same benefit, says Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. In lower-risk groups, for instance, it’s likely that thousands of people would need to be exposed to the risks of screening before a single life was saved. And it’s possible that many of those scanned unnecessarily could be seriously harmed.

“The aggregate harms to all the people’s lives who are not saved have to be taken into account,” Dr. Bach said. “Even in these highly controlled settings, about 1 percent of the people had surgery or a part of their lung removed for something they thought was cancer and it wasn’t.”

Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms.

For now, most consumers who want a scan will have to pay for it themselves, although it is expected that insurance companies eventually will approve scanning for those in high-risk groups. (Medicare officials have indicated that they will soon reconsider paying for the screening tests.) The government has estimated the cost at about $300 a scan, but some centers may charge $1,000 or more.

The day the government announced the study results, Westside Medical Imaging of Beverly Hills, Calif., issued a press release saying that the study “should once and for all settle the controversy” about whether CT lung scans save lives.

In the release, Dr. Norman E. Lepor said the scans were an “indispensable” part of annual exams for patients who have smoked for 10 years.

In an interview, Dr. Lepor said that he only offers lung scans to those at high risk, and that he turns people away who are at low risk but want the scan anyway because “they just want to know.”

Dr. Lepor said it would be “imprudent” not to incorporate the latest study data into his practice right away.

“There are people who, with good conscience and their take of the data, say it’s not ready for prime time, and there are people who look at the same data and they come to other conclusions,” Dr. Lepor said. “This is not the first study that has supported screening. We know from our own anecdotes that we have saved a lot of lives.”

Dr. Lepor said that he had just met a woman who had smoked for 50 years and was concerned about her risk. “She’s the poster person for this test,” he said.

Dr. Brawley said he’s worried that the few early press releases and radio advertisements are just the beginning of widespread promotion of screening lung scans.

“It was sort of ominous to be working Sunday evening in my home office and this thing comes on the radio,” he said. “A lot of people run out when there is a new announcement and get the new test. We’re very frightened some people are going to be harmed because of this.”

A version of this article appeared in print on Nov. 16, 2010, on page D5 of the New York edition of The Times.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good job on this.  The story stated:
 However, it could have also included at least a line about the costs of following testing and possible treatment of false positives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A one-time treatment with Luxturna, the first US Food and Drug Administration-approved gene therapy for an inherited disorder, will cost $425,000 per eye.

Spark Therapeutics Inc., the Philadelphia-based maker of voretigene neparvovec, announced Wednesday in a statement that it reached an agreement in principle with Harvard Pilgrim and affiliates of Express Scripts to make the one-time treatment available to patients with a rare genetic defect that often leads to blindness.

The mutation affects both eyes, usually at the same pace, so most patients would need treatment for both eyes, a Spark Therapeutics spokeswoman said.

In some cases, the gene therapy will be available under an "outcomes-based rebate arrangement." The company also stated that its proposal to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the government program that covers about 100 million Americans, would allow installment payments for the drug.

"For a one-time therapy, like Luxturna, a non-traditional payment and distribution model is necessary to ensure needs of all parties -- patients, payers and providers -- are addressed," said Jennifer Luddy, a spokeswoman for Express Scripts.

At least one patient advocate disagrees.

"The new payment models announced today are merely a way to disguise a price that is simply too high," David Mitchell, president and founder of Patients For Affordable Drugs, said in a statement . "Spark Therapeutics is charging as much for Luxturna as they think they can get away with."

One-time-only treatments for rare genetic disorders are still unique, he noted.

The drug is intended for patients with retinal dystrophy due to a mutation of the RPE65 gene. This rare genetic defect causes severe visual impairment beginning in infancy and can eventually lead to blindness. The company believes the total "population in the US, Europe and select additional markets in the Americas and Asia/Pacific is up to approximately 6,000 individuals" who have the mutation targeted by Luxturna, explained Monique da Silva, a spokeswoman for Spark Therapeutics.

The drug will be available in the United States in early spring, with an estimated 1,000 to 2,000 people in the US standing to benefit from this treatment, according to Spark.

Luxturna is only the third gene therapy approved for use in the United States; two others were also approved in 2017. This is the first to correct an inherited genetic mutation.

Luxturna is a liquid that is injected directly into the eye with a microscopic needle during a surgical procedure. The drug supplies a third gene -- a normal RPE65 gene -- to cells in the retina, a layer of tissue lining the back of the eye. This third version of the gene does not remove or replace the two mutated genes causing the disease, which remain inside the cells. However, the normal gene delivered by the treatment is able to function within the retinal cells and correct vision problems.

In the phase 3 clinical trial, 27 out of 29 participants -- 93% -- who received the gene therapy demonstrated a gain in functional vision as assessed by a mobility test performed in a maze, according to the company. Risks of the treatment include cataracts, elevated eye pressure, retinal tears and holes and inflammation.

The company's offer of unusual payer models, including rebates and installment payments, will "help ensure patients' individual financial situation does not hinder access to treatment," da Silva said.

"New technologies such as gene and cell therapies hold out the potential to transform medicine," FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb said in a statement announcing the August approval of Kymriah, considered to be the first gene therapy to be approved for the US market.

Kymriah is a leukemia treatment made by pharmaceutical giant Novartis. Similar to Luxturna, Kymriah is a one-time treatment, and its price tag is $475,000. However, Novartis said this price will not be charged to patients who do not respond within a month of treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The price tag of this new treatment is the focus of this article. The story also discusses the models of treatment proposed by the manufacturer.  Well done.
Two things, though: It wasn’t clear from the story if the patients in the trial had both eyes treated, which would make the more accurate price tag $850,000 vs the talking point of “$425,000 per eye.”
And does this cost include everything–surgical care costs (operating room, anesthesia, etc), physician payments, and lab costs?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a limited trial, 16 overweight young adults taking various doses of green coffee bean extract lost an average of 17.5 pounds and 16% in body fat in 22 weeks. But questions remain, experts say.

But as a dietary supplement, green coffee extract does not require the FDA's blessing. In fact, it is already available as a naturopathic medicine and antioxidant.

If green coffee extract were a medication seeking approval from the Food and Drug Administration, these results would make it a viable candidate — more than 35% of subjects lost more than 5% of their body weight, and weight loss appeared to be greater while subjects were taking the pills than when they were on the placebo.

In a study presented Tuesday at the American Chemical Society's spring national meeting in San Diego, 16 overweight young adults took, by turns, a low dose of green coffee bean extract, a high dose of the supplement, and a placebo. Though the study was small, the results were striking: Subjects lost an average of 17.5 pounds in 22 weeks and reduced their overall body weight by 10.5%.

When roasted at 475 degrees, coffee beans are sometimes described as rich and full-bodied. But for the full-bodied person who is not so rich, unroasted coffee beans — green as the day they were picked — may hold the key to cheap and effective weight loss, new research suggests.

Joe Vinson, the University of Scranton chemist who conducted the pilot study, said the findings should pave the way for more rigorous research on coffee bean extract's effects. A larger trial involving 60 people is being planned.

Vinson, whose research focuses on plant polyphenols and their effects on human health, said it appears that green coffee bean extract may work by reducing the absorption of fat and glucose in the gut; it may also reduce insulin levels, which would improve metabolic function. There were no signs of ill effects on any subjects, Vinson reported Tuesday.

The study used a "cross-over" design, which allowed each subject to serve as his or her own comparison group. For six weeks, volunteers swallowed capsules three times a day, ingesting either 700 or 1,050 milligrams of green coffee extract a day or taking a placebo. After a two-week break, they moved, round-robin style, to another arm of the trial.

Subjects did not change their calorie intake over the course of the trial. But the more extract they consumed, the more weight and fat they lost. Altogether, they reduced their body fat by 16%, on average.

Of the 16 volunteers, six wound up with a body mass index in the healthful range.

One downside is that the extract is "extremely bitter." It would be difficult to take without a lot of water, Vinson reported.

At roughly $20 per month, however, green coffee extract is much less expensive than any of the weight-loss medications available over the counter or by prescription.

The trial was conducted in India and paid for by Applied Food Sciences Inc. of Austin, Tex., a manufacturer of green coffee bean extract.

The pilot study drew strong cautions from several scientists who weren't involved in the research.

"This is certainly a provocative study," said Dr. Gerald Weissmann, a physician and biochemist at New York University. But he said nutrition experts would want assurances that green coffee beans do not cause "malabsorption" within the human gut — a condition that would lead to weight loss as well as malnutrition, heart arrhythmias and other problems because vitamins and minerals are not passing through the intestine.

Dr. Arthur Grollman, a pharmacologist at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, said coffee beans contain about 250 different chemicals — some with positive and others with negative effects on human health. Though Vinson identified polyphenols and chlorogenic acid as the agents that appear to promote weight loss, Grollman said that claim needed further study. In the meantime, he said, consuming an extract that contains both good and bad chemicals in dense concentration seems an unwise thing to do.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that green coffee extract is available at roughly $20 per month.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Step inside the lounge at Evolved Science and you’ll find a cocktail menu unlike any you’ve ever seen.

The ritzy Manhattan medical office — which says it serves high-powered clients and celebrities — shakes and stirs up tailored IV infusions using a slurry of vitamins and amino acids. There’s a Jet Lag Eraser, for use after hopping off a long international flight, a Detoxification saline smoothie for “improving alertness and mental acuity,” and a Late Night Rescue cocktail to undo the effects of too many actual cocktails the night before.

The company claims liquid vitamins, minerals, and amino acids delivered straight to the bloodstream can protect users from getting a cold, boost athletic performance, “annihilate toxins,” and stave off headaches. “We put together the ideal combination for them to obtain the results they want: clearer skin, clearer mind, better hair, better nails,” said Dr. Erika Schwartz, who runs the clinic.

And though the IV lends a medical air to the procedure, the infusions suffer from the same problem as many supplements taken orally — there isn’t any robust evidence to back up their health claims.

“Supplements don’t fix anything and they don’t prevent anything. It’s simple,” said Dr. Pete Miller, a clinician and nutrition researcher at Johns Hopkins.

Vitamin IV infusions aren’t anything new. Celebrities from Simon Cowell and Rihanna to the Real Housewives have proclaimed their love for vitamin drips. They’re part of a huge — and wildly popular — supplement industry which goes largely unregulated. Supplement makers aren’t allowed to claim that their products can cure or treat a particular condition, but they are allowed to make sweeping claims that the products promote health.

The infusion treatments can be traced back to an intravenous supplement known as the Myers’ cocktail, a slurry of magnesium, calcium, B vitamins, and other products developed decades ago by a Baltimore physician. There is a published review on the use of Myers’ cocktail — but it’s just a collection of anecdotal evidence. The author, Dr. Alan Gaby, has long promoted the use of intravenous vitamins for a wide range of clinical conditions.

The research on injectable vitamins of any kind is thin and the results unimpressive. One study looked at injectable vitamins to treat asthma, but there was no placebo group to compare outcomes against. Two studies have examined intravenous vitamin use in fibromyalgia patients. One didn’t turn up any significant improvement in patients who received the infusions. The other — which was also missing a placebo group — involved just seven patients and showed only short-term improvement in symptoms.

Schwartz, though, said the supplements are completely safe.

“We’re doing it in a sterile environment, it’s administered by a nurse, and everything is sterile,” she said. “The only difference is it’s kind of a beautiful environment.”

Customers at Evolved Science shell out anywhere from $325 to $875 for an infusion. For first-time clients, Schwartz recommends weekly injections for the first month or so, and then a routine infusion once a month. Patients kick back in cream-colored chairs together while they’re hooked up to IVs in the “infusion lounge.”

“It doesn’t look like a doctor’s office. It’s very relaxed, not like a spa. But like a private club. It’s a SoHo house kind of thing,” said Schwartz, a former trauma surgeon.

But as for whether they’ll help a client prepare for an important presentation?

“There is not not substantial evidence that vitamin supplements have a large impact on cognitive function,” said Dr. Francine Grodstein, a public health researcher at Harvard who has studied the subject. A longitudinal study would be needed to back those claims with evidence, she added.

Still, the trend seems to be going strong. The I.V. Doc — an in-home vitamin infusion service — offers on-demand nutrient drips in places including Boston, Los Angeles, Chicago, and the Hamptons. In Las Vegas, hangover buses deliver pick-me-up infusions on the go.

And despite a lack of sound evidence, experts expect consumers to keep coming back for infusions.

“What drives the market is not the science,” said Miller. “In spite of that lack of evidence, there’s still a market for it.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provides the retail price for the supplements described in the story.  (Between $325 and $875 for an infusion.) That’s great, but it would have been even better to know the mark-up. How much the ingredients cost vs. how much is charged to the patient? And does insurance cover this, ever?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers trying to find a way to treat multiple sclerosis think they’ve come up with an approach that could not only help patients with MS, but those with a range of so-called autoimmune diseases, from type-1 diabetes to psoriasis, and perhaps even food allergies.

So far it’s only worked in mice, but it has worked especially well. And while mice are different from humans in many ways, their immune systems are quite similar.

“If this works, it is going to be absolutely fantastic,” said Bill Heetderks, who directs outside research at the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, part of the National Institutes of Health, which helped pay for the research. “Even if it doesn’t work, it’s going to be another step down the road.”

In autoimmune disease, the body’s immune cells mistakenly attack and destroy healthy tissue. In MS, it’s the fatty protective sheath around the nerves; in type-1 or juvenile diabetes it’s cells in the pancreas that make insulin; in rheumatoid arthritis it’s tissue in the joint.

Currently, the main treatment is to suppress the immune system, an approach that can leave patients vulnerable to infections and cancer. The new treatment re-educates the immune cells so they stop the attacks.

The approach uses tiny little balls called nanoparticles made of the same material used to make surgical sutures that dissolve harmlessly in the body. They’re attached to little bits of the protein that the immune cells are attacking, the researchers report in Sunday’s issue of the journal Nature Biotechnology.

Stephen Miller of the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago had been trying a slightly different approach to treating MS. When normal cells die naturally through a self-destruction process called apoptosis, immune cells called macrophages come in and eat up the mess.

The macrophages are carried to the spleen where they show these ground-up bits of cells to other immune cells called T-cells. It’s a kind of introduction that familiarizes the T-cells with the body’s normal cells. Then T-cells know not to attack healthy cells.

Miller’s team had been trying to find ways to use this process to re-educate the T-cells. They have been attaching bits of the myelin that T-cells mistakenly attack to healthy cells from MS patients that were self-destructing, then infusing the concoction back into MS patients.

The idea would be to “introduce” the myelin to the T-cells at the same time they were “meeting” the healthy tissue, and educate them to leave the myelin alone.

So far the team has only shown the process is safe – a phase 1 clinical trial. But Miller says the experiment also seemed to show they were beginning to repair the patients’ immune systems. However, it was hideously expensive. “It cost probably about a million dollars to treat 10 patients using live cells,” he said.

Obviously, the researchers needed something cheaper. Miller got together with Lonnie Shea, a professor of chemical and biological engineering at Northwestern. They substituted cheap little balls of plastic called polystyrene nanoparticles for the self-destructing cells.

These new nanoparticles stopped the course of a MS-like disease in mice, the researchers found. But polystyrene is no good to use in people. It doesn’t break down and contains a compound, styrene, that may cause cancer.

Shea had another possibility, called poly(lactide-co-glycolide) or PLG for short. “It turns out this is an FDA approved substance that is used in resorbable sutures,” said Miller.

“There is nothing rare or exotic or strange here,” said NIBIB’s Heetderks. The particles are easy to produce, he said.

This worked just as well in mice. It only takes an hour in a chemical bath to attach little bits of myelin to the nanoparticles of PLG. When infused into a vein, they’re carried by the blood right to the spleen, where the nanoparticles “meet” the T-cells.

If the treatment was done as soon as the mice had their first MS-like attack, the attacks stopped. The effects lasted for the entire lives of the mice, Miller said.

What’s great about the approach, Miller says, is that it can be used to treat any autoimmune disease. For diabetes, little bits of pancreatic beta cells could be attached to the nanoparticles. For a food allergy, the part of the food that causes the allergic response could be attached. “You can try to induce tolerance to peanuts or eggs or shellfish or whatever you are allergic to,” he said.

One shortcoming is that scientists don’t always know what’s causing an autoimmune disease. “We know that in rheumatoid arthritis, your joints get attacked, but what we don’t know really well is what specific protein in your joints is being attacked. We really need to know that before we can apply this therapy,” Miller said.

Now the researchers are looking for funding so they can test this new approach in people. They’re in discussions with the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation to test it in people with type-1 diabetes, and the Myelin Repair Foundation to test it in MS patients, Miller said. They may form their own company to develop it as a medical treatment, something that would be years away.

Mice don’t live very long, and it’s not clear if human patients would need repeat treatments. But the T-cells that are re-educated usually live for a long time in the body, and have long memories, Miller said.

It’s also clear the approach would not repair any damage already done by the disease, so the best candidates would be patients having their very first symptoms. But it might be possible down the road to combine the nanoparticle treatment with another treatment to replace the damaged tissue in more advanced patients, Miller said.

New drug may help MS
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes a researcher saying that one stage of the research…”was hideously expensive.” … “It cost probably about a million dollars to treat 10 patients using live cells,” he said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
They are part of a new wave of smart implantable devices that is transforming the care of people with heart disease and creating a bonanza for researchers. The hope is that the devices, now being tested in clinical trials, will save lives, reduce medical expenses and nudge heart patients toward managing their symptoms much the way people with diabetes manage theirs. Patients, who often are frail or live far from their doctors, can be spared frequent office visits. Doctors can learn immediately if devices are malfunctioning or if patients’ hearts are starting to fail.

“It’s like having an office visit every day and a complete physical every week,” said Dr. Leslie Saxon, a cardiologist at the University of Southern California.

The big leap forward came a few years ago when device companies figured out how to make transmitters that send data over a broader range, 20 or 30 feet. That meant that, with her device, Mrs. Elzo did not have to wait till her doctor could put a receiver directly on her chest. Instead, she simply went near a small box, which is attached to a phone jack near her bed. Once a week, she also measures her weight and blood pressure — key indicators of heart failure — and that information is automatically transmitted to her doctor. If there are problems, the machine alerts her doctor.

“Now, every single day the device is being queried,” said her doctor, James Coman of the Heart Rhythm Institute in Tulsa. “It’s just a phenomenal tool.”

There is a downside, though: “Information overload is a very serious problem” for the doctors, said Dr. Lynne Warner Stevenson, director of the Heart Failure Program at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and a professor at Harvard Medical School, who counts herself as a proponent of smart devices. More information, she warned, is not always beneficial.

The devices transmit useful data along with data whose significance is not clear, like variations in heart rate. Large swings in heart rate can indicate risk, but it is not clear what to do about them.

Even more confusing are changes in thoracic impedance, a measurement of resistance to electric current through the lung. Impedance changes can predict future heart crises, but more often have no clinical explanation. Yet when doctors get data on impedance changes, they often feel uneasy and call patients to see how they are, making patients uneasy in turn, Dr. Stevenson said.

Dr. Stevenson likened such information to the game of “Jeopardy!” — doctors are given answers in search of a question. It’s a challenge even for the nation’s 1,000 heart failure specialists. But it can be even harder for primary care doctors, who have less expertise in heart failure yet care for most of the six million patients in the country with the condition.

Dr. Richard Page, president of the Heart Rhythm Society, said doctors wonder if they can be held liable if they do not look at all the data. Still, he said, the new technology “is potentially transformative.”

For researchers the information deluge leads to a different problem: how to analyze the data. A large clinical trial of a cardiac device used to involve 1,000, maybe 2,000 patients. Now, Boston Scientific, a maker of one of the smart heart devices, is following 400,000 patients.

“No one has ever done research like this before,” said Dr. Saxon, who leads an independent team of academic scientists overseeing Boston Scientific research. The company has no editorial control over the papers the scientists write, Dr. Saxon said.

Boston Scientific gets data from patients’ defibrillators. It also gets information on deaths from Medicare.

The data are stripped of patient identifiers and analyzed, a task requiring the company to become more like a Google or a Microsoft, handling enormous amounts of information. There are, for example, more than four million recordings of weights and blood pressures and over 60,000 instances when the defibrillators went off, shocking a patient’s heart.

So far, Dr. Saxon’s group has reported on the first 90,000 patients. Half of them had not been enrolled for remote monitoring and served as a control group.

Patients whose doctors looked at the data survived 5 to 15 percent longer than patients in earlier clinical trials of the devices, Dr. Saxon reported. And, in a paper under review, the group reports that their three-year survival was significantly greater than that of patients in the study whose doctors did not see the data.

Other researchers will be analyzing economic data. The devices can cost as much as $30,000. Do patients with defibrillators make up for some of that expense with fewer hospitalizations or doctor visits?

A study using a similar device, made by Medtronic, suggests that is the case. The Medtronic study, directed by Dr. George Crossley, president of St Thomas Heart at Baptist Hospital in Nashville, involved 2,000 patients randomly assigned to receive a defibrillator that transmitted data or a device that did not transmit. Those with the nontransmitting device were seen in their doctor’s offices every few months, the standard of care.

Patients whose devices transmitted spent less time, on average, in the hospital when they were admitted — 3.3 days compared with 4 days — and their hospital costs were $1,600 less per admission.

“The plausible reason, we think, is that we got to these people much sooner in the course of their illness,” Dr. Crossley said. “We think we did not let the people in the remote sensing group get into heart failure.”

Still, the information overload problem looms. One solution, being tested by St. Jude Medical, a medical device company in St. Paul, is to let patients deal with important data.

The idea, said Dr. Neal Eigler, a senior vice president at St. Jude, is to get heart patients to adjust their medications regularly based on readings of their heart’s functioning, just as patients with diabetes adjust their insulin based on blood glucose readings.

Patients hold a small device over their chest twice a day, and if they experience symptoms like shortness of breath. It transmits readings of blood pressure in the left atrium — the upper left chamber of the heart. If pressure in that chamber gets too high, the lungs can fill with fluid.

Doctors preprogram the hand-held device to provide instructions to patients in response to their left atrial pressure measurements, telling them, for example, to take a different dose of a medication, restrict fluid intake, increase their activity level or call the clinic.

If successful, the smart device could have a big effect. One million patients a year are hospitalized for heart failure. Ninety percent of the time it is because fluid has accumulated in their lungs.

Dr. Stevenson, who has no connection with St. Jude, is intrigued. Patients can see what is happening to their own bodies and act accordingly. They have to strictly limit salt in their diet, for example, and seeing their left atrial pressure might be motivating.

“A patient might say, ‘Maybe my pressure is higher because that pizza I had for dinner last night had a lot of salt,’ ” Dr. Stevenson said.

As a more positive incentive, the device can also instruct patients to decrease their medications if they are doing well.

St. Jude recently completed a small study of 40 patients and is starting a large clinical trial. In the pilot study, the device reduced the frequency of high atrial pressure readings by two-thirds and the number of hospitalizations by 80 percent over five months.

Meanwhile, patients whose doctors can deal with the data stream from smart devices say they are getting peace of mind.

They include people like Danielle Denlein, who, to her total shock, developed a serious heart problem.On October 20, 2008, at 1:50 p.m., Ms. Denlein was driving to a drug store to buy formula for her 5-day-old baby girl. Suddenly, she felt a pain in her chest. She thought it was heartburn. Then it began radiating down her arm.

“I just knew — I don’t know how I knew, but I knew — I was having a heart attack,” she said.

Although she was only 35, her main coronary artery had ripped open, a rare complication associated with pregnancy.

Ms. Denlein now relies on her smart defibrillator to save her from her injured heart, and to alert her doctor, Dr. Saxon, to problems if they occur.

“It’s life changing,” Ms. Denlein said. “It gives me such a feeling of comfort.”

Mrs. Elzo feels the same way.

Had her device not alerted her doctor that it needed to be replaced, she said, “I shudder to think what would have happened.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  Mixed bag. The story explained that the devices "can cost as much as $30,000."  And there was one data point from one study on one device that users’ hospital costs were $1,600 less per admission.  But the device costs are variable and device performance will be variable.  We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt but it painted the cost picture with really broad strokes. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dressed in street clothes, Tara Cassidy Driscoll lies face-down on an examining table at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Orthopedic surgeon George Theodore is about to blast her foot with powerful shock waves generated by sound.

After numbing her foot with Novocain, Theodore turns on an expensive German-made machine that beams tightly focused sound energy at Cassidy Driscoll's heel, near the point where her painful plantar fascia attaches to the heel bone. Suddenly the room is filled with the rhythmic click-click-click of a metronome.

It's a kind of paradox: Theodore is damaging her foot in order to heal it.

"The shocks are like a little baseball bat hitting the tissue," Theodore says. "It's producing a little bit of a repair process -- a little microbleeding."

The healing process takes place over several months after the shock-wave therapy, which Theodore does in a single treatment. [Other centers use lower-energy shock waves over several treatments.]

Theodore has been doing the shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis for about eight years, after longer experiences in Europe. It's the same technology used since the 1980s to blast kidney stones, an application called lithotripsy, but for foot problems doctors use less intense shock waves.

Shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis is beginning to catch on around the U.S., partly since this stubborn type of foot pain is so common -- and so difficult to treat. Nearly 2 million Americans seek care for plantar fasciitis (pronounced PLAN-tar FASH-ee-EYE-tus) every year.

Theodore tells Cassidy Driscoll that shock-wave therapy gives her a 60 to 80 percent chance of reducing her pain by half; about one-quarter of patients will become pain-free from the treatment.

After the 20-minute treatment, Cassidy Driscoll says she felt no pain, only a sort of tapping. She gets off the table, walks out of Theodore's office and drives herself home. Two days later, she says her foot felt bruised, but she didn't have enough pain to require medication.

Cassidy Driscoll will pay $1,000 for the treatment. Elsewhere the charge can range from $500 to several thousand dollars. But most insurers won't pay for it, because they consider it experimental.

Studies have given conflicting results, partly because there's no standardized way of doing shock-wave therapy. Different doctors use different sources of energy, different doses and a differing number of treatments.

"Is it rock-solid science that everyone agrees on? I would say no," says Dr. Naven Duggal, another Harvard orthopedic surgeon at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

Duggal is not impressed with reported success rates.

"Sixty to 80 percent [success] for something that somebody's not going to get guaranteed pain relief -- in my mind, it's not something I would go for," Duggal says.

Duggal says foot specialists don't really know what causes the pain of plantar fasciitis.

The plantar fascia is a tough, rubber-band-like structure on the bottom of the foot.

It has to be strong, because every time the foot strikes the ground, the plantar fascia bears the body's full weight. In high-impact activities like running, the forces even exceed the actual weight because it's so concentrated in a narrow spot where the fascia attaches to the heel bone. That's presumably why sufferers of plantar fasciitis feel the pain in the heel.

Concepts of what plantar fasciitis is have changed in recent years. Doctors used to think it occurred because the fascia became inflamed –- in fact, the suffix "-itis" denotes inflammation. But while inflammation can be involved in plantar fasciitis, it doesn't seem to be the cause, Duggal says.

Many think that plantar fasciitis is caused by heel spurs, bony hook-like growths that develop on many people's heels due to stress. But specialists don't think that anymore.

As ideas of what plantar fasciitis is change, so have treatments. Doctors don't do surgery for it anymore except in rare cases, largely because they've found surgery often makes people worse off.

"Patients have to be patient," Duggal says. "They have to understand that this condition unfortunately is not fully understood."

He's interested in another experimental treatment that's just entering clinical trials. It's called platelet-rich plasma, and it involves isolating blood cells called platelets from patients' own blood and injecting them into the plantar fascia. Though platelets are best known for their role in initiating blood clots, they also contain growth factors. So the hope is that platelet injections will stimulate healing without the damaging effects of shock-wave therapy. But it will be some years before that approach is proven -- or not.

Meanwhile, foot specialists and their patients are left with a smattering of low-tech treatments that they say all plantar fasciitis patients should try, whether or not they eventually go on to shock-wave therapy.

-- Icing the bottom of the foot, sometimes using ice to massage the heel area

-- Using cups made of gel in shoes to cushion the heel (and many orthopedic surgeons say expensive custom-made orthotics are not necessary)

-- Wearing a night splint, a simple brace that holds the foot in a flexed position to keep the plantar fascia stretched during sleep

-- Physical therapy, though some studies indicate that some PT practices such as ultrasound and whirlpool are not helpful

-- Use of NSAID (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory) drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen

-- Corticosteroid injections into the heel, though this is controversial and should not be used repeatedly

-- Backing off activities like running until the pain goes away, and then reinitiating them gradually

About 90 percent of sufferers will get better with time. Duggal says he advises patients to try a combination of these measures for at least a year.

Karen Firestone, a 54-year-old Boston businesswoman and avid runner, says that techniques like stretching, icing and taping were effective for her. She started having plantar fascia pain last summer, and on Duggal's advice has been diligent about doing everything she can to heal the problem.

"The stretching, the icing, the taping -- I do all these little pieces of help for my body, and it responds," Firestone says. "So I think people should take that message and go with it."

After a few months, she's back to running -- but shorter distances. And she stops whenever her heel pain acts up.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Cost is a major part of the story here and NPR doesn’t gloss over it. The cost of shockwave treatment can range anywhere from $500 to several thousand dollars, NPR reports, and usually is not covered by insurance. NPR could have added some useful context  by mentioning that the shockwave machines themselves can be very expensive to purchase and operate. This can create an incentive for physicians who have bought such a machine to promote shockwave treatments to patients who may not need them. In addition, it would have been helpful to know how this treatment’s costs differ from those of other common treatments.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When a couple is struggling to conceive, it's the woman who is usually the first — and often the only one — to be poked, prodded and analyzed, experts say. The burden of figuring out infertility is too often placed on the woman alone.

"Unfortunately, the majority of society looks at infertility as a women's issue, but that's just not the case," said Brad Imler, American Pregnancy Association president.

Placed among dozens of pregnancy, ovulation and female fertility kits, an at-home sperm test that hit retail shelves in April could help change that mentality, experts said.

SpermCheck Fertility, which determines in minutes whether a man's sperm count is low, offers almost instant insight into one of the many aspects of male fertility. Although it's not a comprehensive evaluation and could give some consumers a false sense of security, the test does provide a starting point while drawing attention to male infertility as a legitimate health concern.

"It may provide (an opportunity for) both physicians and couples to take a closer look at ways for men to step up to the plate and optimize their reproductive potential," said Dr. Robert Brannigan, urologist at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. "I think anything that highlights the fact that men can have issues, that men do play a role in infertility, is important."

Approximately 15 percent of U.S. couples of reproductive age who are trying to conceive face infertility issues, said Brannigan, an expert in male fertility.

Male infertility contributes to 50 percent of those cases, he said. Male infertility alone is the cause 30 percent of the time; a combination of male and female factors account for the other 20 percent.

SpermCheck Fertility is designed to help couples determine more quickly whether male infertility might be a problem for them, said Ray Lopez, CEO of SpermCheck, based in Charlottesville, Va. Many men put off having a semen analysis because they don't want to provide a sample in a doctor's office or lab, he said.

"No one wants to go through the embarrassment of jumping in that room and looking at dirty magazines," Lopez said.

Giving men the opportunity to take a test in the privacy of their home helps get the process moving, he said.

Men tend to think they're perfectly healthy, especially when it comes to their sexuality, APA's Imler said. This test, which is noninvasive, could be wake-up call for some.

"If there is a problem with him, it's identified a little quicker," Imler said. "We love the idea of avoiding that heartache of that month to month struggle of trying to conceive without success."

SpermCheck Fertility is the only FDA-approved home sperm test currently on the market and available in retail stores, Lopez said. The test costs about $40; the average cost of a semen analysis in a doctor's office is about $100.

At-home sperm tests are a fairly new idea, Imler said, but SpermCheck Fertility is not the first one. Four years ago an FDA-approved home test called Fertell, which is no longer for sale, offered an evaluation of both male and female fertility.

There are also several at-home sperm analysis kits available online. They each include a microscope and cost at least $80.

Although it's not the first ever at-home test, SpermCheck Fertility is the first one to use the lateral flow assay method, Lopez said. When the semen sample is applied to the test strip, the liquid works its way up the paper until it reaches the results window.

"It's very, very similar to a pregnancy test," Lopez said. "The concept behind our test is to keep it simple, user friendly."

For Brittany Scott, a Cortland resident whose husband took the SpermCheck Fertility test, however, it seemed a little more complicated than a pregnancy test. Scott said she was surprised by the number of steps involved, although none were very difficult.

Scott, a "mommy blogger" who requested and received a free test to review, said she wanted her husband to take the test to see if a recent vasectomy had worked. The result showed that the father of four's sperm count was below the test's threshold.

"It was blatantly negative. I was really glad that the test was not ambiguous at all," she said. "There was no line I could mistake."

Scott said she wished the test had been available when the couple was struggling to conceive their first child. After about 11 months of trying, she had pushed her husband to get a semen analysis from a doctor.

"If this test had been around back then, he would have definitely been more willing to do it" than the semen analysis, she said.

SpermCheck Fertility tests were created after a scientist at the University of Virginia discovered a specific protein found only in the head of sperm, Lopez said. By detecting that protein, the test indicates whether or not a semen sample contains 20 million sperm per milliliter.

About 90 percent of fertile men have sperm counts above that concentration, according to the SpermCheck Fertility instructions.

But there is not a strict cutoff point between normal or abnormal, Brannigan said. Some men might be considered in the infertile range and have no problem impregnating a woman. And others have sperm counts that seem fine, but they have difficulty.

"If his sperm concentration is indeed greater than 20 million, that's very encouraging," Brannigan said. "But it's by no means a definitive marker of proven fertility because there is a significant overlap between fertile and infertile men."

As stated in the SpermCheck Fertility instructions, sperm count is not the only factor that contributes to male fertility. The test is not intended to be a complete semen analysis or an overall indicator of a man's fertility, Lopez said.

The male reproductive system should not be oversimplified, Brannigan said. There are several characteristics of sperm alone — at least three that aren't addressed by SpermCheck — that affect male fertility. In addition, hormones and the delivery of the sperm play a part.

"There are a number of components that lead to a man having normal fertility potential," Brannigan said. "It's a complicated picture."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says, “The test costs about $40; the average cost of a semen analysis in a doctor’s office is about $100.” As a comparison, the story says, “There are also several at-home sperm analysis kits available online. They each include a microscope and cost at least $80.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TULSA - New treatment for back pain may help thousands of patients avoid surgery.

Spinal disc decompression therapy is a new alternative for treating a herniated disc in the spine.

Until now, the main options for treatment were surgeries that could involve cutting away bone and placing rods, and rising doses of painkilling medicines that often lead to addiction.

Dr. Bernard Fuh, director and owner of Advanced Spinal Health in Tulsa, said spinal disc decompression therapy has repaired ruptured discs, eliminated back pain and caused some patients at his center to “grow” a few inches.

“I had one guy that came crawling into my practice and handed me his MRI, and I put him on the table. That same visit, the lightning pain going down his back went away, and he got up and walked out. That’s amazing. By the fifth visit, he was completely out of pain,” Fuh said.

In nonsurgical spinal decompression, a patient is placed on a special type of table with harnesses on the pelvis and rib cage. The back is gently stretched over a number of treatments, allowing the disc to rehydrate and heal.

Research has shown an 86 percent to 94 percent success rate with decompression. It is designed for patients who have not had surgery.

The treatment, which includes several 20-minute procedures and rehabilitation, costs between $3,500 and $4,000. It is less than half the cost of surgery but is rarely covered by insurance.

The idea is based on results from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The space agency noticed astronauts, who did not have gravity compressing their spines in space, reporting the disappearance of neck and back pain. Some of them returned to Earth 1 inch to 2 inches taller.

A neurosurgeon adapted the concept for clinical treatment, and several companies began to make beds for spinal decompression.

The new beds, Fuh said, are much different than similar beds made 20 years ago where patients would lie on their stomachs, put a strap around their pelvis and “hold onto handle bars for dear life.”

“The table now, you just lay on your back, and the machine does all of the work. I would say a quarter of my patients fall asleep.”

The decompression therapy is used to treat herniated discs, ruptured discs, sciatica, bulging discs, degenerative discs, posterior facet syndrome and spinal stenosis/arthritis. It also has been used after failed low back surgery.

“Decompression on the West Coast is a dime a dozen, but here in the Midwest, they are almost unaware of it. There is a group in Iowa that doesn’t do surgery anymore because they have found more success with this,” Fuh said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention the cost of the treatment, which is not covered by insurance. The story should have compared the cost to other available treatments. Nonetheless we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt and score it satisfactory. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Middle-aged women may find some relief from hot flashes and other menopause problems with soy supplements, according to Chinese researchers.

They found daily supplements of soy germ isoflavones reduced the sudden sweats more than inactive placebo pills after six months.

But a U.S. expert wasn’t convinced by the results, which run counter to other published studies.

“The majority of them are showing no benefit,” said William W. Wong, a nutrition researcher at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston who wasn’t involved in the new work.

The new study, published in the journal Menopause, is based on 90 Chinese women. A third of them received placebo pills made of starch, while the rest took soy germ isoflavones, either 84 or 126 milligrams a day.

They all kept diaries of their hot flashes and filled out questionnaires about various problems tied to menopause, including hot flashes, sweating, insomnia, tiredness and headache.

At six months, their Kupperman scores — a measure of symptom severity that ranges from 0 to 63 — had dropped by more than 40 percent from an initial value of about 25 in the soy groups.

The number of hot flashes also fell from about 20 a week to less than 10.

While the same pattern was seen in the placebo group, it was less pronounced. Their symptom score dropped by 29 percent and the number of hot flashes by 35 percent, according to Dr. Yan-bin Ye of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou.

The work was supported by Frutarom Netherlands, which also donated the supplements.

Wong cautioned that the new study was small and that the women involved only had few hot flashes. He said it was “hard to believe” that soy would have an effect on these women.

In one of his own studies, Wong found no effect on soy germ isoflavones among women who took the supplements for two years.

The standard drug treatment for stubborn menopause symptoms is hormone replacement therapy. But doctors and women have become increasingly wary of that option because of serious side effects such as increased risk for heart attack, stroke and breast cancer.

“It is something they need to gauge, is it worth the risk?” Wong told Reuters Health.

He generally recommends exercise and an active lifestyle to women who feel bothered by menopause.

Soy supplements also have side effects such as nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the National Institutes of Health. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

Wong said that in Asia, women tend to think of menopause problems as a natural part of life — not a medical problem.

“There is a major cultural difference in how we deal with menopause symptoms,” he mused.

The new study didn’t find significant hormone changes in women who took soy supplements, and Wong said the compounds are probably safe for women.

“Consuming soy is not bad for them,” Wong noted, “but it might be a waste of money if you don’t see any benefit.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Soy supplements are over the counter so the price may vary.  Story cites estimate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AUGUSTA, Ga. (Jan. 2, 2018) - In just four months, high-doses of vitamin D reduce arterial stiffness in young, overweight/obese, vitamin-deficient, but otherwise still healthy African-Americans, researchers say.

Rigid artery walls are an independent predictor of cardiovascular- related disease and death and vitamin D deficiency appears to be a contributor, says Dr. Yanbin Dong, geneticist and cardiologist at the Georgia Prevention Institute at the Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University.

So researchers looked at baseline and again 16 weeks later in 70 African-Americans ages 13-45 - all of whom had some degree of arterial stiffness - taking varying doses of the vitamin best known for its role in bone health.

In what appears to be the first randomized trial of its kind, they found that arterial stiffness was improved by vitamin D supplementation in a dose-response manner in this population, they write in the journal PLOS ONE.

Overweight/obese blacks are at increased risk for vitamin D deficiency because darker skin absorbs less sunlight - the skin makes vitamin D in response to sun exposure - and fat tends to sequester vitamin D for no apparent purpose, says Dong, the study's corresponding author.

Participants taking 4,000 international units - more than six times the daily 600 IUs the Institute of Medicine currently recommends for most adults and children - received the most benefit, says Dr. Anas Raed, research resident in the MCG Department of Medicine and the study's first author.

The dose, now considered the highest, safe upper dose of the vitamin by the Institute of Medicine, reduced arterial stiffness the most and the fastest: 10.4 percent in four months. "It significantly and rapidly reduced stiffness," Raed says.

Two thousand IUs decreased stiffness by 2 percent in that timeframe. At 600 IUs, arterial stiffness actually increased slightly - .1 percent - and the placebo group experienced a 2.3 percent increase in arterial stiffness over the timeframe.

They used the non-invasive, gold standard pulse wave velocity to assess arterial stiffness. Reported measures were from the carotid artery in the neck to the femoral artery, a major blood vessel, which supplies the lower body with blood. The American Heart Association considers this the primary outcome measurement of arterial stiffness.

When the heart beats, it generates a waveform, and with a healthy heart and vasculature there are fewer and smaller waves. The test essentially measures the speed at which the blood is moving, and in this case, fast is not good, Raed says.

"When your arteries are more stiff, you have higher pulse wave velocity, which increases your risk of cardiometabolic disease in the future," says Raed.

The varying doses, as well as the placebo participants took, were all packaged the same so neither they or the investigators knew which dose, if any, they were getting until the study was complete. Both placebo and supplements were given once monthly - rather than daily at home - at the GPI to ensure consistent compliance.

Dong was also corresponding author on a study published in 2015 in the journal BioMed Central Obesity that showed, in this same group of individuals, both 2,000 and 4,000 IUs restored more desirable vitamin D blood levels of 30 nanograms per milliliter.

The 4,000 upper-limit dose restored healthy blood level quicker - by eight weeks - and was also better at suppressing parathyroid hormone, which works against vitamin D's efforts to improve bone health by absorbing calcium, they reported.

While heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, blacks have higher rates of cardiovascular disease and death than whites and the disease tends to occur earlier in life. The authors write that arterial stiffness and vitamin D deficiency might be potential contributors.

While just how vitamin D is good for our arteries isn't completely understood, it appears to impact blood vessel health in many ways. Laboratory studies have shown that mice missing a vitamin D receptor have higher activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, says Raed. Activation of this system increases blood vessel constriction, which can contribute to arterial stiffness. Vitamin D also can suppress vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, activation of garbage-eating macrophages and calcification formation, all of which can thicken blood vessel walls and hinder flexibility. Vitamin D also reduces inflammation, an underlying mechanism for obesity related development of coronary artery disease, says Raed.

Now it's time to do a larger-scale study, particularly in high-risk populations, and follow participants' progress for longer periods, Dong and Raed say. "A year would give us even more data and ideas," Raed adds.

Dong notes that pulse wave velocity and blood pressure measures are complimentary but not interchangeable. "We think maybe in the future, when you go to your physician, he or she might check your arterial stiffness as another indicator of how healthy you are," Raed says.

There were no measurable differences in weight or blood pressure measurements over the 16-week study period.

The Institute of Medicine currently recommends a daily intake of 800 IUs of vitamin D for those age 70 and older. For adolescents and adults, they recommend 4,000 IUs as the upper daily limit; 2,000 was a previous upper limit.

More than 80 percent of Americans, the majority of whom spend their days indoors, have vitamin D insufficiency or deficiency. Dong, an expert in vitamin D and a professor in the MCG Department of Population Health Sciences, says about 15 minutes daily in the "young" sun - between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. - but before your skin starts to get pink, is the best source of vitamin D.

Foods like milk, milk products like cheese and yogurt, fatty fish like mackerel and sardines, some greens like kale and collards and fortified cereals also are good sources. The researchers say a vitamin D supplement is an inexpensive and safe option for most of us.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release responsibly notes that obtaining more vitamin D is a potentially simple endeavor for most individuals. They can drink more milk, for example, or purchase a relatively inexpensive supplement.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 4, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Newer blood pressure drugs are as safe and effective as older medications, new research suggests.

Scientists at the NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City said their findings settle a longstanding debate about which of two types blood-pressure lowering medications studied are better.

An analysis of 106 randomized trials involving more than 250,000 patients examined the effects of newer angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) and older angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Although ACE inhibitors were developed 10 years earlier, both types of drugs showed similar effects in the analysis, challenging previous findings that suggest ACE inhibitors have greater benefits.

According to the new analysis, published online Jan. 4 in the Mayo Clinic Proceedings, the only difference between the medications is that ARBs are more easily tolerated.

"There has been debate for many years over the safety and efficacy of ACE inhibitors compared to ARBs, with many of them using an 'ACE inhibitor-first' approach, with ARBs regarded as less effective," study author Dr. Sripal Bangalore said in a medical center news release.

"We believe that our study ends the debate and gives physicians the option to prescribe either drug for their patients," added Bangalore, an associate professor in the division of cardiology, in the department of medicine at NYU Langone.

Both ARBs and ACE inhibitors interfere with the function of a hormone called angiotensin II, which regulates blood pressure, but they do this in different ways, the study authors said.

Angiotensin II restricts blood flow through vessels, raising blood pressure. ACE inhibitors prevent the body from making angiotensin II, while ARBs prevent the hormone from doing its job by taking its place on the surface of blood vessels, the researchers explained.

Previous studies have suggested that older ACE inhibitors are more effective than ARBs. But, this latest analysis attributed that difference to changes in the standard of care over the decade between trials of the two types of drugs, greater emphasis on quitting smoking, and wider use of cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins.

However, when trials were conducted at similar times, one drug was not more effective than the other, the findings showed.

"This is the first time that we have a clear and consistent message from the three buckets of trials of ACE inhibitors and ARBs, all of which show that there is no outcome difference between the two agents, except for better tolerability of ARBs," Bangalore said.

"The results of our analysis are especially important for patients, given that many ARBs are now also generic, which reduces their costs," he added.

For more about blood pressure drugs, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story a grudging satisfactory in this category since it mentions, as a closing statement, that many ARBs are now generic, which means their cost is lower than brand-name equivalents.  But the story would be more helpful to readers if it provided an idea of the comparative costs for the two types of drugs, as well as an average annual cost, since patients remain on them for long periods of time, if not for life. Though more ARBs are now available generically, the costs of generic ARBs generally remain higher than for ACEIs. For many doctors and patients, the use of ACEIs may still be preferred simply because they’re cheaper – even given similar efficacy and a slightly greater need to stop them due to side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Using chest scans to screen for lung cancer in people who’ve never smoked and have no symptoms might help catch cancers early and decrease the disease’s death toll, suggests a new study from Japan.

But experts say the findings likely don’t apply in non-Asian countries, where the majority of all lung cancers are found in people who smoke — and where using computed tomography (CT) scans to screen for lung cancer in smokers has recently been a controversial topic.

Moreover, they warn that while regular screening might help doctors catch cancer earlier, it also comes with a high price tag and added risks to patients.

CT scanning uses X-rays and computers to produce a clearer image than traditional X-ray techniques, but CT also uses higher radiation doses to generate those images.

Everybody agrees that CT “does find the early stage lung cancer,” said Dr. Heidi Roberts, a lung cancer researcher from Women’s College Hospital, Toronto who wasn’t involved in the new study. Early-stage cancer is easier to treat and has a higher survival rate.

The new study provides further evidence of that. Researchers led by Dr. Ryoichi Kondo of Shinshu University Hospital in Matsumoto looked back at outcomes for close to 500 non-smoking lung cancer patients whose cancer was caught by CT scan screening, or by standard X-ray screening — another strategy for catching cancer early — or when patients came into the doctor with lung symptoms.

Most of the tumors found via CT scans were small, whereas those found through X-ray screening or in patients with symptoms were more often further advanced, according to the findings published in the journal Lung Cancer.

Five years after their diagnosis, 95 percent of people whose cancers were found through a CT scan were still alive, compared to 73 percent diagnosed with an X-ray and 40 percent of patients who had not been screened and whose symptoms led to discovery their disease.

East Asian countries are more likely to regularly screen non-smokers for lung cancer because biological differences seem to put Asians at a higher risk than other non-smokers, researchers explained.

Non-smokers without symptoms generally are not screened for lung cancer in the U.S.

There and in Canada, the lung cancer debate has centered around how often to screen smokers, and until what age screening should be done, Roberts said.

In another study published by Kondo and colleagues — this one looking at lung cancer screening in smokers — five-year survival rates were also highest in those screened with CT scans.

That’s consistent with the findings of the National Lung Screening Trial in the U.S., which in November released data — published online in the New England Journal of Medicine last week — showing that 20 percent fewer middle-aged heavy smokers died of lung cancer when they were screened annually with a CT scan compared to a standard, less detailed chest X-ray.

Lung cancer kills more people in the U.S. than any other cancer — over 150,000 each year.

The problem with frequent screening is not only its cost — CT scans typically run a few hundred dollars each — but that each scan exposes a person to radiation, which also slightly increases cancer risks over time with repeated scans.

And screening comes with an inherent risk of false-positives — scans which suggest a lung cancer that turns out not to be there.

Dr. Christine Berg, one of the leaders of the U.S. screening studies, said that generally about a quarter of chest CT scans show some kind of abnormality — but 96 percent of those abnormal scans turn out not to be lung cancer. While doctors ruled out cancer, those patients would have undergone further tests, sometimes including biopsies, which can cause complications including infection and bleeding.

And for some patients, “if you really weren’t going to benefit from the screening...that complication is something you may not have faced,” Berg said. “Those are some of the things I worry about.”

Her study showed that 300 middle-aged smokers would need to be screened with CT scans to prevent one death from lung cancer.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally-supported expert panel, has said there isn’t enough evidence for it to recommend screening for lung cancer in symptom-free people using CT scans or other methods.

Berg and Roberts both told Reuters Health that more research is needed to see if there might be hints in the blood or genes of smokers that could tell doctors which had the highest risk for lung cancer — and which would get the most out of routine CT screening.

“We now have a technology that can detect (lung cancer) early enough to make some impact,” Berg said. But, “it’s not a home run, and it clearly has these limitations.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story emphasizes cost several times, including the estimate of a few hundred dollars per scan.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Patients with depression often struggle through weeks or months of trial-and-error to find the right antidepressant. Now the burgeoning field of pharmacogenomics — how genes affect a person's response to drugs — is helping more patients avoid debilitating and all-too-common side effects of psychiatric medications.

Sarah Ellis will never forget her darkest days battling depression and the series of prescriptions the Sioux Falls, South Dakota mother of three endured.

“I tried every medicine," Ellis, 45, said. "I wondered if I would ever find something that works." One prescription gave her a rash for two years and the anti-anxiety medication, Clonazepam (Klonopin), affected her balance. She was also prescribed selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) — a class of drugs including Prozac which are used to treat anxiety and depression — but they "made me feel like I was losing my mind," Ellis told NBC News.

More than 1 in 20 American, ages 12 and older, are struggling with depression, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And many more are suffering from sometimes severe side effects, like weight gain, nausea, sleepiness and sexual problems. At least 135,587 adverse drug reactions linked to antidepressants were reported to the Food and Drug Administration's Adverse Event Reporting System between 2004 and 2012.

It's unclear how many patients have had to stop or chosen to stop treatment for depression due to side effects.

Related: 5 Things You Need To Know Before Taking an At-Home Genetic Test

Ellis tried 23 different combinations of depression medications. Finally, her psychiatrist, suspicious that her body might process medication differently than most, recommended a genetic test to see why Ellis wasn’t responding to the prescriptions.

“Once the genetic testing became available it provided Sarah with more than just physical relief," says Dr. Matthew B. Stanley of the Avera Medical Group in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. "It gave us an answer — that this was her physiology and her genetics and not something in her head.”

The Avera Institute for Human Genetics (AIHG) in Sioux Falls, South Dakota is among several institutions exploring the role of pharmacogenomics — the science of how our inheritance and genetic makeup influences the way we metabolize medications.

Related: Is Your Medication Helping or Hurting? DNA Tests May Be a Guide

'One piece of the puzzle'

AIHG’s pharmacogenomics research has led to the development of Genefolio, a genetic test that uses an individual’s unique DNA to predict how that individual will respond to medications. The test offered by Avera is $179 and is often covered by insurance.

Research pharmacist, Krista Bohlen, director of personalized pharmaceutical medicine at the Avera Institute for Human Genetics, believes that genetics play a large role in how different individuals react to certain medications, but cautions doctors and patients against relying solely on this method for answers.

According to a study conducted by the Mayo Clinic that looked at one genetic test similar to many used in hospitals — GeneSight Psychotropic — symptoms of depression were reduced by 70 percent compared to treatments prescribed without genetic testing.

While the results are striking, this technology is not a guarantee of complete resolution of depressive symptoms or medication side effects.

“Pharmacogenomics is one piece of the puzzle," Bohlen told NBC News. "We look at it as a tool to help the physician. They can couple their expert opinions with information from the patient, like their symptoms and family history, to look more closely at one class of drug over another."

The Genefolio test confirmed gene variants within Ellis’ DNA that made her more susceptible to certain side effects with newer classes of medications, so Stanley prescribed an older class of antidepressant and experimented with a lower dose.

"My energy's been really great," she says. "I feel like I can accomplish what I want to accomplish. This was definitely worth it.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that the genetic test touted costs $179 and says it is often covered by insurance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For biochemist Peter Molan, honey's ancient power to heal is not a matter of faith. So sure is he of the science behind it that he frequently applies the stuff of his research on himself -- and on his wife.

"She had a persistent boil on her buttocks," he explained. Since no standard salves had helped, he liquefied a dollop of a particular variety of honey known as manuka in the kitchen microwave, poured it over gauze and applied it.

"Fortunately, manuka is effective in treating burns as well as boils," Molan said cheerfully. Within a short time, he said, both boil and burn healed.

Manuka honey -- widely used for wound treatment in New Zealand, where Molan is co-director of Waikato University's Honey Research Unit -- is becoming increasingly accepted for this purpose around the world. Research over the past two decades, much of it conducted in Molan's lab, has focused on the potential for manuka to be used as an antimicrobial that may one day stand alongside such standard wound treatments as silver dressings and penicillin.

Manuka has also attracted attention because, in an era when the efficacy of pharmaceutical antibiotics is under threat, it has shown some promise in the treatment of wounds infected with especially challenging bacteria, such as methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), the superbug whose incidence increased 32-fold in U.S. hospitals between 1976 and 2003, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Manuka dressings have been in use for some time in Great Britain and Australia as well as in New Zealand; earlier this year they were cleared for use as an antimicrobial dressing in Canada; and last month the Food and Drug Administration cleared them for use in wound and burn care -- though not as an antimicrobial drug -- making them the first honey-based products cleared for medical use in the United States.

The picture has not always been so bright for manuka, or its manufacturers. New Zealand's scrubby manuka trees with their creamy blossoms used to be chopped down for farmland. Beekeepers regarded manuka honey as almost worthless, feeding it to their bees or simply discarding it: It was difficult to process, its taste too strong and bitter, its color too dark. In short, it seemed "medicinal."

This began to change with Molan's work. He had spent his career examining the possible antibacterial properties of various natural substances: milk, yeast, bull semen. At a colleague's suggestion, he began looking into manuka honey, and for the past 25 years he has led the way in this particular aspect of apitherapy, the study of honey as a medicine.

Surrounded by the pipettes and petri dishes of his lab, and with a strip of manuka dressing wrapped around a cut finger, Molan says, "Manuka honey tastes like medicine because it is medicine."

Today, New Zealand's Active Manuka Honey Association estimates that 120 tons are sold each year, with sales of almost $10 million annually. Manuka is proving to be a moneymaker for many companies that market it online as "nature's miracle" and "nature's greatest secret," claiming it can relieve everything from stomach ulcers to bedsores and sinus infections. Although Molan says he has no direct financial interests in honey, the honey research unit was set up with support from New Zealand's Honey Industry Trust, and his work has resulted in his university's signing a multimillion-dollar contract last year with New Zealand health-care products company Comvita.

All honey is medicinal to some extent. Its low water content allows it to draw fluid away from wounds; its high sugar content makes it difficult for microorganisms to grow. What's more, worker bees secrete an enzyme, glucose oxidase, into nectar, which releases low levels of the disinfectant hydrogen peroxide when honey makes contact with a damp surface such as a wound. Because of a chemical reaction with tissue, honey also makes healing wounds smell good.

From the time of the ancient Sumerians, who prescribed a mix of river dust and honey for ailing eyes, until the early 20th century, honey was a conventional therapy in fighting infection, but its popularity waned with the advent in the mid-20th century of a potent, naturally occurring antibiotic: the blue-green mold penicillin.

Not all honeys are equal, though. Manuka appears to have a poorly understood antimicrobial ingredient, dubbed its Unique Manuka Factor (UMF). The level of UMF can vary, and each batch of manuka is ranked according to its UMF value: The higher the concentration, the darker, thicker and more expensive the manuka is. A 250-gram jar with UMF16, which is in the midrange, sells for about $28.95 on the Internet.

As with other natural health-care products, many of the claims for manuka's efficacy are sweeping and scantily supported. Molan distances himself from the notion, for example, that, once ingested, manuka acts as a rejuvenator. The most promising research, he and many other scientists say, focuses instead on bioactive honey's potency as a topical application.

The South African Medical Journal reported in 2006 on a trial among gold miners in which honey worked as well as, and was more cost-effective than, a standard gel on shallow wounds and abrasions.

The European Journal of Medical Research reported in 2003 that honey had an 85 percent success rate in treating infected post-op Caesarean wounds, compared with a 50 percent success rate for conventional interventions.

One reason for the heightened interest in honey is that traditional antibiotics are proving increasingly powerless against certain microbes. In 2000, a World Health Organization report warned: "Since 1970, no new classes of antibacterials have been developed to combat infectious diseases." On average, the report said, "research and development of anti-infective drugs takes 10 to 20 years." Today, according to the CDC, "nearly all significant bacterial infections in the world are becoming resistant to the most commonly prescribed antibiotic treatments."

Hence the hope that a naturally occurring substance such as honey might help fill the void.

Molan offers anecdotal evidence from a ward at Waikato Hospital, where MRSA has been a persistent problem. The charge nurse, he says, began placing manuka on all wounds. "Not only did manuka clear up the infections, there were no cross-infections," Molan says. "Now, whenever MRSA appears at Waikato Hospital, they choose honey dressings."

At the May meeting of the European Wound Management Association, researchers presented the results of a small Irish study that compared the effects of manuka honey and a commonly used hydrogel dressing on 100 patients with chronic leg ulcerations. Those patients treated with manuka dressings experienced a higher rate of cleansing and faster healing than those who used the hydrogel dressing. Ten of the patients had ulcers colonized with MRSA. After four weeks, seven of those 10 wounds no longer showed the bacteria's presence. The results have not yet been published.

Even scientists who are intrigued by manuka's promise recognize that more research needs to be done. (And there's wide agreement among medical professionals that people should not test the treatment themselves by slathering their cuts and burns with honey from the pantry shelf.)

Andrew Jull, a research fellow at the University of Auckland's Clinical Trials Research Unit and principal investigator in a trial in New Zealand of 368 patients into the use of honey as a therapy for leg ulcers, says that while "there is reasonable evidence for manuka honey's antibacterial effect" in the lab, "there is still need for in vivo testing."

Molan suggests there may be another reason the United States has been slower than some other countries to adopt medicinal honey: the scientific establishment's resistance to traditional remedies.

He believes it's not customers or patients who need convincing, "it's the medical community. They find it difficult to accept anything that has an ancient lineage, whatever the scientific evidence," he says. "But manuka is catching on fast."

So much so that in July the FDA gave Derma Sciences, a manufacturer of wound-care products based in Princeton, N.J., clearance to sell manuka wound and burn dressings as medical devices. The company, which has been developing manuka products since 2005, buys medical-grade honey from Comvita, which receives unprocessed honey from beekeepers in New Zealand. The dressings should be available this fall.

Rose Cooper, a microbiologist and honey expert at the University of Wales Institute at Cardiff, remains cautiously optimistic that the increased use of honey dressings will help better information to emerge.

"Honey is not a panacea," she said in a telephone interview, but it has been used by British doctors for several years, and with its growing use elsewhere in the world, "health-care professionals will be more likely to consider honey in treating wounds, and so more data will accumulate." ·

Eric Frederick Trump is a science journalist and a research associate of the Trauma and Violence Interdisciplinary Studies Program at New York University. Comments:health@washpost.com.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention the cost of one jar of manuka that can be bought over the internet.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago, IL (May 6, 2017) -- A new study finds that individuals struggling with obesity who are not candidates for weight-loss surgery can benefit substantially from non-surgical endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty, according to research presented at Digestive Disease Week® (DDW) 2017, the largest international gathering of physicians, researchers and academics in the fields of gastroenterology, hepatology, endoscopy and gastrointestinal surgery.

Patients who underwent ESG -- a procedure performed through the mouth with an endoscope to "accordion" the stomach by suturing pleats to reduce its size -- achieved greater weight loss than laparoscopic banding, but less weight loss than laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy surgery. Patients who received treatment endoscopically had shorter hospital stays and lower costs than those who had laparoscopic surgery.

"Obesity continues to be a problem in America and it is an epidemic rapidly spreading around the world," said Reem Z. Sharaiha, MD, MSc, assistant professor of medicine at Weill Cornell Medicine and attending physician at New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center, the study's lead author. "Our research -- the first to compare these treatments -- demonstrates that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty is safe and effective in helping patients lead healthier lives. It should be considered as another tool available to clinicians and patients in the fight against obesity."

Dr. Sharaiha followed 278 patients who underwent ESG (91 patients), laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (120 patients) or laparoscopic banding (67). During the one-year follow-up period, patients went to an academic bariatric center of excellence as part of their treatment.

At one-year follow-up, patients who chose laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy surgery achieved the greatest percent total body weight loss at 29.28 percent, compared to 17.57 percent for endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty patients and 14.46 percent for laparoscopic banding patients. Researchers found that patients who received endoscopic treatment had lower complications (1 percent) than those who received surgical treatment (10 percent for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and 11 percent for laparoscopic banding).

Dr. Sharaiha noted that these findings do not suggest that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty will replace the two surgical treatments as weight-loss interventions. Instead, these results show that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty is another possibility that patients and health-care providers should consider when discussing options.

While endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty is performed with an endoscopic device through the mouth, laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy involves a small surgical incision in the belly to place a tube in the abdomen, allowing doctors to reduce the stomach's volume. With laparoscopic banding, doctors insert a tube through an incision in the belly to place a band around the stomach, restricting food intake.

The team also reported that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty patients customarily left the hospital on the same day of treatment, while laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy patients stayed for about three days and laparoscopic banding patients for a day and a half.

When examining cost, researchers reported endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty resulted in the lowest-cost, with an average institutional procedure cost of $12,000, compared to $22,000 for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and $15,000 for laparoscopic banding.

"For years, patients seeking weight-loss interventions had limited options because they could not tolerate or did not want surgery, or it was not even an option for them," added Dr. Sharaiha. "Our research shows that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty can be the treatment they've been looking for. It's less invasive than surgery and helps them reach their health goals."

Obesity is associated with heart disease, stroke, diabetes and some cancers, and researchers estimate that it is the second-leading cause of preventable death, after tobacco use. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that more than one in three U.S. adults is obese, having a body mass index of 30 or more. The CDC estimated the medical cost of obesity in the U.S. at approximately $147 billion in 2008. Globally, the World Health Organization estimates that more than 600 million people were obese in 2014.

Dr. Reem Z. Sharaiha will present data from the study, "Endoscopic Sleeve Gastroplasty, Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy, and Laparoscopic Band for Weight Loss: How Do They Compare?" abstract 334, on Saturday, May 7, at 11:54 a.m. CT, in S504 of McCormick Place. For more information about featured studies, as well as a schedule of availability for featured researchers, please visit http://www. . Dr. Sharaiha did not have any disclosures for DDW research.

Digestive Disease Week® (DDW) is the largest international gathering of physicians, researchers and academics in the fields of gastroenterology, hepatology, endoscopy, and gastrointestinal surgery. Jointly sponsored by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Institute, the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE), and the Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract (SSAT), DDW takes place May 6-9, 2017, at McCormick Place, Chicago. The meeting showcases more than 5,000 abstracts and hundreds of lectures on the latest advances in GI research, medicine and technology. More information can be found at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job here, comparing the average cost of three different procedures: “researchers reported endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty resulted in the lowest-cost, with an average institutional procedure cost of $12,000, compared to $22,000 for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and $15,000 for laparoscopic banding.” However, the release also notes that banding and gastrectomy involve spending more time in the hospital, and it’s not clear if those costs are solely for the procedures, or if they are for both the procedures and the hospital stay. Some clarification there would have been valuable.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She could continue taking the 13 pills a day she needed to control her Parkinson's disease, along with dealing with the side effects. Or she could allow doctors to implant two long, thin electrodes deep into her brain, along with an electrical generator about the size of an iPod in her chest.

In August 2007, Wolter, 63, underwent the surgery at Froedtert Hospital in Wauwatosa, and her life has improved dramatically.

A study released online Tuesday concluded that so-called deep brain stimulation was substantially more effective in treating Parkinson's than the best drug therapy, but it also carried a much greater risk of serious adverse side effects.

The results come at time when a growing number of people are reaching their late 50s and early 60s, when they are most likely to be diagnosed with the disease, which affects between 500,000 and 1.5 million Americans.

"We are on the verge of an epidemic," said Erwin Montgomery, a professor of neurology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The six-month study, which involved 255 people, found that those who underwent surgery had 4.6 more hours each day of good control of their symptoms than those who got the best drug therapy.

"That's huge," said lead author Fran Weaver, a researcher with the Hines VA Hospital in Hines, Ill.

She said the best drugs provide only one to two hours of added improvement, or "on time."

Those who got the therapy also had significantly more improvement in other measures of symptoms, according to the study that will appear today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

However, they were 3.8 times more likely to experience a serious adverse event, such as an infection, falls, nervous system or psychiatric disorders, or a problem with the device. Forty-nine of the deep brain stimulation patients, or 40%, had 82 serious adverse events, compared with 11% of the drug patients, who had 19 serious adverse events.

Weaver said 99% of the adverse events were resolved within six months, including some cases in which an infection required the removal of the generator from the chest.

There also was one death related to the surgery involving a patient who had bleeding in the brain, went into a coma and died several days later, she said.

Deep brain stimulation also is expensive. At Froedtert Hospital the procedure costs about $120,000, an amount that generally is covered by Medicare and private insurance.

The hospital has done about 300 of the procedures since 2005, said Brad Hiner, an associate professor of neurology at the Medical College of Wisconsin and neurologic director of the hospital's deep brain stimulation program.

"This (the JAMA study) is the largest, most complete and thorough analysis of deep brain stimulation to date," Hiner said.

Some neurologists remain unconvinced about the benefits of the therapy.

"You are doing something pretty invasive," said Paul Nausieda, director of the Regional Parkinson's Center at Aurora Sinai Medical Center in Milwaukee. "It's got too many downside issues."

Nausieda said much of the benefit found in the study could be due to a placebo effect.

Beyond that, doctors need to do a better job of optimizing drug therapy, he said, noting that there are thousands of potential combinations of drugs that can be used to control symptoms.

Nausieda said that of the more than 5,000 Parkinson's patients he has seen, only about 100 were candidates for deep brain stimulation.

"It's certainly not a breakthrough," he said.

Still, deep brain stimulation and several other potential therapies in the growing field of neurostimulation have created a buzz in the medical community.

Clinical trials involving different forms of neurostimulation are looking into its effectiveness in treating a range of disorders, including epilepsy, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and tinnitus, although doctors acknowledge they don't know how the treatments actually work.

In a sense it's a field of science that works backward: Stimulation is applied to the brain, some people get better, and doctors try to figure out why.

"We haven't the foggiest notion," said UW's Montgomery. "(But) we used aspirin long before we knew how it worked. God watches out for fools and little children. We are blessed that we have this therapy."

The problem with deep brain stimulation is that many doctors are not aware of its benefits or don't know how to determine the appropriate patients based on risks vs. potential benefits, he said.

Up to 15% of Parkinson's patients are good candidates for the therapy, but only 2% get it, he said.

Deep brain stimulation is not an option for the 20% to 30% of Parkinson's patients who also have dementia, said Hiner, of Froedtert Hospital.

He said the best candidates are those whose medications are not working well or are causing too many side effects.

Wolter, who lives in Oconomowoc, fit that profile well. She was diagnosed with the disease in 1997 after she developed a slight limp.

She was put on an increasing number of medications, which eventually caused side effects.

At times, she said, she felt incredibly fidgety.

"I'd take my pills and feel good for a while, but I never knew when they would wear off," she said. "I don't know what was worse: the medications or the disease."

She said she worried about having the surgery, but it got to the point where she felt as though she had run out of options.

In the nearly year and a half since having the surgery, her condition has improved substantially, she said.

Her medication use has dropped dramatically and "my body has calmed down," she said. "I can do what everybody does."

In April she went to Disney World with her two daughters and grandchildren and was able to walk around the park.

The study was paid for by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and Medtronic, the company that makes the device used in the study.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that the procedure costs about $120,000. 
But we wish it had given the price of the many drugs and treatments used in conventional therapy for Parkinson’s disease. As a consequence, the reader is led to believe the cost comparision is $120,000 vs. $0. In fact it’s $120,000 vs. some other number, perhaps a higher one. Some comparison would have been useful.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Beyond The Nasty Needle: Trying To Make Vaccines More Comfy And Convenient

News this summer of a flu vaccine patch sparked a lot of chatter. Could getting vaccinated be as easy as putting on a bandage? Could there be fewer, or at least smaller, needles in our future?

Some companies and academic labs are working to make those things happen.

They're refining technologies that involve tiny needles, less than a millimeter long, and needle-free injectors that can send a dose of vaccine through your skin in a fraction of a second.

Some of these technologies are already available on the market, while others are still being tested.

A flu vaccine patch is not yet available to the public. But one version developed by Georgia Tech's Laboratory for Drug Delivery showed promising results in its first human clinical trial, according to a study published in The Lancet in June.

The patch, about the size of a small square bandage, has tiny, dissolvable needles filled with a dose of flu vaccine. It's placed on the arm and activated through pressure. The microneedles dissolve into the skin, releasing the vaccine.

In the study, 100 participants received either the flu vaccine patch, a standard flu shot or a placebo via a patch.

Six months later, no one involved in the study had gotten the flu. People in the microneedle patch groups reported some redness, itching and tenderness but no serious side effects.

People who received the flu patch had comparable immune responses to people who had gotten the flu shot.

About 70 percent of the patients in the study preferred the patch to the regular shot, says Yasmine Gomaa, the lab's associate director.

Now, Gomaa's lab is looking beyond the flu vaccine. She says the microneedle patch could be particularly helpful in developing countries because it uses a form of vaccines that doesn't need to be kept as cold as regular vaccines. It can be stored at temperatures as high as 104 degrees Fahrenheit for up to a year, she says.

And the patch can be administered by people who aren't trained health professionals. A number of the people in the flu patch study applied it to themselves.

In 2015, Georgia Tech and the pharmaceutical company Micron Biomedical won $2.5 million in grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to develop a patch for polio immunization.

Gomaa's hope is that vaccine patches will cost less than vaccinations do now.

A 2016 study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that the use of vaccine patches could save on cooling costs and could cut down on waste. Its analysis concluded that a dose of measles vaccine with the patch would cost just under $1, while a typical shot would cost $1.65. But that didn't take into account the costs of getting the patch to market.

The potential cost savings wouldn't happen until the patches were in "routine use," the CDC noted.

Others in the vaccine-delivery business are taking a different approach, using a new twist on a needle-free device called a jet injector that has been around for more than half a century.

Portal Instruments, a company that is developing jet injectors, uses technology based on work done by Ian Hunter at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

"Initially, we worked on microneedles," says the company's CEO Patrick Anquetil. "And then Ian realized that why don't we just remove the needle altogether? And that's how this project came to be."

Needle-free jet injectors were actually used in the 1960s in mass smallpox vaccination campaigns. As described by the CDC, these devices use a high-pressure, narrow stream of fluid to penetrate the skin. The diameter of the stream is comparable to a mosquito bite.

The devices were used to quickly vaccinate large numbers of people, including members of the armed forces.

Anquetil notes that the older devices sometimes made patients feel as if they had been punched.

"To create the jet, you have to instantaneously create 100 times more pressure than you've got in the tire of a car," he says. "Patients actually hated them because they were more painful than a needle and syringe."

"My 85-year-old neighbor still remembers how painful it was," says Ron Lowy, CEO of PharmaJet, a company that makes an FDA-approved jet injector that administers a flu vaccine.

The older devices had another problem. They used the same nozzle for multiple injections, leading to concerns about the transmission of bloodborne pathogens between patients.

Today's devices have made a lot of progress, Lowy says. Now, the syringe is changed for each patient and the injections are gentler.

"It feels like somebody snapped me with a rubber band," he says, adding that the injection happens too fast for some patients to register any sensation at all. It lasts about one-tenth of a second.

He says hundreds of thousands of people in the U.S. have already received the flu vaccine via one of PharmaJet's injectors.

"If you have your choice, you want to get poked with a needle or you want to try this? Most of the people say, 'Yeah, I'll try that,' " he says.

Cost remains an issue for some jet injectors. Portal is aiming to get its cost down to $3 or $4 per injection.

"In vaccines, what's really hard is that there's a very, very high volume, and you're competing with a needle and syringe, which is tremendously low cost," Anquetil says.

PharmaJet says the ability to give precise doses helps to save money. The company says its flu vaccine "starter kit," which can vaccinate 500 people, costs $900.

FluMist, an FDA-approved flu vaccine delivered through a nasal spray, was widely used in the U.S. and, at one point, was even the preferred method of vaccination for children.

Then last year, in a sharp turnaround, the CDC recommended that it not be used during the 2016-17 flu season after a study found it had not been very effective in the previous year, particularly among kids.

The vaccine's effectiveness was just 3 percent, so low that "no protective benefit could be measured" for children ages 2 to 17, the CDC said in a statement.

In contrast, the effectiveness of the flu shot was about 63 percent for kids in that age group.

AstraZeneca, the parent company behind FluMist, says the CDC's data contradicts data from several other studies, which show the vaccine was about 48 percent effective during the same flu season. And the same vaccine continues to be recommended and used in European Union markets, AstraZeneca says.

In the U.S., the CDC continues to recommend against the nasal spray vaccine for the upcoming flu season. AstraZeneca hopes to reverse that decision before flu season begins.

"We continue to pursue a broad-based investigation to identify potential causes of lower effectiveness" in recent years, the company said in a statement, adding that one of the four flu virus strains it used in the vaccine during the past two flu seasons may have been the problem.

The company has chosen a new strain of live virus that is similar to other strains that have proven effective in studies and clinical trials.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article provides information about the cost of both the flu vaccine patch and the jet-injector. The cost of giving flu vaccine by nasal spray isn’t provided.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating More — Or Less — Of 10 Foods May Cut Risk Of Early Death

About half of all U.S. deaths from heart disease, stroke and Type 2 diabetes are linked to poor diets, according to a new study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

And eating more — or less — of just 10 types of food can help raise or lower the risk of death from these causes, the researchers found.

Scientists at Tufts University identified the foods that seem to contribute the most to the risk. At the top of the list? Salt. Consuming too much salt was associated with 9.5 percent of the deaths.

Next — and I sympathize with all of you who love to eat these — high intake of red meat and processed meats such as bacon was linked to 8 percent of the deaths. And sugary drinks were a factor in 7.4 percent of the deaths.

We know, it may be tough to cut back on foods you love. Bacon is so alluring to many that it has even been called the 'gateway' to meat for vegetarians!

But, here's the flip side: The researchers also found there's a significant risk in eating too little of certain healthy foods. So, think of it this way: You can start consuming more of the foods that are protective.

For instance, the study found that low consumption of nuts and seeds was linked to about 9 percent of deaths.

In addition, diets low in seafood, whole grains and fruits and vegetables were found to contribute to about 6-8 percent of the deaths.

"The good news is that we now understand which foods we need to target to prevent Americans from dying prematurely from cardiometabolic diseases," says lead study author Renata Micha, a public health nutritionist and epidemiologist at the Friedman School at Tufts University.

In 2012, about 700,000 Americans died from these diseases. Diet was linked to nearly 319,000 of these deaths. "This is a remarkable burden, nearly 1,000 deaths each day" linked to dietary habits, says senior study author Dariush Mozaffarian, dean of the Friedman School at Tufts.

So, changing Americans dietary habits could have a significant impact, the authors argue. "Our research suggests that nearly half of the risk can be reduced [by] eating a healthy diet," Mozaffarian says.

The new analysis is based on data from the federal survey known as NHANES, the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Researchers asked some 8,500 participants about their eating habits. In addition, Mozaffarian and his colleagues estimated associations of diet and disease from prior studies and clinical trials.

Now, the task of estimating death or disease linked to diet is tricky. Scientists use statistical methods to try to tease apart the impact of diet as part of people's overall lifestyle.

One challenge: People who have healthy diets often have other healthy habits, too — such as getting regular exercise. Dietary habits also track with socio-economic status. So, people with lower incomes are more likely to have poorer diets compared with wealthier people.

The Tufts researchers used studies that had controlled for these lifestyle factors, but it's not a perfect science.

"Relying on evidence from observational studies...carries the potential limitation of confounding bias," states an editorial that was published alongside the study. The editorial raises the possibility that the effect of confounding factors such as socioeconomic status and physical activity could be substantial. "For instance, it's possible that processed meat consumption merely reflects a Westernized dietary pattern."

Mozaffarian acknowledges the limitations. "At the end of the day, our findings might modestly over - or under-estimate the health burdens," he told us.

He says the bigger point is this: "Whether poor diet is causing 1,000 cardiovascular and diabetes deaths per day, or 500, it remains among the leading causes of preventable suffering."

Poor diets are also linked to billions of dollars in healthcare spending. For instance, diabetes costs the U.S. $245 billion a year. In the U.S., a women with diabetes incurs, on average, about $283,000 in lifetime health care costs. (Many cost studies don't separate Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes.)

If you love foods that are associated with cardiovascular risks, you don't have to give them up entirely. As most nutrition studies show, it's excessive consumption that drives up the risk.

For instance, dietary guidelines recommend limiting sugar consumption to no more than 10 percent of daily calories. This means that a single 200-calorie sugary drink may be OK for a person who typically consumes a 2,000 calorie-per-day diet.

The problem: Most Americans consume much more.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story addresses cost at both the individual and societal level, noting that poor diets are “linked to billions of dollars in healthcare spending. For instance, diabetes costs the U.S. $245 billion a year. In the U.S., a women with diabetes incurs, on average, about $283,000 in lifetime health care costs. (Many cost studies don’t separate Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes.).” That’s helpful context.. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Life!) - The herpes zoster vaccine could prevent tens of thousands of cases of shingles each year if it was offered to everyone who is eligible, with vaccinated adults half as likely to develop shingles, a study said.

In 2006, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a vaccine against shingles — a painful and potentially serious condition — for adults over 60. The vaccine has been tested, but never under real-world conditions in regular doctors’ offices.

The study, led by Hung Fu Tseng, a research scientist at Kaiser Permanente in Southern California, compared about 75,000 vaccinated members of the Kaiser Permanente Health plan with about 225,000 similarly aged members who weren’t vaccinated.

“We didn’t know how well the vaccine actually performed in the community setting,” Tseng told Reuters Health.

Shingles is a viral disease produced by the chicken pox virus, a common childhood disease, and is characterized by pain and a blistering rash along the nerves that have housed the dormant virus.

Most shingles patients are older adults, but people with a weak immune system or those under stress may also develop it.

Everyone in the study, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, was at least 60 years old, and the researchers didn’t include anybody for whom the live vaccine is not recommended.

Using electronic health records, researchers tracked patients for up to three years after vaccination.

About six out of every 1,000 people vaccinated got shingles each year, compared to 13 of every 1,000 unvaccinated patients. Researchers calculated that for every 71 people who were vaccinated, one case of shingles was prevented.

But researchers cautioned that because they did not follow patients over the longer term, they didn’t know how effective the vaccine is years later.

Despite the FDA’s approval, the vaccine has not caught on as much as some had hoped.

Cost is one hurdle, with the vaccine sometimes costing up to $200 for people whose insurance doesn’t cover it. It also requires stringent storage and handling.

“The human cost of shingles is enormous,” said Michael Oxman, who studies infectious diseases at the University of California, San Diego, and was involved in a previous study of the vaccine.

“Adult medicine is really geared toward diagnosis and treatment of existing diseases. The adult medical community is not as attuned to preventing disease... as pediatricians are,” he told Reuters Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The story reports that the vaccine can cost $200.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When I tore my rotator cuff in 2008, I had conventional laparoscopic surgery to repair it. The outcome was excellent, but the recovery was long and horrible. The orthopedist wouldn’t let me drive for six weeks, or run, swim or lift weights for three months. I suffered through weeks of torturous physical therapy. It was nearly six months before I felt normal again.

So in 2014, after a nurse improperly administered a vaccination that resulted in chronic pain and an MRI revealed another rotator-cuff tear, I vowed I would not go through shoulder surgery (or its aftermath) again.

Cortisone injections and physical therapy didn’t help, so I decided to try something else: platelet-rich plasma, a therapy that uses the body’s natural healing properties to mend injuries. Its practitioners believe it will transform orthopedics. Based on my experience with it, I think they are right.

It may not work for every condition, or for everyone. But it worked for me.

[PRP therapy is popular for sports injuries, but does it work?]

Before undergoing PRP treatment, I read quite a bit about it, learning that it holds promise for healing soft-tissue injuries such as tearing of the rotator cuff (the group of tendons and muscles that provide stability to the shoulder), tennis elbow, plantar fasciitis, Achilles tendinitis, patella tendinitis and hamstring tears; it may even provide relief for mild to moderate osteoarthritis.

“[PRP] works, and the results have been amazing,’’ says John Ferrell, the sports medicine physician who treated me. “There still needs to be more research done to perfect the process, but [it] will change the way orthopedics is practiced in the future. We will be more preventive. We will be able to treat ailments noninvasively, and at an earlier stage.’’

The procedure involves collecting several ounces of blood from a patient’s arm, spinning the blood in a centrifuge to concentrate the platelets and injecting the concentrated platelets into the injury site to stimulate healing. Platelets, the blood cells that promote clotting, contain hundreds of proteins, called growth factors, that are important in repairing injuries.

“PRP works by acting like a stem-cell magnet,’’ says Ferrell, who practices at Regenerative Orthopedics & Sports Medicine, which has several offices in the Washington area. “It releases growth factors that signal stem cells to come [and] help regenerate the injured area. Rotator-cuff tendon partial tears are notorious for not healing because of the poor blood supply there. PRP actually creates new blood vessels that feed the tendon the proper nutrients it needs to heal.’’

A recent pilot study conducted at the Glen Sather Sports Medicine Clinic at the University of Alberta on rotator-cuff tears supports this. It showed tissue healing in five of seven of the patients who received PRP, as well as improvements in their pain and function.

The researchers call the results “clinically relevant,’’ despite the study’s small size, and say the next step should be a larger, controlled clinical trial. “I’ve heard some skeptics call PRP a cure looking for a disease, but it is being used in so many areas of medicine now with promising outcomes,” says Marni Wesner, a sports medicine physician at the clinic and one of the study’s authors. “The potential for benefit from PRP is real.’’

I had my first appointment with Ferrell last October to find out whether PRP might help me. By then, my painful shoulder had been keeping me up nights for more than a year. It bothered me while swimming and lifting weights, and while getting dressed. By performing several tests to assess my strength and range of motion, Ferrell discovered that my left shoulder — the site of the tear — was considerably weaker than my right.

He then used ultrasound to find the tear and showed it to me on a monitor. It turned out to be larger than indicated in the static MRI pictures I had obtained earlier.

Before deciding whether PRP was right for me, he had to be sure that the tear was the source of my pain and weakness. He injected an anesthetic into the tear, then he ran the strength tests again. My strength was significantly better. This meant that the tear was causing my problems, and fixing it probably would restore strength and function to my shoulder and end my pain.

I had the first PRP injection on Oct. 23. It was painful, and the aching persisted for about 36 hours. I had one bad night, followed by an uncomfortable day. After that, the pain stopped. Still, Ferrell advised me to baby the shoulder — to use my other arm when holding a dog leash and to skip swimming and weights for two weeks. Running was fine. He also recommended physical therapy after two weeks.

After what I went through in 2008, those were restrictions I could live with.

Ferrell told me not to use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, such as ibuprofen, for a week after the injection because the goal is to encourage, not stifle, inflammation. Other pain relievers such as acetaminophen were okay. “We want to stimulate an acute inflammatory reaction, which will trigger the healing cascade to start to work,’’ Ferrell says.

Because there is not yet enough research on PRP — and because some studies have shown mixed results — insurance will not cover it.

Still, “it has significant cost savings” compared with surgery, Ferrell says. The average treatment is two injections, which costs about $1,000 at his practice, whereas rotator-cuff surgery runs about $13,000, he says, although insurance often covers most of the costs of surgery.

With additional research, insurance may ultimately pay for PRP. Unfortunately, there is little financial incentive to conduct such studies because there is nothing for the Food and Drug Administration to approve, such as a drug or device. The centrifuges already are licensed, and the procedure uses a patient’s own blood, which is regarded as safe. The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons — which says PRP “holds great promise’’ — describes the risk as minimal.

Those who seek this treatment must look for a clinician with considerable PRP experience — someone who does the procedure several times a day, not once or twice a month — and who has a good success rate, Ferrell says.

Moreover, “you see the greatest results when the injections are done under direct visualization with ultrasound,” he adds.

By February, the ultrasound showed my tear to be about 80 percent healed. The remaining tear was quite small. Ferrell recommended a second injection to finish the job.

I had it on March 4.

When I returned to see him on April 12, I was feeling pretty good. No pain, no problems. He rolled in the ultrasound machine, and I was not surprised by the results. The tear was completely gone.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story attempted to discuss cost by citing the difference in price between shoulder surgery ($13,000) and the PRP treatment ($1,000, in this case for two injections). This is sufficient enough for a Satisfactory rating, but barely.
While this does give readers some idea of the possible cost difference in treatments, there is no assurance that the charges in the author’s case are typical for those for the general public. It is simply one single data point which is fairly useless to the public. And, since there is no evidence of benefit or how many shots one might require, cost could be all over the place.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pill That Hits A Cause Of Cystic Fibrosis Beats Expectations

More than 20 years after the gene behind cystic fibrosis was identified, a pill that could fix the problem in some people is getting closer to reality.

The experimental medicine, taken twice a day, goes by the code name VX-770. Now there are some promising results from a study in 161 people with a specific genetic mutation that affects about four percent of cystic fibrosis patients.

Lung function got 10 percentage points better, on average, in people who got the drug compared with those taking a placebo. The improvement at six months was still present almost a year after the study's start.

That much improvement is "a big deal for CF patients," Robert Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation told Shots. "It is larger than any other clinical intervention we've ever had in cystic fibrosis." Beall said there were no significant side effects.

The foundation has championed the development of drugs, including VX-770, and has provided $75 million to Vertex to get the medicine this far. If the drug makes it to market, the foundation will receive royalties from sales.

This pill, for people with the G551D mutation of the cystic fibrosis gene, helps a defective protein in cell membranes do a better job moving things around. Lisa Jarvis has more details on that at the Haystack blog. But a key takeaway is that the medicine gets at a root cause of cystic fibrosis in some people rather than just relieving their symptoms.

Now, to be perfectly clear, all we know about the latest data is from press releases. And the drug hasn't been submitted for review by the Food and Drug Administration, though Vertex expects to do that later this year.

But these results, even with plenty of caveats, suggest the drug is on the right track. Vertex's shares jumped 15 percent Wednesday as investors figured VX-770 looks even better than they'd expected.

"Wow!" wrote Dr. Mark Schoenebaum, a biotech and drug analyst ISI Group, in a note to investors. The effectiveness of VX-770 looks "best case," he wrote. Ultimately, the drug might be used by around 3,000 patients worldwide, if approved, and Schoenebaum expects it would be command a very high price, perhaps $250,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: More explicitly than some other stories we saw, this blog included an estimate that the drug “would command a very high price, perhaps $250,000 a year.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - Scientists for the first time have used gene therapy to successfully destroy cancer tumors in patients with advanced disease — a goal that has taken 20 years to achieve.

Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania engineered patients’ own pathogen-fighting T-cells to target a molecule found on the surface of leukemia cells.

The altered T-cells were grown outside of the body and infused back into patients suffering from late-stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), which affects the blood and bone marrow and is the most common form of leukemia.

Two participants in the Phase I trial have been in remission for up to a year. A third had a strong anti-tumor response, and his cancer remains in check. The research group plans to treat four more patients with CLL before moving into a larger Phase II trial.

“We put a key onto the surface of the T-cells that fits into a lock that only the cancer cells have,” said Dr. Michael Kalos, director of translational and correlative studies at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine and an investigator on the study.

The results provide “a tumor-attack roadmap for the treatment of other cancers,” including those of the lung and ovaries as well as myeloma and melanoma, researchers said.

The findings were published simultaneously Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine and Science Translational Medicine.

Kalos said past efforts to use the technique, known as “adoptive T-cell transfer,” failed either because the T-cell response was too weak or proved too toxic for normal tissue.

The technique differs from other cancer therapies designed to harness the body’s own immune system to fight tumors — such as therapeutic cancer vaccines.

“We are saying forget about stimulating an immune response. We are going to give you an immune response,” Kalos said.

The treatment appears safe, but researchers said more study was needed. The leukemia patients in the Phase I trial had to be treated with an immunity-boosting drug since the targeted molecule, CD-19, is also present on certain normal immune-system cells.

To deliver the gene therapy, the researchers used a virus that can only infect cells once. It was used to carry a chimeric antigen receptor targeting CD-19 coupled with receptors for two other components of T-cell activity.

About two weeks after the gene therapy, patients began to experience “tumor lysis syndrome” — chills, nausea and fever — caused by the break-down products of dying cancer cells.

The engineered T-cells were detected in patients’ blood for several months afterward, and a portion of them turned into “memory T-cells,” which could provide ongoing protection against cancer recurrence, researchers surmised.

Dr. Walter Urba of the Providence Cancer Center in Portland Oregon cautioned that continued presence of activated T-cells and memory cells might be more of a problem in other types of cancer where toxic effects on normal tissue could be more severe.

In addition, the long-term viability of the treatment is still unknown.

“One of the big questions is ... will those persistent T-cells continue to work and prevent that tumor from coming back,” said Urba, who was not involved in the study.

All of the funding for the University of Pennsylvania’s gene therapy work has come from the academic community, but the work is expensive.

“We are looking for corporate partners as we head into Phase II trials,” Kalos said.

Further study will show whether the latest results “reflect an authentic advance toward a clinically applicable and effective therapy or yet another promising lead that runs into a barrier that cannot be easily overcome,” Urba said in an NEJM editorial.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While WebMD missed the cost component, Reuters smartly raised this issue and discussed how future research will be funded. “All of the funding for the University of Pennsylvania’s gene therapy work has come from the academic community, but the work is expensive. ‘We are looking for corporate partners as we head into Phase II trials,’ Kalos said.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, April 26, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- After a stroke, many patients are given the clot-busting intravenous drug alteplase, but another drug may be more effective, Australian researchers report.

Among more than 200 stroke victims, TNKase (tenecteplase) was about twice as effective as alteplase in restoring blood flow to the brain, and it also resulted in less disability, the scientists found.

"Tenecteplase is likely to become the preferred medication for clot-dissolving in stroke patients," said lead researcher Dr. Bruce Campbell, head of the stroke department at the Royal Melbourne Hospital in Parkville. "It is likely to change stroke treatment guidelines and clinical practice."

Campbell said tenecteplase is more effective than alteplase because of differences in the enzymes in each drug.

Although both drugs work in the same way, tenecteplase is better at attacking and dissolving clots, and more resistant to factors that inhibit the breakdown of clots, he said.

For either drug to be most effective, it needs to be given as soon as possible after a stroke occurs. In this study, patients were given the drugs within 4.5 hours after the onset of a stroke, Campbell said.

Although tenecteplase appears to be more effective for stroke patients, it's not approved for that use in the United States, according to Dr. Rohan Arora, director of stroke at Long Island Jewish Hospital in Forest Hills, N.Y.

In 2000, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved tenecteplase for use after a heart attack, Arora said.

"Tenecteplase is being widely used in developing countries, such as India," he said. "One reason is it's cheaper than alteplase."

In the United States, tenecteplase costs about $5,800, versus alteplase, which costs $8,000, Arora said.

In addition, tenecteplase is easier to give, requiring only a single injection, while alteplase requires an injection and an IV drip, he added.

Arora explained that tenecteplase is not widely used in the United States for heart attack patients because these patients are typically treated with angioplasty or heart bypass surgery.

For the new study, which did not receive drug company funding, Campbell and his colleagues randomly assigned 202 stroke patients to either alteplase or tenecteplase before surgery to remove clots.

The researchers specifically looked to see which drug was better at restoring blood flow to clot-blocked blood vessels in the brain, and which drug resulted in patients having better outcomes.

The investigators found that 22 percent of the patients treated with tenecteplase had more than 50 percent of blood flow return to the brain, compared with 10 percent of those treated with alteplase.

Patients treated with tenecteplase also had better functional outcomes after 90 days than those given alteplase, the findings showed.

Bleeding into the brain, the most serious side effect of either drug, occurred in 1 percent of patients, regardless of which drug they received, Campbell said.

The report was published April 26 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on stroke, visit the National Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that tenecteplase costs about $5,800 in the U.S. compared with about $8,000 for alteplase.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) — Could one hour be all you need to quit smoking, without cravings or side effects?

That’s what Innovative Laser Therapy, a New Haven, Connecticut-based company, advertises on its website. The clinic uses low-level lasers - similar to those sometimes used to treat arthritis-related pain - to target specific acupuncture points on the body related to addiction, metabolism and stress, and claims that most patients can quit smoking after one session.

In that session, the laser is pointed at spots on the face, hands and wrist, with the aim of relieving withdrawal symptoms and preventing cravings.

“When you smoke a cigarette, you artificially tell your brain to release endorphins,” Frank Pinto, the owner of Innovative Laser Therapy, told Reuters Health. Therefore, quitting leads to a quick drop in endorphin levels, he said.

“The laser basically stimulates the nerve endings to tell the brain to release a flood of endorphins” to boost a patient over that initial 3-5 day hump of withdrawal symptoms, he said.

The treatment also targets other points that are thought to suppress appetite — to prevent the weight gain that often comes with quitting smoking — and promote relaxation, according to Innovative Laser Therapy.

But does it work?

There's limited research showing that laser therapy might help some smokers quit. Innovative Laser Therapy cites one study, a 2008 paper published in the Journal of Chinese Medicine, available on their site at link.reuters.com/pus95p. A UK-based team found that smokers that had four laser treatments over two weeks were more likely to quit than smokers that had three treatments. Those in the three treatment group, in turn, had better success rates than a control group that was given fake laser treatments.

After 6 months, 55 percent of the four-treatment group was smoke-free, compared to 19 percent of the three-treatment group and 6 percent of those who were treated with fake lasers.

The authors weren’t able to follow most of the 340 participants for more than 6 months after treatment, so they don’t know if those who stopped smoking started up again, or if they really quit for good. And the journal’s site - which offers lasers and other treatments for sale — does not say whether it is peer-reviewed.

In contrast, a 2000 Singapore study of 330 adolescents found no difference in 3-month quitting rates for participants treated with real or fake laser therapy.

“In scientific terms, this one (UK) study is not enough evidence to recommend (the) laser for smoking cessation,” Dr. Adrian White told Reuters Health by email. Dr. White is a research fellow at Peninsula Medical School in the UK who co-authored a review of laser therapy and similar smoking cessation methods for the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organization that evaluates medical research. “The results conflict with the other study, and they seem ‘too good to be true.’”

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 1 in 5 Americans is a current cigarette smoker, and the majority of them smoke every day. The American Heart Association reports that more than 80 percent of smokers say they want to quit. But many smokers try more than one smoking cessation method or take years of trying before they do quit for good.

Pinto launched Innovative Laser Therapy after he successfully quit smoking with a round of laser therapy from a clinic in Florida. His company charges $350 for a one-time treatment that takes less than an hour, and offers free extra treatments to patients who are still struggling with quitting in the following 6 months. Other companies do a few shorter therapy sessions as part of their regular treatment plan.

Using acupuncture methods to treat addictions such as smoking is not new, White said, but there is still no clear evidence that treatment with needles has any therapeutic effects either.

And while the laser device used by clinics including Innovative Laser Therapy has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for temporary pain relief, the agency has not cleared it to be marketed for smoking cessation.

The UK study found that the side effects of the treatment were similar to some withdrawal symptoms, and the FDA has classified the laser as a “nonsignificant risk” device. Pinto says that the biggest side effect he sees is that “people feel relaxed during the treatment.”

Neil Camera, the president of Laser Therapeutics, Inc., says that FDA approval could be on the horizon. His company, which produces the lasers and supplies them to centers that are running clinical trials on the treatment’s effectiveness, has had an application for approval in to the FDA for three and half years, he said.

But the government organization had only dealt with drugs - not new technology - for smoking cessation, which has slowed down the process, Camera said. “The FDA didn’t know how to handle it, quite frankly,” he told Reuters Health. “That was the biggest drawback.”

Dr. Neil Spielholz, of Nova Southeastern University in Fort Lauderdale, was involved with the initial study submitted to the FDA - the same one that showed the success of laser treatment in UK smokers. The FDA had a couple of problems with that study, he said, including that successful quitting was measured by a smoker’s own reports, and not by more modern methods that calculate the amount of carbon monoxide in someone’s breath. In response, Laser Therapeutics is designing another study to address those comments, he said.

A spokesperson from the FDA confirmed that the agency is aware of the concept of using low level lasers for smoking cessation and had been in discussions with those seeking to get it approved on how they should proceed.

Usually three convincing studies involving large groups of human patients are needed before the FDA decides to approve a treatment.

Pinto says that Innovative Laser Therapy follows up on the success of all of its clients a month after the treatment for clinical evidence that will be part of the package of data presented to the FDA.

“The company (Laser Therapeutics) is going crazy,” Spielholz told Reuters Health. “They want to get this thing approved, obviously.”

But, he said of the initial evidence in favor of the treatment, “this one is only a single study, which of course the people who believe in lasers will jump on ... (but) things have got to be confirmed. One study, no matter how many patients are in it, really needs one or two confirmation studies.”

If future studies do show its effectiveness, laser treatment would have a leg up over conventional methods of smoking cessation, such as medications including Chantix and Zyban, said Spielholz, who continues to work with Laser Therapeutics on getting FDA approval.

The lack of any drugs involved in laser therapy “would be the beauty of this,” he said. “You do not have those side effects of suicidal thoughts and feelings of paranoia that are reported for the drugs,” he said.

Still, Laser Therapeutics’ Camera said, the treatment won’t work on everybody. “The person has to be wanting to quit smoking,” he said. “They can’t be dragged in by a spouse or whatever, because nothing’s going to work then.”

Dr. Martha Daviglus, who studies preventative medicine at Northwestern University, agreed that the most important part of any smoking cessation program was that smokers were ready to quit. After seeing the initial research, she’s hopeful, but cautious, about low-level laser therapy as a way to help people do that.

“There are hundreds of methods to quit smoking,” she said. “We can hope that this is going to be a method that is going to help people.” But, Daviglus said, “We need more research and more evidence.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that the company profiled "charges $350 for a one-time treatment that takes less than an hour, and offers free extra treatments to patients who are still struggling with quitting in the following 6 months. Other companies do a few shorter therapy sessions as part of their regular treatment plan."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Patients gave universally positive feedback about the app's ease of use and the ability to have wounds monitored

CHICAGO (Jan. 19, 2018): A new smartphone app called WoundCare is successfully enabling patients to remotely send images of their surgical wounds for monitoring by nurses. The app was developed by researches from the Wisconsin Institute of Surgical Outcomes Research (WiSOR), Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, with the goal of earlier detection of surgical site infections (SSIs) and prevention of hospital readmissions. The study results appear as an "article in press" on the website of the Journal of the American College of Surgeons ahead of print.

SSIs are the most common hospital-acquired infection and the leading cause of hospital readmission following an operation.1,2,3 Due to the prevalence off SSIs, the WiSOR research team decided to see if postoperative wound monitoring could be effectively achieved by having patients upload photos through the WoundCare app and answer a few brief questions to gather information not easily captured through images.

"Patients cannot identify [infections] and frequently ignore or fail to recognize the early signs of cellulitis or other wound complications," study authors wrote. "This drawback leads to the common and frustrating scenario where patients present to a routine, scheduled clinic appointment with an advanced wound complication that requires readmission, with or without reoperation. However, the complication may have been amenable to outpatient management if detected earlier."

Forty vascular surgery patients were enrolled in the study. There was an overall data submission rate of 90.2 percent among participants, and submissions were reviewed within an average of 9.7 hours. During the study, seven wound complications were detected and one false negative was found.

"We set out to come up with a protocol where patients could become active participants in their care and allow us to be in closer communication and monitor their wounds after they leave the hospital," said lead study author and general surgery resident Rebecca L. Gunter, MD. . "This approach allows us to intervene at an earlier time rather than waiting for patients to come back in after the problem has already developed past the point of being able to manage it on an outpatient basis."

Patients were enthusiastic about the app's ease of use and the reassurance they felt having their wounds regularly monitored. The nurse practitioners responsible for reviewing the submitted images attested to the value of the photos and patient satisfaction, although they also noted it was difficult to find time to review the submitted images on top of an already heavy clinical workload. Study authors note that the success and sustainability of a post-discharge wound-monitoring protocol requires a dedicated transitional care program and not simply adding a task to the current staff workload.

This protocol also has a cost-savings component, in addition to the patient safety and satisfaction aspects. Study authors note that SSIs are the most expensive hospital-acquired infection, costing an average of nearly $30,000 per wound-related readmission and an estimated $3-10 billion annually.

"If you could imagine saving the cost from the number of patients whose readmission you were able to prevent, that result could provide significant savings to the health system," Dr. Gunter said. Although capturing specific numbers related to cost-savings was not part of this study, Dr. Gunter said it is an important area of focus for future studies.

A limitation to telemedicine protocols that call for the use of smartphones is that not every patient has the necessary technology or knowledge to upload images on their own. The WiSOR research team addressed this issue by having participants undergo tailored training to learn to use the WoundCheck app. They provided each patient with an iPhone 5S and an accompanying visual reference guide to further assist in using the phone and app. Dr. Gunter said they were very successful in giving patients knowledge and access to technology so they could participate in the study. She said this is a model easily adaptable to other medical centers, whether through providing participants with a phone, having a rotating supply of phones at the hospitals for patients to borrow, or relying on a patient's personal device.

"We have demonstrated that a population of complex and high-risk patients, many of whom are older adults and novice smartphone users, can complete this protocol with high fidelity and satisfaction," the researchers concluded.

Study coauthors from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, include Sara Fernandes-Taylor, PhD, Shahrose Rahman, BS, Lola Awoyinka, MPH, Kyla M. Bennett, MD, Sharon M. Weber, MD, FACS, Caprice C. Greenberg, MD, MPH, FACS, and K. Craig Kent, MD, FACS.

"FACS" designates that a surgeon is a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons.

Support for this study came from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: AHRQ R21 HS023395. Dr. Gunter is supported by the National Institutes of

Health: NIH T32 HL110853. This study was presented at the 13th Annual Academic Surgical Congress, Las Vegas, Nev., February 2017.

Citation: Feasibility of an Image-Based Mobile Health Protocol for Postoperative Wound Monitoring. Journal of the American College of Surgeons.

1Wiseman JT, Guzman AM, Fernandes-Taylor S, et al. General and vascular surgery readmissions: a systematic review. J Am Coll Surg 2014;219:552-569.e2.

2Weber DJ, Sickbert-Bennett EE, Brown V, et al. Completeness of surveillance data reported by the National Healthcare Safety Network: an analysis of healthcare-associated infections ascertained in a tertiary care hospital, 2010. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012;33:94-96.

3Lewis SS, Moehring RW, Chen LF, et al. Assessing the relative burden of hospital-acquired infections in a network of community hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013;34:1229-1230.

About the American College of Surgeons

The American College of Surgeons is a scientific and educational organization of surgeons that was founded in 1913 to raise the standards of surgical practice and improve the quality of care for surgical patients. The College is dedicated to the ethical and competent practice of surgery. Its achievements have significantly influenced the course of scientific surgery in America and have established it as an important advocate for all surgical patients. The College has more than 80,000 members and is the largest organization of surgeons in the world. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release addresses the overall cost of post-surgical infections and the potential for cost savings using the monitoring app. The lead author of the study is quoted saying that preventing readmissions due to infection could lead to “significant savings to the health system,” and the release notes that “capturing specific numbers related to cost-savings was not part of this study.”
The news release helpfully states that providers have to pay for training and in some cases smartphones for patients, and pay staff to monitor the data in a “dedicated transitional care program.”
The the app itself is free for patients to download, which isn’t explicitly mentioned. There’s no mention of whether hospitals have to pay to use it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 12, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- As a particularly nasty flu season rages across the United States, scientists have found a powerful new disinfectant that makes "light" work of the virus.

Researchers say a certain spectrum of ultraviolet light -- called far-UVC -- easily kills airborne flu viruses while posing no risk to people.

It could offer a new, inexpensive way to eliminate airborne flu viruses in indoor public spaces such as hospitals, doctors' offices, schools, airports and aircraft, said the team from Columbia University Medical Center in New York City.

The disinfecting success of initial experiments still need to be confirmed, said lead research David Brenner.

But he believes "the use of overhead, low-level far-UVC light in public locations would be a safe and efficient method for limiting the transmission and spread of airborne-mediated microbial diseases, such as influenza and tuberculosis."

As the researchers explained, broad-spectrum UVC light kills viruses and bacteria, and it is currently used to decontaminate surgical equipment. But this type of light can cause skin cancer and cataracts, so it's not used in public spaces.

However, Brenner and his colleagues wondered if a much narrower spectrum of ultraviolet light, far-UVC, might be a safer option.

In prior studies, they found that far-UVC light killed methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) bacteria -- a common and dangerous "superbug" -- without harming human or mouse skin.

In this new study, they found that far-UVC light also killed airborne H1N1 virus, a common strain of flu virus.

"Far-UVC light has a very limited range and cannot penetrate through the outer dead-cell layer of human skin or the tear layer in the eye, so it's not a human health hazard," said Brenner, who directs Columbia's Center for Radiological Research.

However, "because viruses and bacteria are much smaller than human cells, far-UVC light can reach their DNA and kill them," he said in a university news release.

Lamps with this type of UV light currently cost less than $1,000, Brenner said, but that price would likely fall if the lamps were mass-produced.

"And unlike flu vaccines, far-UVC is likely to be effective against all airborne microbes, even newly emerging strains," he said.

Two flu experts were encouraged by the findings.

"The prospect of reducing the transmission of influenza and other respiratory viruses using far-UV radiation is very exciting," said Dr. Michael Grosso, chief medical officer at Huntington Hospital in Huntington, N.Y.

"Though hand-washing remains critically important, it does not prevent every instance of transmission," Grosso said. "Immunization and antiviral medications are also important, but again, have limitations. It appears that low-dose far-UV light is safe and effective, and has the advantage of inactivating a wide range of disease-causing viruses."

Dr. Len Horovitz, a pulmonary specialist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, agreed.

He noted that the technology's cost "is not prohibitive, and it is safe. This use can sterilize the air in a public space, reducing the spread of respiratory droplets containing flu viruses and other bacteria and viruses."

The findings were published online Feb. 9 in the journal Scientific Reports.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on flu.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It’s mentioned “lamps with this type of UV light currently cost less than $1,000 … but (according to the study author) that price would likely fall if the lamps were mass-produced.” The article gets credit for addressing this issue, but the tone seemed a bit speculative.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By the time 8-year-old Ava Christianson got to the National Institutes of Health this summer, she had lost several grueling rounds to leukemia and was bracing for the next one.

Intensive chemotherapy, which cures up to 90 percent of children with the most common type of leukemia, hadn’t kept her cancer from coming back. Neither had a painful bone-marrow transplant nor an experimental treatment. Her careworn father cried in the shower to hide his anguish. Her mother couldn’t help but wonder, “Why is this happening to our child?”

But Ava was fortunate in one respect. Discoveries in the burgeoning field of immunotherapy are offering lifelines to desperate patients who previously had none. “Five years ago,” said her mother, Bethany Christianson, “our doctor would have just had to tell us to go home.”

Instead, in a five-minute procedure at the NIH Clinical Center in late July, the freckle-face girl got another chance to beat the acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) that has stalked her since age 4. She was infused with 30 million of her own T cells, a key part of the immune system, that had been genetically modified to track down and kill her cancer like a pack of crazed dogs.

Ava’s treatment, called CAR T-cell therapy, is one of the new immunotherapies that attempt to rally the body’s own defenses to fight malignancies. Unlike other cancer advances, it is being tested widely in children because of its stunning effectiveness in ALL, the most common pediatric cancer. In early-stage trials, many patients who had repeatedly relapsed saw their leukemia disappear. Some remain cancer-free.

Yet big questions surround the therapy, and many scientists are urging caution. “There’s very real promise with this approach, but the immune system is complicated,” said Terry Fry, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) scientist who is running Ava’s trial. “There’s a lot that still needs to be worked out.”

[Here’s what you need to know about immunotherapy]

Complications can be lethal; one clinical trial was briefly halted in July after three young adults died of brain swelling. It is also far from clear that such a personalized approach — possibly costing hundreds of thousands of dollars — is economically viable on a large scale or will produce the lasting remissions that everyone hopes to see.

U.S. researchers running CAR T-cell trials for children and adults with leukemia and lymphoma have reported remission rates up to 90 percent in some cases. That’s a major achievement in a group whose cancer is emboldened by every treatment failure. But rates in other trials are considerably lower, and many patients eventually relapse.

“The treatment is great about getting people into remission but not at keeping everyone in remission,” said Rebecca Gardner, a pediatric oncologist at Seattle Children’s hospital. She ran an early-stage trial using CAR T-cell therapy in which 39 of 42 patients went into complete remission. By a year, about half had relapsed, either because their T cells had inexplicably disappeared or their cancer had changed so that the T cells could no longer recognize it. “Leukemia is really smart,” she said.

Ava’s family understands that better than most. She underwent her first CAR T-cell procedure in Minnesota last year, but her leukemia returned within six months. Her treatment at NIH involved a next-generation version, developed by NCI, that used a different target for her marauding T cells. In this first-in-humans trial, she is Patient No. 18.

In late August, the Christiansons learned that Ava had gone into remission. She and her mother, who were still at the Clinical Center in Bethesda, Md., gleefully rushed home to Wisconsin so Ava could start third grade.

Her parents, so frequently disappointed, remain guardedly optimistic. “Hope is all you have,” said her father, Jay Christianson.

Her mother added, “We just need this to work and to stay working.”

NCI’s Fry is careful not to make any promises about an extended remission. “I can’t say that’s going to be the case,” he said, “because we just don’t know. It’s too soon.”

Scientists have wanted for decades to marshal the immune system to vanquish cancer, but their attempts have mostly been frustrated. In the past few years, however, breakthroughs have led to the development of two types of immunotherapy — checkpoint inhibitors and CAR T cells — that are generating enormous excitement.

Checkpoint inhibitors are off-the-shelf therapies aimed at unleashing the immune system’s power to see and attack the disease. Used mostly in adults, to date, they are producing impressive results, albeit in a minority of cases. The most prominent: Jimmy Carter. The former president became the poster patient when he was successfully treated last year with a checkpoint inhibitor called Keytruda, along with surgery and radiation, for his advanced melanoma.

Much of the earliest research for customized CAR T-cell therapy was conducted at NCI, the University of Pennsylvania, the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Seattle Children’s.

“The technology of CAR T cells is really a breakthrough, especially for children,” said Michael Jensen, director of the Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research at Seattle Children’s Research Institute.

Almost all the initial work focused on CD19, a protein found on the surface of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Scientists figured out ways to use a chimeric antigen receptor, or CAR, to reprogram T cells to recognize the protein and kill the cancer.

[Immunotherapy is showing benefits in an increasing number of cancers]

Zane Esposito, a 13-year-old from Plano, Tex., calls himself the “T-Cell Explorer.” He was diagnosed with ALL in June 2010. “I just thought my back hurt,” he said. “I couldn’t walk up the steps very well.” Almost three years of treatment, including punishing chemotherapy, provided a couple of years of remission. His leukemia returned in January, and this time it did not respond to treatment.

Soon after Zane relapsed, he and his father bumped into friends in a local doughnut shop who told them about a TV segment on CAR T-cell therapy. Paul Esposito searched online and found Gardner’s clinical trial in Seattle. Zane signed on, got the treatment, went back into full remission and gained 25 pounds.

His Texas doctors have talked about a bone-marrow transplant to increase the chance of a true cure, but the Espositos have resisted. The Seattle doctors say it is not clear yet whether that is necessary or whether there would be still other options should Zane’s cancer recur.

Zane is moving on, with dreams of competing on “Chopped Junior” to show off his homemade pasta and pizza. On July 27, the day that Ava got her T cells, he celebrated his 13th birthday.

Ava was 4 when she started having leg pains, then trouble standing up. Her mother suspected Lyme disease. “You never think of cancer with a child,” she said, eyes filling as she recalled her daughter’s cancer diagnosis in November 2012. The doctors assured the family that it was typical leukemia — and curable.

Like most children, Ava quickly went into remission after starting the prescribed 30 months of chemotherapy. But at home in Prescott, a small Wisconsin city at the confluence of the Mississippi and St. Croix rivers, things did not get easier for the Christiansons. In early 2013, Ava was hospitalized in Minneapolis for a lung infection. About the same time, the couple’s second daughter, Audrey, was born 13 weeks premature and hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care unit in St. Paul. Bethany, who manages occupational therapists for a nursing-home chain, and Jay, a rural mail carrier, shuttled between the Twin Cities visiting their daughters.

“I would be with Ava during the day, and then when Jay got home, he would stay with Ava, and I would spend time with Audrey,” she said. “No matter what you do, you feel like a bad mom.”

A year or so after treatment began, Ava relapsed. Now she was in a much more dangerous category: children whose leukemia no longer responds to chemo. Her doctors arranged for a bone-marrow transplant, with her baby sister as the donor.

The transplant made her sick and the whole family miserable. Ava spent months in the hospital and then a year at home. Because of fears of infection, she couldn’t go out much. She missed all of first grade. But her parents had hope that the transplant would keep her cancer at bay.

[Brain cancer now the leading cause of cancer deaths in children]

At a six-month checkup, tests showed that the leukemia was back again. There were no more conventional treatments to try. But because of her two relapses, Ava was now eligible for a CAR T-cell trial at the University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospital. Her T cells would be genetically altered to go after CD19.The number of cells then would be vastly increased and reinfused.

It sounded like science fiction, but Bethany Christianson found comfort in talking to the father of Emily Whitehead. In 2012, the 6-year-old Pennsylvania girl became the first child to be treated with reprogrammed T cells for leukemia. She has been in remission ever since.

Ava got her treatment in April 2015 — after her cells were extracted via a tube inserted into her neck — and five days later had a massive immune reaction with a high fever and intense pain. While that is typical, some patients become dangerously ill. Yet Ava recovered fast, went into remission and attended summer school, where she learned how to make pigs-in-a-blanket and wrote her own cookbook.

By then, her parents had gotten used to living in the midst of remissions and relapses. “When she felt better, we would do everything we could,” Bethany said. They visited Robot World, a scientifically themed attraction a few hours from Prescott. “You don’t put things off, because you are always thinking, ‘What if?’ ”

Last fall, doctors delivered the bad news. Ava’s cancer had changed. It was no longer producing the CD19 protein, which meant her modified T cells could no longer recognize the disease. But the leukemia was still producing another common protein, called CD22, and that offered an opportunity.

As it happened, Fry, head of the blood-cancer section in NCI’s pediatric oncology branch, had already launched the world’s first trial using CAR T-cell therapy to focus on CD22. It seemed an equally promising target that could broaden the therapy’s impact, researchers thought. At the time, they did not realize that a significant percentage of patients in the other trials might relapse because of changes in their cancer.

Fry insisted as he designed the study that children be included, despite ever-present concerns about exposing them to safety risks. He wanted to avoid a delay in testing what could be a lifesaving pediatric treatment. “I didn’t want to take two to three years on adults, and then go back and do children,” he said.

[For a 6-year-old with cancer, a future staked on medicine’s hottest field]

The clinical trial already has treated nearly two dozen leukemia and lymphoma patients through age 30. The majority have gone into remission, although some have had their cancer return. While it is far too early to know long-term outcomes, Fry said he is convinced the CD22 treatment holds much potential. He is planning another trial next year with the Stanford University School of Medicine. It will target both proteins — CD19 and CD22 — simultaneously.

Once Ava relapsed after the Minnesota trial, Fry’s study at the NIH Clinical Center appeared to be the only option. But there was no slot immediately available. With Ava deteriorating, doctors put her on an experimental treatment that sent her into remission but had serious side effects.

They immediately stopped the medication when they learned Ava might get her T-cell therapy in January — she actually needed a high level of leukemia in her body to participate. But on this wrenching roller coaster of research and treatment, it turned out that she still had to wait several more months.

Ava’s cancer returned in June. Her T cells were extracted in preparation for the trial, even as she got sicker and sicker.

She was admitted to the Clinical Center in mid-July, to a room with dancing penguins painted on the windows. The day before her therapy, an ebullient Audrey burst into the room and the two sisters ran down the hall to a play space.

Her mother was ready this time for the intense immune reaction that followed treatment, although she still found it hard to watch Ava spike a fever of 106. “When you see that temperature on the thermometer, every bone in your body says it’s wrong to let it get that high,” Bethany said. “Then suddenly it’s over.”

If his daughter’s cancer returns yet again, “I have no idea what we’ll do,” Jay said. “We’re kind of up against the edge.”

Fry thinks she might be able to undergo a second round of her latest immunotherapy, as long as her cancer is still producing CD22 proteins. Doctors in Minnesota also might recommend a second bone-marrow transplant — something her parents dread, saying it was the roughest treatment of all.

For now, Ava is happily back in school. “I just want her to be a kid,” Bethany Christianson said. “She has missed out on a lot of that.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The CAR T-cell therapy is currently available only in clinical trials, where costs presumably aren’t an issue (a point the story might have made for readers who aren’t familiar with clinical trials).
That leaves the question of how much this therapy may cost if it becomes more widely available. And this is where the story offers some valuable insight: “It is also far from clear that such a personalized approach — possibly costing hundreds of thousands of dollars — is economically viable on a large scale.” In other words, to quote the story again: “big questions surround the therapy.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heart researchers have long known that plaques in coronary arteries start out as pimplelike bumps but get waxy and hard and filled with calcium as time passes. Calcium shows up as white flecks in CT scans. The hard plaques are not the dangerous ones — it is the softer ones that rupture and cause a heart attack. But the amount of calcium in arteries can give a good idea of the presence or extent of coronary artery disease.

Dr. Krumholz and Dr. Khurram Nasir, a preventive cardiologist at Baptist Health South Florida, who conceived the new study, reasoned that research on heart scans had not been designed to help doctors make treatment decisions they face today.

Current guidelines have vastly increased the number of people who are eligible to take statins. Many people, though, are reluctant to take them. So, the investigators asked, could a scan identify those whose actual risk is lower than what was calculated?

The study subjects were nearly 4,000 men and women ages 45 to 84 and included blacks, whites, Hispanics and Asians who were recruited in 2000 through 2002. According to today’s guidelines, half had risk scores high enough that a statin would be recommended or should be considered. But guidelines then were more conservative, and in accordance with them, the subjects did not take the drugs. All had heart scans, and half had no calcium visible on the scans. The subjects were followed for 10 years.

It turned out that the actual incidence of heart attacks or disabling chest pain in those with zero calcium was half or less than what the risk calculator predicted.

For example, a person who, according to the current risk calculator, has a 12 percent risk of a heart attack in the next decade should take a statin, the guidelines say. But if that person has a calcium score of zero, the actual risk turned out to be 4 percent, below the 7.5 percent threshold for recommending a statin according to the guidelines and below the 5 percent risk for considering a statin.

Dr. Nasir said he has been using the study’s findings in his clinic. First, he asks patients for whom statins are recommended according to the current guidelines if they would want to avoid taking the drugs if they turn out to have a calcium score of zero and an actual risk of less than 5 percent. Most tell him that they would. He then sends them for a scan.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that a CT scan looking for calcium in coronary arteries “typically costs between $75 and $100. Still, it is generally not covered by insurance and so is not often used to assess risk.” That’s enough information to clear our bar handily, although we’d note that such scans can also turn up lung nodules that require additional follow-up and related costs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, July 9, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A daily drink combining several nutrients appears to help people with early Alzheimer's disease improve their memory, a new study suggests.

As Alzheimer's progresses, patients lose their memory as synapses (connections between brain cells) deteriorate, according to background information included in the study. The new drink, called Souvenaid, may actually stimulate the growth of new synapses, said the drink's inventor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist Dr. Richard Wurtman.

But more research is needed before the drink could be made available to the public. And, even then, consumers should exercise caution, said William Thies, vice president for medical and scientific affairs at the Alzheimer's Association.

Nutricia, a division of Dannon, sponsored the study. MIT has a patent on Souvenaid, and Nutricia has the exclusive license on the patent.

"Existing data now suggests that it may be possible to receive something that will sustain cognition in people with Alzheimer's disease with a limited concern about side effects," Wurtman said.

Previous experiments in animals showed that giving them the three compounds included in the drink increased the production of synapses improving brain function, he said.

For the new study, nearly 260 early Alzheimer's patients in Europe drank either Souvenaid or a placebo for six months.

During the first three months of the study, patients in both groups showed improved memory. After that, however, patients taking the placebo had a decline in memory. In contrast, patients taking Souvenaid continued to show improved memory on tests used to assess Alzheimer's patients.

Whether Souvenaid will slow the progression of Alzheimer's isn't known. There is, however, a longer trial going on that might answer that question, Wurtman said. "I don't think it has any effect on the fundamental diseases process, but we'll see," he said.

The report was published in the July 10 online edition of the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease.

The drink combines three ingredients: choline, uridine and omega-3 fatty acids.

Choline is a B vitamin found in meats, nuts and eggs, and omega-3 fatty acids are found in fish, eggs, flaxseed and meat from grass-fed animals. Uridine, which is produced by the liver and kidneys, is also found in some foods as a part of RNA, which helps make protein in the body.

These nutrients, along with other proteins, are essential for making brain-cell membranes that form synapses. To be effective, all three compounds must be given together, the researchers said.

Nearly all patients drank the nutrient cocktail consistently throughout the study, and there were no serious side effects, the researchers reported.

To show the drink's effect on the brain, patients underwent electroencephalography (EEG) throughout the trial. During the study, the brains of those taking the drink shifted from patterns of dementia to more normal ones, the researchers found.

Since EEG patterns reflect the activity of synapses, this result suggests that synaptic function increased with treatment, the researchers said.

An earlier study found that patients with more advanced Alzheimer's did not benefit from Souvenaid, most likely because brains cells had already been lost so new synapses couldn't develop, Wurtman said.

There are as yet no plans to market Souvenaid, so the cost hasn't been established, company spokesman William Green said.

"Souvenaid is a test product in development, which is still undergoing clinical trials," Green said. "No plans for the introduction of Souvenaid to the market -- either in Europe or the U.S. -- have been confirmed. It is probable that any introduction would take place first in Europe."

An ongoing study will evaluate the product over two years. If it appears to have a positive effect, then it may be something that could benefit patients even before definitive symptoms of Alzheimer's appear, Wurtman said.

Thies, of the Alzheimer's Association, is very cautious about the benefits of Souvenaid.

"Medical foods do not have a requirement for FDA premarket approval, but they do have a requirement for having a scientific foundation and some evidence of efficacy," he said. "But they don't have the kind of data we would find for a medication."

That makes it difficult to make a clear-cut statement about the value of the product, he said.

"There isn't a clear diet that prevents you from getting Alzheimer's disease or improves your memory," Thies said.

In addition, medical foods for Alzheimer's most likely won't be covered by insurance, he said.

"You are making a judgment without the protections you have when dealing with a medication," Thies said. "You're going to be making a decision using your own funds and we would advise anybody to make sure they understand what the product offers and make sure they understand what it's going to cost."

For more about Alzheimer's disease, visit the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states “There are no plans to market Souvenaid, so the cost hasn’t been established.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CINCINNATI – Dawne Gardner-Davis almost skipped the free health screening for her son. The weather was rotten, an earlier appointment ran long — and 15-year-old Jordan was the picture of health.

Today, the Cincinnati mother of two is thankful she didn't. Doctors diagnosed Jordan with aortic root dilation, a potentially life-threatening heart defect. They advised the teen — who played six sports, his favorite being baseball — to quit competitive athletics for good.

For decades pediatricians and family physicians have sought a more effective way to identify young athletes at risk of dying while playing the sports they love.

Now, the Heart Institute at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center is testing a new method. In the most complete test of its kind, the institute is using both an electrocardiogram and limited echocardiogram to see the rhythm and structure of the heart.

If proved effective, it could become the norm for identifying heart conditions that put one in 10,000 people at risk when doing top-level physical activities, researchers say.

Since the study began about a year ago, 500 local teens have been screened and 26 diagnosed with heart abnormalities. Twenty-two can continue in athletics, though they'll require lifelong monitoring.

Four young athletes, two girls and two boys, have been advised to quit sports altogether. Researchers hope to screen a total of 640 before they're done.

So far, their work is turning up a higher rate of heart abnormalities than expected.

Jordan was one of the more serious cases.

That day at his appointment, he, his mother and little sister Jaelynne sat astonished as doctors described a dangerously large root in Jordan's heart. Because of its size, it could rupture if stressed by too much physical activity. The effects could kill him.

Jordan took his doctor's advice and quit the sports he loved.

"The saddest day for me had to be the day of (baseball) try-outs," Jordan says. "I woke up, and I couldn't go to try-outs. After that I just started to cope."

Cases of high school athletes collapsing and dying on sports fields most often result from undiagnosed heart defects, says Dr. Jeffrey Towbin, co-director and head of clinical care at the Heart Institute. Victims often show no earlier symptoms, looking the picture of health.

Towbin asked two pediatric cardiologists — Dr. Jeff Anderson and Dr. Michelle Grenier —to take on the study that he'd wanted to do since joining the Heart Institute 3 and one-half years ago.

"One of our goals is to advance the field … in areas either untouched or unappreciated as being important," Towbin says. "These cases are obviously each a tragic event that occur in every city a few times a year."

As high school sports begin this year, the caution takes on increased urgency.

Locally, swimmer Jose Cerda Navarro became unconscious during practice with his private swim club in October 2010. He died within the hour at the hospital, on this 18th birthday.

Cameron Batson, 18, died a few weeks before that, while playing a game of pick-up soccer. He had graduated that spring from high school in Covington.

In the United States, a doctor must approve participation in a school or competitive sports league. Approval is generally granted to teens with little to no family history of heart problems and a physical exam devoid of medical red flags.

Some years ago, Italy instituted a countrywide rule requiring competitive athletes to undergo an electrocardiogram, a test that records the electrical activity of the heart.

Fewer Italian athletes died after the testing began, but the tests also had a relatively high rate of falsely reporting medical problems. That led to unnecessary physical restrictions of athletes.

"There's got to be a better way," Anderson said. "That's what we set out to answer."

Anderson and Grenier now say that adding a limited echocardiogram — a two-dimensional image of the heart — can offer a more precise diagnosis.

National estimates are that roughly 1% of people are born with potentially life-threatening heart defects. But the Children's Hospital study is showing more than twice that rate and a higher rate for more minor abnormalities as well, perhaps because of better technology, Grenier says.

"I do think they're real numbers," she says of the study's findings so far. "Are they normal variations? What (abnormality) is going to contribute to the overall health versus something that just looks funny? That's not entirely known."

Grenier and her colleagues at the Heart Institute hope to continue this study — turn it into an ongoing program — so they may one day be able to answer those questions. In the meantime, screenings continue.

A key challenge now is making these tests affordable; most medical insurance plans won't cover them. Currently, an EKG and echocardiogram would cost parents a minimum of $2,500, Anderson says.

Simon's Fund, a non-profit organization, donated $5,000 to honor Cerda Navarro for screenings. Children's Hospital paid the rest, around $42,000, according to Children's spokesman Jim Feuer.

If an ongoing program of testing happens, the hospital would try to tap into third-party funding, donations and grants, Towbin says. "The hope would be that with data, we could get the entire system interested in participating … get funding to run a clinical trial, locally and maybe nationally."

After Jordan's diagnosis, his family packed the room to support him for every subsequent appointment.

He now takes daily blood pressure medication and is allowed to jog and do other light physical activities.

"He grew up around athletics, so I'm sure it was a culture shock for him," says his grandfather, Lacey Calloway. "Whatever he does, he knows we've got his back, even if it's tiddlywinks."

Sports teaches discipline, Gardner-Davis says, but her son is finding that in other interests. Jordan plays the drums in a high school concert band, is getting into photography and cars — now that he's 16. And he got a summer job at Great American Ballpark.

Gardner-Davis calls the decision to take him for that screening the "best decision of my life" and suggests other parents take advantage of the free service.

"We're so thankful," she says. "Otherwise, we'd have no idea, and Jordan could be standing here one day and gone the next."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that this sort of screening would typically cost $2500 and that the cost is a challenge. The story might have made the challenge more obvious by noting that screening all high school athletes would cost $20 billion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters) - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved on Tuesday the sale of Amgen Inc’s osteoporosis drug Prolia to help prevent fractures in post-menopausal women just days after the medicine received European approval.

The drug, known chemically as denosumab, is widely considered to be Amgen’s most important future growth driver and the FDA decision comes nearly two months ahead of the agency’s expected action date of July 25.

Investors greeted the good news by sending Amgen shares more than 4 percent higher in after-hours trading.

Amgen said the drug will be available within the next two weeks and cost $825 per 60 milligram injection based on wholesale acquisition cost.

Prolia, which is given by injection once every six months, works to decrease the destruction of bone and increase bone mass and strength by inhibiting proteins that activate bone-destroying cells.

“Denosumab is the most potent agent ever introduced into clinical practice that blocks bone degradation,” Roger Perlmutter, Amgen’s research chief, said in a telephone interview.

Analysts estimate the product could see annual global sales of $3.3 billion in 2014 for the world’s biggest biotechnology company, according to Thomson Reuters data.

“Most of us certainly expected this drug to be approved,” said Cowen and Co analyst Eric Schmidt, adding it was “a surprise that it happened before” July 25.

“I believe it will have gradual uptake in the commercial setting given that this is a silent disease and existing therapies are pretty good,” Schmidt said.

He estimates U.S. annual peak sales of $750 million to $1 billion in osteoporosis. The cancer market, depending on upcoming data, could be in the multi-billions, Schmidt said.

Amgen last month applied for U.S. approval to market the drug for reduction of fractures and other skeletal-related problems in patients with advanced cancer. Amgen will provide Phase III data on denosumab in advanced cancer patients at a major oncology meeting that begins later this week.

“What we’ve been able to show in our advanced cancer studies of men with prostate cancer and women with breast cancer, is when they have tumor in their bone that Prolia is more effective than the best available therapy at delaying significant fractures or other skeletal-related events,” Perlmutter said.

Prolia, or denosumab, was compared with Novartis’ Zometa in late stage clinical trials of advanced cancer patients.

“It’s also superior to Zometa in its ability to delay subsequent events,” Perlmutter said. “If you have a fracture because of tumor invasion of bone, the last thing you want to have is another one.”

According to the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, one out of every two women over age 50 will break a bone in their lifetime due to osteoporosis.

In a pivotal study that was the basis for the approval, Prolia reduced the incidence of vertebral, non-vertebral, and hip fractures in post-menopausal women with osteoporosis.

As Prolia only needs to be taken twice a year, it is likely to be attractive to patients who are not happy with current drugs that must be taken more often or cannot tolerate them.

An analysis of data combined over multiple U.S. health plans showed approximately 50 percent of patients discontinue oral bisphosphonate therapy within the first year, Amgen said.

“Prolia is a new treatment that reduces the risk of fracture at key sites, including the hip and spine, and is given as a convenient twice-yearly shot just under the skin. It will be a welcome new option,” Dr Felicia Cosman, clinical director of the National Osteoporosis Foundation, said in a statement, calling it the first new class of osteoporosis medicine introduced in nearly a decade.

The approval comes with a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS) that includes a medication guide for patients and information for healthcare providers that explains the risks and benefits of the drug, the FDA said.

Amgen shares rose to $52.92 in extended trading from their Nasdaq close at $50.76.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: According to the story, each injection is estimated to cost $825 and people will require two injections per year. There is no mention of whether insurance companies will cover the cost, particularly since cheaper drugs for osteoporosis are available. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. — Researchers at Mayo Clinic’s campus in Florida have conducted the world’s first prospective, blinded and placebo-controlled clinical study to test the benefit of using bone marrow stem cells, a regenerative medicine therapy, to reduce arthritic pain and disability in knees.

The researchers say such testing is needed because there are at least 600 stem cell clinics in the U.S. offering one form of stem cell therapy or another to an estimated 100,000-plus patients, who pay thousands of dollars, out of pocket, for the treatment, which has not undergone demanding clinical study.

The findings in The American Journal of Sports Medicine include an anomalous finding — patients not only had a dramatic improvement in the knee that received stem cells, but also in their other knee, which also had painful arthritis but received only a saline control injection. Each of the 25 patients enrolled in the study had two bad knees, but did not know which knee received the stem cells.

Given that the stem cell-treated knee was no better than the control-treated knee — both were significantly better than before the study began — the researchers say the stem cells’ effectiveness remains somewhat uninterpretable. They are only able to conclude the procedure is safe to undergo as an option for knee pain, but they cannot yet recommend it for routine arthritis care.

“Our findings can be interpreted in ways that we now need to test — one of which is that bone marrow stem cell injection in one ailing knee can relieve pain in both affected knees in a systemic or whole-body fashion,” says the study’s lead author, Shane Shapiro, M.D., a Mayo Clinic orthopedic physician.

Journalists, sound bites with Dr. Shane Shapiro are available in the downloads below.

“One hypothesis is that the stem cells we tested can home to areas of injury where they are needed, which makes sense, given that stem cells injected intravenously in cancer treatments end up in the patients’ bone marrow where they need to go,” he says. “This is just a theory that can explain our results, so it needs further testing.”

Another explanation is that merely injecting any substance into a knee offered relief from pain.

“That could be, but both this idea and the notion that a placebo effect could be involved would be surprising, given that some patients are still doing very well years after their study treatment ended,” says Dr. Shapiro.

He adds that these findings are important because while use of a patient’s own stem cells for regenerative therapy is extraordinarily popular, the treatments may be untested and are often poorly regulated.

Stem cell clinics often offer expensive treatments for conditions that range from multiple sclerosis, lung and heart disease, to cosmetic treatments, such as facelifts. None of these techniques have been studied because clinics maintain that use of a patient’s own cells is not a drug.

But, depending on how they are processed and used, stem cells can, in fact, be regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as biological products or drugs requiring rigorous safety and efficacy approval processes. In early September, the FDA held scientific meetings to clarify how to regulate such practices.

“We feel that if we are going to offer any stem cell procedures to our patients, the science needs to be worked out,” Dr. Shapiro says.

The study was conducted in Mayo’s Human Cell Therapy Lab. Researchers extracted 60 to 90 milliliters of bone marrow from each patient, then filtered it, removed all blood cells, and concentrated it down to 4 to 5 milliliters. The solution, which contained tens of thousands of stem cells, was injected into a patient’s knee using ultrasound-guided imagery.

“We actually counted all of the stem cells with markers that are accepted by the FDA, and we made sure they would be able to survive inside the patient,” Dr. Shapiro says. “Counting is expensive. Most clinics just draw the cells from bone marrow or fat and inject them back into the patient without checking for stem cells, hoping that patients get better,” he says.

Dr. Shapiro and his colleagues are currently designing new studies that will test whether the stem cells home to distant areas of injuries, as well as exploring other implications suggested in their findings.

Study investigators include Mayo Clinic in Florida senior author Mary L. O’Connor, M.D., Shari E. Kazmerchak, Michael G. Heckman, and Abba C. Zubair, M.D., Ph.D. Dr. O’Connor is now at Yale University.

Funding for this study was from Mayo Clinic’s Center for Regenerative Medicine.

About Mayo Clinic

 Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization committed to clinical practice, education and research, providing expert, whole-person care to everyone who needs healing. For more information, visit http://www.mayoclinic.org/about-mayo-clinic or https://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that patients may pay “thousands” out of pocket. It could have offered some information on the cost of alternative therapies, which would have put the cost burden in context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A mind-altering drug called ketamine is changing the way some doctors treat depression.

Encouraged by research showing that ketamine can relieve even the worst depression in a matter of hours, these doctors are giving the drug to some of their toughest patients. And they're doing this even though ketamine lacks approval from the Food and Drug Administration for treating depression.

"It became clear to me that the future of psychiatry was going to include ketamine or derivatives of ketamine," says David Feifel, a professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Diego, who began administering the drug to patients in 2010.

Ketamine was developed as an anesthetic and received FDA approval for this use in 1970. Decades later, it became popular as a psychedelic club drug. And in 2006, a team from the National Institute of Mental Health published a landmark study showing that a single intravenous dose of ketamine produced "robust and rapid antidepressant effects" within a couple of hours.

Since then, thousands of depressed patients have received "off-label" treatment with ketamine.

One of those patients is Paul, 36, who lives in San Diego and is a patient of Dr. Feifel. We're not using his last name to protect his medical privacy.

Paul's depression began with anxiety. "I was an extremely anxious child," he says. "I would always make choices based on fear. My life was really directed by what was the least fearful thing that I could do."

As Paul grew up, his extreme anxiety led to major depression, which could leave him unable to get out of bed for days. "I lived in pain," he says.

Paul managed to get through college and a stint in the Peace Corps. But most days were a struggle. And Paul has spent much of his adult life searching for a treatment that would give him some relief.

He tried just about every drug used for depression, as well as cognitive behavioral therapy, acupuncture, and even electroconvulsive therapy, which induces a brief seizure. But nothing worked — at least not for very long.

Paul says he was increasingly haunted by "this comforting thought of pressing a cold gun against my forehead where I felt the pain the most."

Then one day, while investigating depression on the Internet, Paul discovered the research on ketamine. "It was clear to me that this was real," he says.

Ordinarily, there would have been no legal way for Paul to get ketamine. He didn't qualify for most research studies because of his suicidal thoughts. And doctors usually won't prescribe a mind-altering club drug to someone with a mental illness.

But the studies of ketamine have produced results so dramatic that some doctors, including Feifel, are bypassing the usual protocols.

By the time Feifel began hearing about ketamine, he had become frustrated with existing depression drugs. Too often, he says, they just weren't helping his patients.

A major study on antidepressant medication published in 2008 seemed to confirm his suspicions. It found that current antidepressants really aren't much better than a placebo.

Many psychiatrists criticized that study. But not Feifel. "I was kind of like, I'm not surprised," he says. "These really don't seem like powerful tools."

Feifel remembers feeling "professionally embarrassed" that psychiatrists didn't have something better to offer their depressed patients. Something like ketamine.

He knew the drug had risks. It could be abused. It could produce hallucinations. And it didn't have the FDA's OK for treating depression.

But he also knew that doctors had a lot of experience with ketamine. It's been used for decades as an anesthetic that can rapidly stop pain without affecting vital functions like breathing. And ketamine's safety record is so good that it's often the painkiller of choice for children who arrive in the emergency room with a broken bone.

So in 2010, Feifel decided he wanted to offer low doses of the drug to some patients. The decision put him at odds with some prominent psychiatrists, including Tom Insel, director of the National Institute of Mental Health. "While the science is promising, ketamine is not ready for broad use in the clinic," Insel wrote in his blog a few months ago.

"There are a lot of pundits who remain skeptical or feel we need to research this ad infinitum before it's ready, which doesn't make sense to me," Feifel says. It's hard to take the wait-and-see approach when you're treating patients who are desperate for help, he adds.

Paul was one of those desperate patients when he was referred to Feifel in March of 2014. The referral was from a local psychiatrist who had run out of ideas, Feifel says.

And Paul jumped at the chance to try ketamine. "If there was even a 1 percent chance that this worked, it would have been worth it to me," he says. "My life was hanging in the balance."

And for Paul, the benefits of ketamine became obvious soon after one of his early injections.

"I remember I was in my bathroom and I literally fell to my knees crying because I had no anxiety, I had no depression," he says

For the past year, Paul has been getting ketamine every four to six weeks. He feels an altered sense of reality for an hour or two after getting the drug. The effect on depression and anxiety, though, lasts more than a month.

Ketamine doesn't always work that well, Feifel says. After treating more than 100 patients, he's beginning to understand the drug's limitations.

One is that its ability to keep depression at bay can fade pretty quickly. Feifel recalls one patient whose depression would disappear like magic after a dose of ketamine. But "we could never get it to sustain beyond maybe a day," he says.

Also, ketamine treatment is expensive because patients need to be monitored so closely. Feifel charges about $500 for each injection and $1,000 for an intravenous infusion, which takes effect more quickly. Insurers don't cover the cost because the treatment is still considered experimental.

Even so, ketamine clinics are popping up around the country and they have already treated thousands of patients willing and able to pay out of pocket. Some of the clinics are run by psychiatrists. Others have been started by entrepreneurial anesthesiologists and emergency room doctors, who are familiar with ketamine but may not know much about depression.

"We've seen ketamine clinics open up as pure business models," Feifel says. "I'm a little bit concerned about that."

Feifel fears something bad will happen to a depressed patient at one of these clinics. And that could set back efforts to make the drug more widely available.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Nice detail here. The story reports that each treatment can cost $500 to $1000 and it is usually repeated every few weeks. The story also reports the treatment is generally not covered by insurance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lung ultrasound has been shown to be highly effective and safe for diagnosing pneumonia in children and a potential substitute for chest X-ray, according to a study conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Results are currently published in the medical journal Chest.

To watch study author discuss this research, click this link: https:/

Pneumonia is the leading cause of death in children worldwide, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Symptoms include fever, cough, and rapid breathing. Chest X-ray is considered the test of choice for diagnosing pneumonia in children, but the WHO estimates three-quarters of the world's population does not have access to radiography.

Investigators conducted a randomized controlled trial in the pediatric Emergency Department at The Mount Sinai Hospital comparing lung ultrasound to chest X-ray in 191 children from birth to 21 years of age. The patients were randomly assigned into an investigational arm (received a lung ultrasound and if the physician needed additional verification, a chest X-ray) and a control arm (received a chest X-ray followed by a lung ultrasound). Researchers found a 38.8 percent reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm compared to no reduction in the control arm, with no missed pneumonia cases and no increase in any other adverse events.

The research team was led by James Tsung, MD, MPH, Associate Professor in the Department of Emergency Medicine and Department of Pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and former clinical fellow Brittany Pardue Jones, MD, who's currently Assistant Professor in the Department of Pediatrics at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.

"Ultrasound is portable, cost-saving and safer for children than an X-ray because it does not expose them to radiation," says Dr. Tsung. "Our study could have a profound impact in the developing world where access to radiography is limited."

Furthermore, the reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm resulted in an overall cost savings of $9,200, and length of stay in the Emergency Department was decreased by 26 minutes.

"In the era of precision medicine, lung ultrasound may also be an ideal imaging option in children who are at higher risk for radiation-induced cancers or have received multiple radiographic or CT imaging studies," says Dr. Tsung.

As more and more handheld ultrasound machines come to market, these results suggest that lung ultrasound has the potential to become the preferred choice for the diagnosis of pneumonia in children. Further research is needed to investigate the impact of lung ultrasound on antibiotic use and stewardship.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an integrated health system committed to providing distinguished care, conducting transformative research, and advancing biomedical education. Structured around seven hospital campuses and a single medical school, the Health System has an extensive ambulatory network and a range of inpatient and outpatient services--from community-based facilities to tertiary and quaternary care.

The System includes approximately 6,100 primary and specialty care physicians; 12 joint-venture ambulatory surgery centers; more than 140 ambulatory practices throughout the five boroughs of New York City, Westchester, Long Island, and Florida; and 31 affiliated community health centers. Physicians are affiliated with the renowned Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, which is ranked among the highest in the nation in National Institutes of Health funding per investigator. The Mount Sinai Hospital is ranked as one of the nation's top 10 hospitals in Geriatrics, Cardiology/Heart Surgery, and Gastroenterology, and is in the top 25 in five other specialties in the 2014-2015 "Best Hospitals" issue of U.S. News & World Report. Mount Sinai's Kravis Children's Hospital also is ranked in seven out of ten pediatric specialties by U.S. News & World Report. The New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai is ranked 11th nationally for Ophthalmology, while Mount Sinai Beth Israel is ranked regionally.

For more information, visit http://www. , or find Mount Sinai on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This release earns praise for clearly mentioning the cost savings derived from the use of chest ultrasounds versus chest X-rays in treating patients in the study — $9,700 from 191 patients. The release could have been even even more helpful by adding information showing chest ultrasounds cost about two-and-a-half times less than chest X-rays ($140 versus $370 respectively). The release also might have mentioned that there’s a large initial outlay for ultrasound machines that may make them too expensive in the developing world. Another upfront cost not mentioned is the expense of training emergency medicine physicians (and presumably also internal medicine, pediatric and family medicine physicians) to do this procedure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Christine Curtis of Sterling says she is a “happy mom” again, crediting her recovery from debilitating depression to an expensive treatment that sends magnetic pulses into the brain.

“I can’t put a price on it,” said Curtis, 36, who said she feels better than she has in a decade after completing 30 days of the procedure, called repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, or rTMS.

An increasing number of psychiatrists and hospitals — as well as entrepreneurs opening rTMS centers around the country — are betting that there are millions of people like Curtis, discouraged by depression treatments that have proved unsuccessful and willing to pony up thousands of dollars for the possibility of relief. The treatment, which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, is covered by Medicare in five states, but few private insurers pay for it routinely.

While rTMS has ardent supporters, its effectiveness is still debated, and there is little evidence showing how long the results last. The technique has been shown to work better than a placebo, but the proportion of patients who show complete relief ranges widely, from as few as 10 percent to as many as 57 percent, according to various studies.

The debate has huge implications, not just for many of the 14 million Americans who suffer from major depression every year but also for businesses eyeing a potentially lucrative market and insurers weighing whether to cover it.

About half of those 14 million Americans seek relief through psychotherapy and prescription drug treatment, according to an evaluation by the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. But studies show that antidepressants provide complete cessation of symptoms only about a third of the time. Magnetic stimulation is aimed at patients with such “treatment-resistant depression.”

Supporters say rTMS is worth the cost — between $6,000 and $12,000 for the four-to-six-week treatment — because it enables people such as Curtis to resume productive lives.

Skeptics question the price tag in light of uncertain benefits.

“The majority of studies that evaluated rTMS failed to find evidence of an enduring treatment effect after the initial response . . . and some . . . failed to find any significant treatment effect,” concluded Health Plan of Nevada, a UnitedHealthcare insurer, which rejected coverage in March.

With the nation’s health-care spending expected to top $2.7 trillion this year, the battle over paying for rTMS demonstrates why it is so difficult to rein in health-care costs. New technology is generally allowed into the market after studies show it is reasonably safe and more effective than placebos. But that’s not the same as showing it works better than current approaches.

Experts differ over whether it’s smart to cover new techniques if they haven’t proved superior to established methods. And they can also disagree over the medical research itself: Was a study done well? Were there enough patients enrolled? Did it ask the right questions? Insurers often call for more research, while doctors and patients — many desperate for help — warn against delay. And costs are rarely discussed publicly.

‘What did I have to lose?’

In December, when Curtis first had a magnetic coil placed on her scalp while a $70,000 machine sent pulses into part of her brain, she had already spent a decade trying seven different prescription medications in her battle with depression.

Getting no relief but gaining weight and feeling sluggish and “out of it” because of the drugs’ side effects, she eagerly agreed to the month-long series of five-day-a-week treatments. Most patients have between four and six weeks of near daily sessions.

Curtis’s psychiatrist, Niku Singh, who is also the medical director at TMS NeuroHealth, suggested that she try the procedure. “I was all for it,” said Curtis, whose insurance did not cover the treatment. “It’s a matter of nothing else had worked, so what did I have to lose?”

As the very first patient treated at the Tysons Corner facility, which opened in December, Curtis paid only $3,000 because the center needed a test patient to meet the requirements of the device manufacturer. The fee is generally about $10,000, but officials say they work with patients who can't afford that. Founders of the center compare rTMS’s potential to that of the now-ubiquitous laser eye clinics; they aim to open a chain of centers nationally that will take walk-ins and accept referrals from physicians. Walk-in patients without a doctor referral would be screened by the center’s medical director to determine if they are in fact appropriate candidates for rTMS treatment.

“We looked at the Lasik model and said, ‘Can we do this with depression? Can we do this with TMS?’” said Bill Leonard, president of the company.

During a treatment, a patient sits in a chair like one in a dentist’s office while an electromagnetic coil is placed against her head. The machine sends four seconds of magnetic pulses into the brain in 26-second intervals, making a woodpecker-like tapping noise. The whole procedure takes about 40 minutes and is monitored by a technician. Patients say it does not hurt. Studies have shown that side effects are few and generally minor, such as headaches and scalp irritations.

Singh said rTMS works by having the pulses stimulate a region of the brain that helps control mood; researchers say the pulses help depression by activating the release of neurotransmitters such as serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine. (Singh, who owns two psychiatry practices in the region, says he does not have an investment interest in TMS NeuroHealth.)

The use of rTMS for altering mood or affecting the brain has been studied since at least the early 1990s. After reviewing data from a study of 301 patients, the FDA cleared the device in 2008 for the treatment of major depression in adults who had failed to improve after at least one round of drug therapy.

That study was funded by the device’s manufacturer, Neuronetics, a company based in Malvern, Pa. It found that up to 17 percent of patients treated with the device for six weeks became symptom-free, about twice as many as those treated with a sham rTMS machine.

Subsequent studies have shown a range of results, with about a third of patients reporting complete relief. One 2010 study of 199 “moderately treatment resistent” patients funded by the National Institute of Mental Health found that rTMS was four times as likely to get patients symptom-free as was a sham procedure. Patients in that study were treated five times a week for three to five weeks. One key measure — known as the “number needed to treat” — found that one patient became symptom-free for every 12 who were treated. Five percent of the patients in the sham group became symptom-free.

Supporters such as those at TMS NeuroHealth say they are seeing better results than that among their patients, who can continue taking antidepressants along with their treatment. Curtis, for example, still takes a daily antidepressant four months after completing her treatment, but she has been able to sharply reduce the dosage.

Curtis said she noticed no change in her depression at the very start of her rTMS treatment, but she began feeling better after about two weeks of treatment. “I’m not up and down anymore,” she said.

For patients who don’t respond to prescription drugs and talk therapy, the other major option is electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, in which an electrical current is sent through the brain to deliberately cause a seizure. The procedure, which is more widely used than rTMS, requires two to three treatments a week for three to four weeks and is effective for many patients. But it requires anesthesia and sometimes causes memory loss or confusion. rTMS does not require anesthesia, and its side effects are generally mild. A few small studies have looked at its effects on cognitive function and found either no effect or slight improvement, according to the AHRQ analysis. The costs of ECT — typically about $3,300 for four weeks of thrice-weekly treatments, according to AHRQ data — are covered by most private insurers as well as by Medicare and Medicaid. The cost is higher, however, if a patient must be admitted to the hospital.

Linda Carpenter, an associate professor of psychiatry and human behavior at Brown University, who has conducted medical studies using rTMS for depressed patients, says the treatment is effective for some patients, possibly even better than simply trying another medication. But she says questions remain about how long the effects last and how often a patient should return for additional sessions.

“What’s the range of booster treatments people need?” she asks. “Is it once a week, or every couple of years? There’s a huge range in my clinical experience.” Carpenter, a physician, says research has not found any safety issues for patients returning for additional treatments, but cost is a factor.

Uncertainty about its long-term effectiveness is why most insurers do not routinely cover rTMS. Medicare also has mainly rejected coverage, though in January, the administrator of the program’s New England region became the first to approve it, citing the AHRQ report and an assessment from an independent regional advisory board.

That 19-member panel voted 10 to 5 last year that studies of the treatment showed it to be as good as or better than usual care for depression. Six of the 10 said it represented a “reasonable” value for its cost; four saw it as a low value. (The same panel voted 9 to 6 that rTMS’s health benefit was equal to that of ECT.) A similar coverage decision proposal is being considered by the Medicare office serving the Washington region.

Even with limited insurance coverage, about 8,000 patients have had the treatment, and the number of treatment centers has doubled to a total of about 400 nationwise since 2010, according to reports by the device’s maker. Centers include some big names, such as Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

Still, some are not convinced. “The initial treatment with rTMS is $12,000: That’s a lot of generic Prozac or Effexor,” which are cost-effective antidepressants with long track records, said Joel Rubinstein, associate medical director of Harvard Pilgrim HealthCare, an insurer that does not cover rTMS. “Managed care has an obligation to a population. You’re shepherding a fixed amount of resources across a large population and trying to do it according to some sort of evidence-based system.”

Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent program of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit, nonpartisan health policy research and communication organization not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The costs of rTMS, and the market forces that work to encourage or restrain use of this technology, are well described.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON – (February 19, 2015) – In the first clinical trial directly comparing three drugs most commonly used to treat diabetic macular edema, researchers found all were effective in improving vision and preventing vision loss. However, one drug, aflibercept, provided greater improvement for people with more severe vision loss when treatment was initiated. The trial was conducted by the National Eye Institute Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net) including researchers from Joslin Diabetes Center. The results appeared in the February online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Diabetes is a significant risk factor for developing eye diseases. The most common diabetic eye disease and a leading cause of blindness is diabetic retinopathy, which is caused by elevated blood sugar levels damaging the blood vessels of the retina and affects approximately 7.7 million Americans. About 750,000 Americans with diabetic retinopathy have diabetic macular edema (DME) in which fluid leaks into the macula, the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The fluid causes the macula to swell, blurring vision. “DME is the leading cause of moderate vision loss in working-age adults with diabetes. With the rate of diabetes increasing dramatically worldwide, many individuals will be at risk for vision loss from diabetic eye complications and DME is a major global health concern,” says Jennifer K. Sun, M.D., M.P.H., a member of the study research team and writing committee, and an Investigator in the Section on Vascular Biology, an ophthalmologist in Beetham Eye Institute at Joslin and an Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical School.

In an earlier study, Joslin researchers reported that VEGF, a major growth factor for blood vessels, is elevated in the eye fluids of patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy and DME, causing leakage and the growth of abnormal blood vessels. Over the past few years, drugs that target VEGF have become a standard treatment for DME, providing a preferred alternative or adjunct to laser treatment. The standard Medicare per-injection costs of the three anti-VEGF drugs evaluated in the study are about $1960 for aflibercept (Eylea), $1200 for ranibizumab (Lucentis) and $70 for bevacizumab (Avastin).

At the start of the trial, 660 adults with DME were enrolled: their average age was 61 years and 90 percent had type 2 diabetes. About half of the participants had 20/32 or 20/40 vision and the other half had vision of 20/50 or worse. They were randomized into three treatment groups and received the assigned study drug by injection into the eye until the DME resolved or stabilized. Participants on bevacizumab and ranibizumab received, on average, 10 injections, versus nine for those on aflibercept.

One year after starting treatment, all participants had improved vision. Those with mild vision loss (20/32 to 20/40) at baseline in all three treatment groups gained on average almost two lines on an eye chart. For participants with more severe vision loss (20/50 or worse), aflibercept improved vision on average nearly four lines, bevacizumab about 2.5 lines, and ranibizumab almost three lines.

“The results clearly remove any doubts about anti-VEGF drugs’ efficacy in treating DME. All three drugs improved vision substantially, with aflibercept showing more visual gains in patients with worse vision at the start of the trial. Physicians now have robust data to help them counsel patients and make informed decisions regarding treatment options,” says study co-author Lloyd P. Aiello, M.D., Ph.D., Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, Director of Joslin’s Beetham Eye Institute, co-head of Joslin's Section of Vascular Cell Biology, and founding chair of the DRCR Network.

In light of these positive results, “it is more important than ever for patients with diabetes to be evaluated on a regular basis for eye disease and receive treatment promptly once indicated as we now have excellent success in treating patients with DME,” says Dr. Aiello.

The trial was supported through a cooperative agreement from the National Eye Institute and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Regeneron Pharmaceutical provided the aflibercept and Genentech provided the ranibizumab for the study. The DRCR.net had complete control over the design of the study, data ownership and content of presentations and publications related to this study.

Joslin Diabetes Center, based in Boston, Massachusetts, undertakes diabetes research, clinical care, education and health and wellness programs on a global scale. Joslin is dedicated to ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives and offers real progress in preventing and curing diabetes. Joslin is an independent, nonprofit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and is recognized worldwide for driving innovative solutions in diabetes prevention, research, education, and care.

Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit www.joslin.org.

Joslin Research comprises the most comprehensive and productive effort in diabetes research under one roof anywhere in the world. With 30‐plus faculty‐level investigators, Joslin researchers focus on unraveling the biological, biochemical and genetic processes that underlie the development of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and related complications.

Joslin research is highly innovative and imaginative, employing the newest tools in genetics, genomics and proteomics to identify abnormalities that may play a role in the development of diabetes and its complications. Joslin Clinic patients, and others with diabetes, have the option of participating in clinical trials at Joslin to help translate basic research into treatment innovations.

Joslin has one of the largest diabetes training programs in the world, educating 150 M.D. and Ph.D. researchers each year, many of whom go on to head diabetes initiatives at leading institutions all over the globe. For more information, visit www.joslinresearch.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The costs of the three anti-VEGF drugs evaluated in the study were listed as about $1960 for aflibercept (Eylea), $1200 for ranibizumab (Lucentis) and $70 for bevacizumab (Avastin), per injection. This is satisfactory, although since a treatment course involves multiple injections, we’d like to have seen the total cost of treatment compared without having to do the math ourselves.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chemotherapy is administered to a cancer patient via intravenous drip in Durham, N.C. IVs are one of the most common things in health care.

New research calls into question what’s in those IV bags that nearly every hospitalized patient gets. Using a different intravenous fluid instead of the usual saline greatly reduced the risk of death or kidney damage, two large studies found.

The difference could mean 50,000 to 70,000 fewer deaths and 100,000 fewer cases of kidney failure each year in the U.S., researchers estimate. Some doctors are hoping the results will persuade more hospitals to switch.

“We’ve been sounding the alarm for 20 years” about possible harms from saline, said Dr. John Kellum, a critical care specialist at the University of Pittsburgh. “It’s purely inertia” that prevents a change, he said.

Kellum had no role in the two studies, which were discussed Tuesday at a critical care conference in San Antonio and published by the New England Journal of Medicine. Federal grants helped pay for the work.

IVs are one of the most common things in health care. They are used to prevent dehydration, maintain blood pressure, or give patients medicines or nutrients if they can’t eat.

Saline — salt dissolved in water — has been the most widely used fluid in the U.S. for more than a century even as evidence has emerged that it can harm kidneys, especially when used a lot.

Other IV solutions called balanced fluids include saline but also contain potassium and other things that make them more like plasma, the clear part of blood. They’re widely used in Europe and Australia.

The studies involved 28,000 patients at Vanderbilt University who were given IVs of saline or a balanced fluid. For every 100 people on balanced fluids, there was one fewer death or severe kidney problem.

Since there are about 30 million people hospitalized in the U.S. alone each year, “there are tens or hundreds of thousands of patients who would be spared death or severe kidney problems by using balanced fluids instead of saline,” said one study leader, Vanderbilt’s Dr. Matthew Semler.

After seeing the results two months ago, Vanderbilt hospital officials decided to primarily use balanced fluids. The University of Pittsburgh also has largely switched to them, Kellum said.

The fluids cost about the same — a dollar or two per IV — and many suppliers make both types, so switching should not be hard or expensive, doctors said.

IV fluids have been in the news since Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico last fall, shutting down electricity to three plants owned by Baxter International, one of the biggest makers of these fluids. The shortage has eased, but some supply issues remain.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: In comparing the costs of normal saline vs. balanced fluids, the article states “the fluids cost about the same — a dollar or two per IV — and many suppliers make both types, so switching should not be hard or expensive.”
This is sufficient for a satisfactory rating, but readers should be aware that even a difference of a few pennies per bag would have a significant impact at the institutional level, and a massive impact on the national level.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A new look at the medical evidence shows zinc supplements may take the edge off the common cold.

But not a whole lot.

Although the precise estimate is still uncertain, researchers found that people who started taking zinc-loaded lozenges or syrups within 24 hours of showing symptoms — a sore throat, say, or runny nose — shortened their cold by one day. By comparison, a normal cold lasts about a week.

Still, with an infection that currently has no good treatment and leads to an estimated 275 million lost work days a year in the U.S., well, what a difference a day makes.

The review, published by the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organization that evaluates medical research, also shows that people taking the supplements tended to have milder symptoms.

“I think one can give it a try,” said Dr. Meenu Singh, a pediatrician at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research in Chandigarh, India, who led the new work.

“But giving zinc over a long period of time for prevention should be done very carefully,” she told Reuters Health.

Zinc may interfere with other metals in the body, and that may have unpredictable consequences over the long haul, Singh said.

An earlier Cochrane review from 1999 didn’t find any signs that zinc supplements would work. But since then several new studies - known as randomized controlled trials - have been completed.

The new review is based on 13 trials with 966 participants who either took zinc or a dummy treatment at the beginning of their symptoms. Another two trials found that zinc helped stave off colds, but the quality of that research was low.

The bottom line: After seven days of treatment, those taking the supplements had less than half the chance of still being sick.

A typical adult has a few colds every year. While the episodes usually aren’t serious, the resulting visits to the doctor alone cost the U.S. an annual $7.7 billion, according to the new report.

Singh said the side effects of zinc lozenges, which can be bought for a few dollars in any drug store in the U.S., come down to bad taste and some cases of nausea.

The researchers did not study nasal zinc remedies, however.

In 2009, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration warned Matrixx Initiatives to stop selling its widely used supplement Zicam after more than 130 users reportedly lost their sense of smell.

Singh said there was no evidence of a similar danger from the lozenges or syrups.

Exactly how well zinc works is a matter of future research, and the one day estimate may well change, the researchers note. They add it is currently unclear what dose and particular formulation of the supplement will be most helpful.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that the supplements can be bought “for a few dollars,” which is more than the WebMD story noted. Even better, though, this story talked about the costs in work days missed and lost productivity from the common cold.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Still, the findings could help smooth the way for regulatory approval, wider use of the drugs by doctors and possibly reimbursement by insurers.

The drugs, evolocumab from Amgen and alirocumab from Sanofi and Regeneron, inhibit a protein in the body called PCSK9 that helps regulate cholesterol. In the studies detailed on Sunday, both drugs reduced the bad cholesterol by about 60 percent, to about 50 milligrams per deciliter from about 120 at the start of the studies. In many cases such big reductions were achieved even though the patients were already taking statins.

Both drugs could win approval from the Food and Drug Administration by this summer. Analysts say the drugs will have billions of dollars in annual sales and will be taken by millions of people who cannot lower their cholesterol enough using statins alone or cannot tolerate statins. (However, the PCSK9 drugs are taken by injection every two weeks or four weeks, which could deter some users.)

Statins reduce cardiovascular risk and scientists believe it is because they decrease low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, the so-called bad cholesterol. But merely looking at cholesterol levels can be misleading. The drug niacin did not protect against heart attacks and strokes even though it raised so-called good cholesterol and modestly lowered bad cholesterol.

Insurers in particular might demand proof that the PCSK9 drugs stave off heart attacks, strokes, deaths from coronary disease and procedures to open arteries before agreeing to pay for them for many patients. Executives at CVS Health, a leading pharmacy benefits manager, recently said that PCSK9 inhibitors might cost $7,000 to $12,000 a year and would strain health care budgets because so many people might use them.

“Managed care pharmacy, indeed the health care system, has never seen a challenge like this to our resilience in absorbing costs,” they wrote in the Health Affairs blog.

Whether the results from these two small studies will be persuasive enough remains to be seen.

The study of Amgen’s evolocumab involved 4,465 patients with various degrees of risk, two-thirds of whom were randomly chosen to get the drug in addition to the medication they were already taking. After one year, 0.95 percent of those in the group that received the drug had suffered a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular problem, compared with 2.18 percent in the group that did not take the drug. By a measure known as the hazard ratio, the risk of cardiovascular events was reduced by 53 percent.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It’s difficult to estimate costs for drugs that haven’t yet been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, so we feel this article did an exceptional job discussing the projected costs of PCSK9 inhibitors. The piece quoted executives at CVS Health who said these drugs may cost $7,000 to $12,000 a year, which may strain health care budgets if many people use them. Furthermore, insurers may be hesitant to pay for PCSK9 inhibitors until there is proof that they prevent heart attacks, strokes and death, it said.
Despite the potential high costs, analysts estimated the drugs will have billions of dollars in annual sales, the article added.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a big step towards developing a test that can tell people if they have cancer long before the first symptoms show up.

The blood test detected the majority of cancers in people with four of the biggest cancer killers: breast, colon, lung and ovarian cancer, the team at Johns Hopkins University said.

The test is a long way from being used to screen for cancer, but the study shows a way to get there, the team reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

“There is a lot of excitement about liquid biopsies, but most of that has been in late-stage cancer or in individuals where you already know what to look for,” said Dr. Victor Velculescu, professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins University Kimmel Cancer Center.

“The surprising result is that we can find a high fraction of early-stage patients having alterations in their blood,” said Velculescu, who led the study team.

It was not a slam dunk, but the test found cancer in the blood of more than half the patients who had been diagnosed with stage 1 cancer. It was even more accurate in finding late-stage cancers, but the goal would be to catch cancer in its earliest, easiest-to-treat stage.

There were no false positives in 44 people who did not have cancer, they said. That's important, said Dr. Wyndham Wilson of the National Cancer Institute, because there is no point detecting cancer in people if the cancer is not going to actually cause trouble.

"You don’t want to go screening people for hallmark (cancer) mutations unless you absolutely know that when you find it, that there is a tumor there and that it is a tumor that needs to be treated," said Wyndham, who was not involved in the study.

Sometimes, early-stage tumors or precancerous growths just go away -- attacked by the immune system or because they don't thrive for other reasons.

Several different liquid biopsies are already on the market, used to help track whether cancer treatments are working. But there’s nothing yet that can detect cancer in someone who has not yet been diagnosed.

It’s easy to find tumor mutations if you know what to look for. “The challenge was to develop a blood test that could predict the probable presence of cancer without knowing the genetic mutations present in a person’s tumor,” Velculescu said.

“We have used this approach to examine 58 cancer-related genes,” the team wrote in their report. The method involved deep sequencing – sequencing DNA 30,000 times over to look for mutations in DNA from tumor cells that floats in the blood.

Cancer patients had more of this DNA in their blood, the team found.

They identified 62 percent of the patients with stage I cancer – four out of eight colon cancer patients, and 90 percent of colon cancer patients with stage II, III or IV disease.

They got a positive in 45 percent of the lung cancer patients with stage I disease, 67 percent of ovarian cancer patients with stage I disease and 67 percent of breast cancer patients with stage I disease.

While that's good, it's not a great result. The test still missed a large percentage of cancers and will need much improvement, Velculescu said.

It will also have to be tried in larger groups of patients, and patients with different cancers. The first goal would be to try it in people at high risk of cancer but no symptoms yet – such as smokers, or people with cancer-causing gene mutations like BRCA mutations, Velculescu said.

Wyndham said it will be important to study such tests in large groups of people who have not had cancer diagnosed, to see if it can truly be used to screen asymptomatic people for cancer. And then it will have to be shown that using the test allows doctors to intervene sooner and help people.

Catching cancer in its earliest stages could save many lives. Cancer is the No. 2 killer overall in the United States.

”The survival difference between late stage and early stage disease in these cancers would account for more than a million lives each year worldwide,” Velculescu said.

The genetic sequencing is also expensive right now – on the order of several thousand dollars for the 30,000 repeats the team did. But costs are coming down steadily, he said.

Velculescu said Johns Hopkins had patented this test, and Velculescu is himself the founder of a company that does liquid biopsies for advanced cancer patients called Personal Genome Diagnostics.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has been very skeptical of blood tests that claim to diagnose disease before people have symptoms.

The agency has chastised a company called Pathway Genomics over its "liquid biopsy" test , saying the company had not shown the $699 test worked as advertised.

It’s also warned other gene testing companies but finally gave 23andMe the go-ahead to market its home DNA test – which does not include any cancer screening – in April.

Cancer screening is still often a tricky issue.

Currently, colon cancer can be detected very early with colonoscopies, and even stopped before pre-cancerous growths get out of control. But colonoscopies are uncomfortable and carry a small risk of injury.

Mammograms can detect early breast cancer, Pap smears can detect cervical cancer or pre-cancerous changes and a type of specialized chest x-ray called a spiral CT can detect lung cancer. There’s a debate over the usefulness of screening for prostate cancer but blood tests and physical exams can indicate some men at high risk.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story gets a satisfactory in this category by including, “The genetic sequencing is also expensive right now – on the order of several thousand dollars for the 30,000 repeats the team did. But costs are coming down steadily, he said.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The device, made of both synthetic and animal tissue, is driven by two miniature electric motors. Implanted in the patient’s chest after the diseased heart is removed, it uses information gleaned from sensors to mimic the activity of the natural organ. It is operated by a microcontroller and powered by electromagnetic induction through the skin or through a plug implanted behind the patient’s ear.

Carmat estimates its device will cost $176,000 to $226,000. When all expenses are considered, including hospital and surgical expenses, it says it will cost just over $315,000, about the same as a transplant.

The device was developed over 15 years by a team that included Alain F. Carpentier, the French surgeon-scientist who, along with Albert Starr, received the 2007 Albert Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research. The Lasker Foundation, which is based in New York, praised their work in the development of artificial heart valves, saying they had “prolonged and enhanced the lives of millions of people with heart disease.”

In the November 2009 bulletin of the Académie Nationale de Médecine, Dr. Carpentier wrote that, instead of picking up from older models of artificial hearts built on animal research, the developers of the new device had sought to use the tools of the digital revolution, namely computer-assisted design, hemodynamic modeling, regulation algorithms and simulations.

The French company is not the first to make total artificial hearts, which are meant to completely replace damaged and diseased organs.

SynCardia, based in Tucson, currently makes the only approved temporary artificial heart, having continued development of the groundbreaking Jarvik-7, which Dr. William C. DeVries implanted in a retired dentist named Barney B. Clark in 1982. Its device, powered by a small air compressor that can be carried in a backpack, has been implanted in more than 800 patients as a bridge before transplant.

Abiomed, a company based in Danvers, Mass., makes a self-contained total artificial heart, the electrical-powered AbioCor. The United States Food and Drug Administration has designated the AbioCor as a “humanitarian use device,” meaning its use is restricted to people who are ineligible for transplants and would otherwise be facing imminent death.

Others are in development. In the United States, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, a unit of the National Institutes of Health, is supporting efforts by two separate groups, one led by Dr. O. H. Frazier of the Texas Heart Institute in Houston, the other by Dr. Leonard A. R. Golding of the Cleveland Clinic.

Another device is being developed by scientists at the Helmholtz-Institute for Biomedical Engineering at the University of Aachen in Germany.

“There’s definitely a major need for a permanent, total artificial heart,” Laman A. Gray Jr., the University of Louisville professor of surgery who implanted the first AbioCor heart in 2001, said.

Citing World Health Organization data that shows heart disease is the world’s leading cause of death, Mr. Conviti, the Carmat chief executive, estimated the potential market at “a minimum” of 100,000 patients a year in the United States and Europe. However, he said cost constraints meant it was unlikely that more than one-tenth of those patients would actually receive an artificial heart.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that the company "estimates its device will cost $176,000 to $226,000. When all expenses are considered, including hospital and surgical expenses, it says it will cost just over $315,000, about the same as a transplant."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Human Genome Sciences, based in Rockville, Md., is sharing development and marketing rights to the drug with GlaxoSmithKline. Results from a second Phase 3 trial are due in November. If that succeeds, the companies will apply for regulatory approval in the first half of next year.

Lupus is an autoimmune disease, in which the defense system against pathogens attacks the body’s own tissues. The disease, which primarily affects women of child-bearing age, can cause rashes, arthritis, mouth sores, kidney damage and other problems.

One recent study estimated that 322,000 Americans definitely or probably have systemic lupus erythematosus, the most common form of the disease and the one against which Benlysta was tested. The Lupus Foundation of America estimates that 1.5 million Americans have some form of lupus.

Because the disease’s symptoms wax and wane on their own and vary considerably from one patient to another, it has been hard to demonstrate the efficacy of drugs in clinical trials.

Among the companies that have had setbacks or outright failures in clinical trials are Roche and Biogen Idec with their drug Rituxan; La Jolla Pharmaceutical with Riquent; Bristol-Myers Squibb with Orencia; ZymoGenetics and Merck Serono with atacicept; Genelabs Technologies with Prestara; Teva Pharmaceutical Industries with edratide; and Aspreva Pharmaceuticals and Roche with CellCept.

Benlysta, which was previously called Lymphostat-B and is known generically as belimumab, also failed in its Phase 2, or midstage, trial.

But Human Genome Sciences, in consultation with the Food and Drug Administration, restricted the Phase 3 trials to a subset of patients who seemed to respond better to the drug in the earlier trial. It also changed the measurement of success and lengthened the trial to give the drug more time to work.

“We knew the drug was safe and biologically active,” H. Thomas Watkins, chief executive of the company, said in an interview. “The question was, ‘Can you prove in a very large trial what we’ve proven here?’ ”

The 865 patients in the trial, who were mainly in Asia, South America and Eastern Europe, received either Benlysta or a placebo in addition to the drugs they were already taking.

More patients on the drug had the required improvement in symptom severity. In addition, about 20 percent of patients taking Benlysta were able to reduce their use of the steroid prednisone by at least 25 percent, compared with about 12 percent of those on placebo.

Although the difference between the treated patients and those given the placebo in the trial might appear modest, Dr. Joan T. Merrill, a lupus expert at the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, said Benlysta’s safety and its ability to reduce steroid use would make it attractive to doctors. Steroids can cause severe weight gain, acne and the weakening of bones, among other side effects.

“I think it looks good,” Dr. Merrill said. “And we are in a field where we haven’t even had anything fair.”

Benlysta, which is given by infusion once every four weeks, inhibits the action of a protein in the body called B-lymphocyte stimulator, which helps B cells in the blood respond to infections. The company said high levels of the protein might spur the immune system to attach the body’s own tissues.

Human Genome, a pioneer in studying human genes, discovered the gene for the stimulator protein. If Benlysta gets to market, it will be the first drug from the company, and one of the first in the industry, to result from genomics.

In 2000, the company’s share price soared to over $100 on anticipation that understanding the human DNA blueprint — the human genome — would lead to a cornucopia of drugs. On Friday, it closed at $3.32 a share.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article comments that Benlysta will be far more expensive than current treatments but doesn’t give an order of magnitude. Nonetheless, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two big studies suggest possible new ways to screen healthy people for cervical or prostate cancers, but a third disappointed those hoping for a way to detect early signs of deadly ovarian tumors.

-For women 30 and over, a test for the virus, HPV, is better than a Pap smear for predicting cervical cancer risk, and those who test negative on both can safely wait three years to be screened again.

-A single PSA blood test at ages 44 to 50 might help predict a man's risk of developing advanced prostate cancer or dying of it up to 30 years later. The PSA test is notoriously unreliable, but using it this way separates men who need a close watch from those who are so low-risk that they can skip testing for five years or more.

-Screening women with no symptoms for ovarian cancer with a blood test and an ultrasound exam is harmful. It didn't prevent deaths and led to thousands of false alarms, unneeded surgeries and serious complications.

The last study is a warning to people who get screening tests that aren't recommended, or who question whether screening can ever hurt.

"The answer is, it could hurt a lot," said Dr. Allen Lichter, chief executive of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. The group published these and 4,000 other studies Wednesday, ahead of its annual meeting next month.

Cervical cancer is easy to prevent. It's very slow-growing and screening finds precancerous cells and allows early treatment. The new study was the first big one to examine a newer screening tool, HPV tests, with or without Pap smears in routine practice.

For a Pap test, cells scraped from the cervix, the gateway to the uterus, are checked under a microscope. But this can miss problems or raise false alarms.

HPV tests detect the human papillomavirus, which causes most cases of cervical cancer. But HPV is "the common cold" of the nether regions — most sexually active young people have been exposed to it, said Debbie Saslow, the American Cancer Society's director of breast and gynecologic cancer. Most infections go away on their own; they're only a cancer risk when they last a year or more.

Younger women tend to have short-term infections, so Pap tests are a better way to screen them. HPV tests are approved as an option along with Paps for women 30 and older, and the cancer society says that if a woman tests negative on both, she can wait three years to be screened again. Few take this advice, though.

"Women still want their annual Pap and doctors still want to give them," and think it's rationing care to test less often, Saslow said.

The new study gives "very, very solid support" for screening less often, Lichter said.

Hormuzd Katki of the National Cancer Institute studied more than 330,000 women getting HPV and Pap tests through Kaiser Permanente Northern California for five years.

Only about three out of 100,000 women each year developed cervical cancer after negative HPV and Pap tests. HPV tests were twice as good as Paps for predicting risk. Adding a Pap after a negative HPV test did little to improve risk prediction.

However, if an HPV test was positive, a Pap test helped confirm or rule out the need for follow-up.

The study didn't look at the downside of HPV testing — how many false alarms and needless procedures it triggered. HPV tests cost $80 to $100 compared to $20 to $40 for Paps.

The prostate study sought a better way to use PSA tests, which are troublesome because PSA can be high for many reasons besides cancer, and doctors don't know which cancers need treatment or whether screening saves lives. Most groups don't recommend PSA tests, but most men over 50 get them anyway.

The new study "is not going to end the controversy, but it suggests a very interesting middle ground," Lichter said.

Researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York used stored blood samples that 12,000 Swedish men gave for a heart study decades ago, when most were 44 to 50 years old. They also had second samples from some of them six years later, and samples from other 60-year-old men.

Looking 27 years later, researchers saw that 44 percent of cancer deaths occurred in men whose initial PSAs had been in the top 10 percent when they were 44 to 50 years old.

Conversely, scoring below the median meant very little cancer risk years later.

"They're identifying a group of guys who don't need to be screened, or need to be screened less often," said Dr. Otis Brawley, the cancer society's chief medical officer.

The results are "provocative," but this type of study can't prove that screening prevents deaths, said Dr. Matthew R. Smith of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center. Few of the Swedish men were treated for prostate cancer as most men are today, which can affect survival.

The National Cancer Institute, the Swedish Cancer Society and several foundations paid for the work, and one researcher holds patents for two PSA-related tests.

Baseline PSA tests for men in their 40s can't be recommended yet, Brawley said. The cancer society says men should be informed of the risks and benefits of PSA tests starting at age 50, and sooner for blacks and those with family history of prostate cancer.

The government-funded ovarian cancer study involved nearly 80,000 women. Half were screened annually with an ultrasound for four years and a blood test for six years. The blood test looked for CA-125, a substance often elevated in ovarian cancer.

After 13 years, there were no major differences in ovarian cancers found or deaths from the disease. Screening found only 212 cancers while giving 3,285 false alarms that led to 1,080 unneeded biopsy surgeries and 163 serious complications.

"So many people say `how can cancer screening be harmful?' This thing documents it," Brawley said.

The results don't apply to using these tests on women with symptoms of ovarian cancer or abnormal physical exams. That's still the best way to check for ovarian cancer in those cases.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does not list the costs of all the screenings mentioned, but we give it a passing grade for at least addressing the issue of costs-versus-benefits. The story says, “HPV tests cost $80 to $100 compared to $20 to $40 for Paps.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“What we found is that where patients were applying Latisse, especially in areas where the hair was thinner and wispier and less pigmented, the hair grew thicker, stronger and healthier,” he said.

Though some users of Latisse have experienced skin discoloration, Dr. Bauman said he had never seen any such reaction on the scalp of his patients.

Certainly, Mr. Paduda, who used Latisse daily from November through February, is a happy customer. By the third week, he said, both he and friends he asked for reactions were seeing results. “I even busted out the old ‘before’ and ‘after’ pictures,” he said. “It was a noticeable difference.”

But Latisse does not appear to be a silver bullet for hair loss. Instead, it appears to work in much the same way as Rogaine or Propecia: All three can strengthen and darken hair that grows from a dying follicle, but none can bring a dead one back to life. The result is an enhanced, refortified hairline rather than a brand new head of hair.

Aside from hair transplants, which can cost about $10,000 each and do not always look natural, the only current hope for complete replacement is hair cloning, the act of producing entirely new hair from the DNA of an existing one, which researchers have been attempting, unsuccessfully, for years.

A pair of researchers last year claimed to grow new hair by combining plucked hair with a wound-healing powder made by ACell, a regenerative-medicine company in Columbia, Md. Though the claim was met with some skepticism by other clinicians, the idea that ACell’s powder, which has been approved by the government, could facilitate new hair growth has breathed new life into the race to clone hair.

Dr. Robert M. Bernstein, clinical professor of dermatology at Columbia University, is now one of several researchers experimenting with the product.

“It’s just a question of time now” before hair cloning becomes a reality, Dr. Bernstein said. “We keep on moving back that time, but I think there’s absolutely no doubt that it’s going to be done.”

He believes hair cloning will be commercially available within 10 years. This may sound like a long time to wait, but “it’s important to remember that baldness is unlike other conditions where you can progress past the point of being helped,” Dr. Bernstein said. “Once we have a cure for hair loss, everyone will be able to benefit.”

It has been been 14 years since the F.D.A. approved a new hair-loss remedy (Propecia, in 1997), so it is understandable that anticipation for a new one might be running high. One advantage of Latisse is that it needs to be applied only once a day (Rogaine needs to be applied twice; Propecia is taken once daily), and does not seem to cause reactions in people who are allergic to minoxidil.

It is, however, expensive: a month’s supply of Latisse can cost up to $150, and that is in amounts appropriate for use merely on the eyelashes. Rogaine, which is also available over the counter now, costs about $25 a month, and a month’s supply of Propecia runs about $75. (Even Mr. Paduda has now switched to Propecia, citing cost.)

The potential for Latisse is not lost on Allergan. The company initiated a Phase 1 clinical study in August to determine whether bimatoprost can be used as a treatment in men and women suffering from hair loss (alopecia).

“There is a great deal of interest in developing other uses of bimatoprost,” Heather Katt, a spokeswoman for Allergan, wrote in an e-mail message, “and Allergan is exploring ways to pursue that pathway through the F.D.A. approval process.”

For those too impatient to wait, there is also the bold and fashionable solution of shaving one’s head.

But the fact is that many men — and women — simply do not accept baldness easily.

“Hair has been an evolutionary sign of health and sexuality and youth, and that doesn’t change,” Dr. Bernstein said. “Shaved heads look cool, but not everyone wants one, and not everyone looks good with one.”

“I have really dark eyebrows,” he said. “I would look like a psycho if I shaved my head.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provided a more thorough discussion of costs than we have seen in many stories about cosmetic products. It says, “It is, however, expensive: a month’s supply of Latisse can cost up to $150, and that is in amounts appropriate for use merely on the eyelashes. Rogaine, which is also available over the counter now, costs about $25 a month, and a month’s supply of Propecia runs about $75.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Premature labor is a serious and hard-to-predict problem. This test might help.

"Those molecules will circulate in the blood for some time, they can be measured, and you can see the contributions from essentially every tissue in the body," senior investigator Stephen Quake told BuzzFeed News. "When you are pregnant you can see the contribution from the placenta and the fetus," said Quake, a professor of bioengineering and applied physics at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California.

Both tests use cell-free RNA (cfRNA), which are snippets of genetic material released by cells when genes are active. They float around in the mother's bloodstream and can be picked up by blood tests.

However, a new blood test — which is still experimental and not yet available outside of a research lab — can pick up on gene activity in the body that suggests a pregnancy is at risk for preterm delivery, according to a study published Thursday in the journal Science . The researchers also found a similar type of blood test could determine gestational age, which is used to calculate the due date of the baby. Currently, gestational age is calculated in the first trimester using ultrasound, and it's not that accurate if used later in pregnancy.

Pregnancies are usually about 40 weeks, and a premature birth is when a baby arrives three or more weeks early. This happens in about 9% of all deliveries and it can be seriously risky for the infant ; they can have all kinds of complications, including lung problems, brain hemorrhages, and infections.

The scientists analyzed 20,000 genes to find the ones that were active during pregnancy and labor.

They identified seven cfRNAs that seemed to be associated with premature birth, and in a test of 38 women, they found that they could predict premature birth up to two months in advance.

All the women were at risk for premature labor because they had early contractions or a previous preterm delivery, and 13 did indeed go on to have a premature baby.

In a subgroup of women, the test accurately classified 4 of 5 preterm deliveries as being at-risk, and incorrectly suggested that 3 of 18 women who had a full-term pregnancy were at risk for early labor.

In a test of 31 healthy pregnant women, testing for nine cfRNAs seemed roughly as accurate as an ultrasound at measuring gestational age. An ultrasound has a 48% accuracy rate at predicting a due date that's within two weeks of a baby's actual birth, while the blood test was 45% accurate. The test, if it does turn out to work in clinical trials, would be cheaper than ultrasound, said Quake.

"It might be tens or hundreds of dollars, rather than thousands," he said.

There's a lot more work to be done before these tests becomes available, including clinical trials. The studies were small and included only black or white women, but not other ethnicities. But the findings are promising, particularly because premature delivery is such a serious problem.

"Preterm birth is the leading cause of neonatal death, it’s a huge problem," Quake said. If doctors know someone is at risk for premature labor earlier in pregnancy, they might start efforts to help delay labor, such as recommending bed rest.

Quake became interested in the problem in part because his first child was born almost a month premature. She's now a healthy 16-year-old. "You realize, holy cow, that was a pretty risky thing that we had no control over and no sense that it was coming," he said.

"We’d like to see a bunch of lives saved, that’s really the goal here," Quake said. "There’s a lot of work left to do before we get to that point, but we are pretty energized and excited at this point."

The study was funded by the March of Dimes and other nonprofit sources, although Quake and his colleagues have filed for a patent on the test.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Experimental health tests don’t have public price tags. However, this story gives readers a rare and helpful ballpark estimate, and one that compares it to an alternative (ultrasound): “It might be tens or hundreds of dollars, rather than thousands,” a study author told BuzzFeed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lauren Pestikas sits as she receives an infusion of the drug ketamine during a 45-minute session at an outpatient clinic in Chicago on July 25, 2018. Pestikas struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before starting ketamine treatments earlier in the year. (AP Photo/Teresa Crawford)

CHICAGO (AP) — It was launched decades ago as an anesthetic for animals and people, became a potent battlefield pain reliever in Vietnam and morphed into the trippy club drug Special K.

Now the chameleon drug ketamine is finding new life as an unapproved treatment for depression and suicidal behavior. Clinics have opened around the United States promising instant relief with their “unique” doses of ketamine in IVs, sprays or pills. And desperate patients are shelling out thousands of dollars for treatment often not covered by health insurance, with scant evidence on long-term benefits and risks.

Chicago preschool teacher Lauren Pestikas long struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before trying ketamine earlier this year.

The price tag so far is about $3,000, but “it’s worth every dime and penny,” said the 36-year-old.

Pestikas said she feels much better for a few weeks after each treatment, but the effects wear off and she scrambles to find a way to pay for another one.

For now, ketamine has not received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treating depression, though doctors can use it for that purpose.

Ketamine has been around since the 1960s and is widely used as an anesthesia drug during surgery because it doesn’t suppress breathing. Compared to opioids such as morphine, ketamine isn’t as addictive and doesn’t cause breathing problems. And some studies have shown that ketamine can ease symptoms within hours for the toughest cases.

Its potential effects on depression were discovered in animal experiments in the late 1980s and early 1990s showing that glutamate, a brain chemical messenger, might play a role in depression, and that drugs including ketamine that target the glutamate pathway might work as antidepressants.

Conventional antidepressants like Prozac target serotonin, a different chemical messenger, and typically take weeks to months to kick in — a lag that can cause severely depressed patients to sink deeper into despair.

Ketamine’s potential for almost immediate if temporary relief is what makes it so exciting, said Dr. Jennifer Vande Voort, a Mayo Clinic psychiatrist who has used ketamine to treat depression patients since February.

“We don’t have a lot of things that provide that kind of effect. What I worry about is that it gets so hyped up,” she said.

The strongest studies suggest it’s most useful and generally safe in providing short-term help for patients who have not benefited from antidepressants. That amounts to about one-third of the roughly 300 million people with depression worldwide.

“It truly has revolutionized the field,” changing scientists’ views on how depression affects the brain and showing that rapid relief is possible, said Yale University psychiatrist Dr. Gerard Sanacora, who has done research for or consulted with companies seeking to develop ketamine-based drugs.

But to become standard depression treatment, he said, much more needs to be known.

Last year, Sanacora co-authored an American Psychiatric Association task force review of ketamine treatment for mood disorders that noted the benefits but said “major gaps” remain in knowledge about long-term effectiveness and safety. Most studies have been small, done in research settings and not in the real world.

When delivered through an IV, ketamine can cause a rapid increase in heart rate and blood pressure that could be dangerous for some patients. Ketamine also can cause hallucinations that some patients find scary.

“There are some very real concerns,” Sanacora said. “We do know this drug can be abused, so we have to be very careful about how this is developed.”

Dr. Rahul Khare, an emergency medicine specialist in Chicago, first learned about ketamine’s other potential benefits a decade ago from a depressed and anxious patient he was preparing to sedate to fix a repeat dislocated shoulder.

“He said, ‘Doc, give me what I got last time. For about three weeks after I got it I felt so much better,’” Khare recalled.

Khare became intrigued and earlier this year began offering ketamine for severe depression at an outpatient clinic he opened a few years ago. He also joined the American Society for Ketamine Physicians, formed a year ago representing about 140 U.S. doctors, nurses, psychologists and others using ketamine for depression or other nonapproved uses.

There are about 150 U.S. ketamine clinics, compared with about 20 three years ago, said society co-founder Dr. Megan Oxley.

Khare said the burgeoning field “is like a new frontier” where doctors gather at meetings and compare notes. He has treated about 50 patients with depression including Pestikas. They’re typically desperate for relief after failing to respond to other antidepressants. Some have lost jobs and relationships because of severe depression, and most find that ketamine allows them to function, Khare said.

Typical treatment at his clinic involves six 45-minute sessions over about two weeks, costing $550 each. Some insurers will pay about half of that, covering Khare’s office visit cost. Patients can receive “booster” treatments. They must sign a four-page consent form that says benefits may not be long-lasting, lists potential side effects, and in bold letters states that the treatment is not government-approved.

At a recent session, Pestikas’s seventh, she leaned back on a reclining white examining-room chair as a nurse hooked her up to a heart and blood pressure monitor. She grimaced as a needle was slipped into the top of her left palm. Khare reached up with a syringe to inject a small dose of ketamine into an IV bag hanging above the chair, then dimmed the lights, pulled the window curtains and asked if she had questions and was feeling OK.

Pestikas listened to music on her iPhone and watched psychedelic videos. She said it was like “a controlled acid trip” with pleasant hallucinations. The trip ends soon after the IV is removed, but Pestikas said she feels calm and relaxed the rest of the day, and that the mood boost can last weeks.

Studies suggest that a single IV dose of ketamine far smaller than used for sedation or partying can help many patients gain relief within about four hours and lasting nearly a week or so.

Exactly how ketamine works is unclear, but one idea is that by elevating glutamate levels, ketamine helps nerve cells re-establish connections that were disabled by depression, said ketamine expert Dr. Carlos Zarate, chief of experimental therapies at the National Institute of Mental Health.

A small Stanford University study published in August suggested that ketamine may help relieve depression by activating the brain’s opioid receptors.

Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Allergan are among drug companies developing ketamine-like drugs for depression. Janssen leads the effort with its nasal spray esketamine. The company filed a new drug application in September.

Meanwhile, dozens of studies are underway seeking to answer some of the unknowns about ketamine including whether repeat IV treatments work better for depression and if there’s a way to zero in on which patients are most likely to benefit.

Until there are answers, Zarate of the mental health institute said ketamine should be a last-resort treatment for depression after other methods have failed.

The Associated Press Health & Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story said one woman paid $3,000 “so far” for her treatments and “scrambles to find a way to pay for another one” as the effects wear off.
It also reported that a “typical” treatment at one clinic “involves six 45-minute sessions over about two weeks, costing $550 each. Some insurers will pay about half of that….”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CDC To Doctors: Anti-HIV Pill No Magic Bullet Against Virus

In November, researchers revealed a encouraging finding: taking a pill can greatly reduce the risk of getting HIV. Now health officials are warning doctors that preventing the disease will take more than just writing a prescription.

The pill, called Truvada, is already on the market for treating HIV infections. But the landmark study, involving 2,500 men who have sex with men, showed that taking Truvada faithfully can reduce the risk of infection by as much as 92 percent.

That touched off a lot of celebrating. It's the first time anybody's shown that taking a pill can prevent HIV – and it was the first new weapon against HIV unveiled in many years.

To make sure it works, though, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says doctors need to do a number of things:
• Prescribe Truvada only for men at high risk of getting infected – that is, only for men who have sex with men, those who have multiple sex partners, and those who live in areas where there's a lot of HIV circulating.
• Test patients before prescribing it to make sure they're not already infected. That'll help avoid creating viruses resistant to the drug when patients miss doses. For the same reason, patients should get an HIV test periodically while on the drug.
• Counsel patients on Truvada to use condoms faithfully, because the drug isn't a sure bet against the virus.
• Above all, tell patients they must take the drug every day – not just when they've had risky sex.

The study makes that last point very clear. Overall, men who took Truvada had a 44 percent lower risk of HIV infection. But those who said they took the drug at least 9 out of every 10 day had a 73 percent lower risk.

That doesn't tell the whole story. When researchers tested the blood of patients for traces of Truvada, they found many who claimed to have taken the pill regularly weren't telling the truth. Among those whose tests showed they really did take it every day, the risk of HIV infection was 92 percent lower than those not on the drug.

There's one other thing, the CDC says. Make sure patients understand that warding off HIV isn't cheap. Each pill currently costs around $36, which adds up to more than $13,000 a year. Some insurers might pay, but some might balk.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Strong point.  The story said, “There’s one other thing, the CDC says. Make sure patients understand that warding off HIV isn’t cheap. Each pill currently costs around $36, which adds up to more than $13,000 a year. Some insurers might pay, but some might balk”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using data from a national study, Johns Hopkins researchers determined that using heart CT scans can help personalize treatment in patients whose blood pressure falls in the gray zone of just above normal or mild high blood pressure. Previously, the appropriate blood pressure treatment for these patients used risk calculations and some guesswork, potentially leaving many vulnerable to heart disease or taking drugs they don't need. Nearly one in three adults in the U.S. has prehypertension, blood pressure higher than normal but not considered high yet.

The scans detect levels of calcium in the heart's arteries, and the physicians suggest those people with the highest calcium levels would benefit most from aggressive blood pressure treatment, whereas those with little or no calcium may not need to be treated as intensively, depending on their other heart disease risk factors.

In the study, published on Jan. 10 in Circulation, the researchers say these calcium scores allow physicians to go beyond the traditionally calculated risk factors to determine which blood pressure treatment strategy may be most appropriate for a particular patient.

"If a health care provider wants to target blood pressure in a patient with traditional heart disease risk factors and above-normal blood pressure, he or she can look at coronary artery calcium to help with tiebreakerlike decisions," says J. William McEvoy, M.B.B.Ch., M.H.S., assistant professor of medicine and member of the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. "Our study, along with others, such as SPRINT and HOPE, positions cardiac risk and coronary artery calcium as helpful ways to determine if a given patient would either benefit from more intensive blood pressure control or do just fine with a more traditional blood pressure target."

In late 2015, the SPRINT trial showed improved outcomes for participants with increased risk for heart disease whose physicians targeted their systolic (the top number) blood pressures to 120 millimeters of mercury, rather than the traditional 140 millimeters of mercury. But not all people deemed "higher risk" by traditional methods may need to be aggressively treated, McEvoy says. Some people react poorly to higher doses of blood pressure medicines and experience side effects, such as sexual dysfunction, dizziness, falls, weakness and more. And the risk factor equations that determine whether certain people are at higher risk and should be treated more intensively with blood pressure medications may have inaccuracies on the individual level, says McEvoy. "We can predict that about 15 out of every 100 people with a particular risk score will die of a heart attack, but the equations don't tell us which of those people will be one of the actual 15; they don't give us personalized information," says McEvoy.

Conventionally, coronary artery calcium scores have informed physicians' decisions of whether to put a patient on statins, but the researchers say they haven't been evaluated before for their potential ability to determine blood pressure treatment. To determine if coronary artery calcium scores could inform blood pressure recommendations too, the researchers used data from 3,733 participants in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) who had systolic blood pressures between 120 and 179 millimeters of mercury. Participants were an average of 65 years old, and 48 percent were men. Thirty-five percent were white, 32 percent were African-American, 22 percent were Hispanic and 11 percent were Chinese-American. At the beginning of the study, investigators measured their blood pressure and performed a cardiac CT scan to determine coronary artery calcium scores. They also calculated each participant's heart disease risk with the Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Algorithm, which uses traditional risk factors, such as race, age, sex, cholesterol levels and family history of disease. About once a year for 10 years, an interviewer contacted each participant or a family member to determine heart disease diagnosis, hospitalizations or deaths. After about 10 years, the participants had 642 heart disease events, such as heart attack, heart failure, stroke and death.

The researchers divided the participants by their coronary artery calcium scores into one of three groups: those with a score of zero, those with a score of one to 100 and those with a score greater than 100. Then, they looked at the number of heart disease-related events in each calcium score category broken down by blood pressure range and calculated heart disease risk. Low heart disease risk was classified as a less than 15 percent chance of a heart disease event over the next 10 years, and high risk was 15 percent or greater risk of a heart disease event. To get the event rate, the investigators divided the number of events in each category by the amount of people in the study multiplied by the length of time they spent in the study, known as a person-year.

Participants with calcium scores of zero with a high calculated risk of heart disease had a relatively low actual event rate after the 10-year study. For example, according to the researchers, those with systolic blood pressures below 140 millimeters of mercury and no calcium had an event rate of 12.7 events per 1,000 person-years, and similar people with systolic blood pressures between 140 and 159 millimeters of mercury had an event rate of 13.6 events per 1,000 person-years.

In contrast, participants with systolic blood pressure under 140 millimeters of mercury -- below the current cutoff for treatment -- and rated with a low predicted risk of heart disease who had a calcium score over 100 had a high actual event rate of 19.7 events per 1,000 person-years. Thus, even though their calculated heart disease risk is relatively low and their blood pressure is below traditional cutoffs for treatment, the researchers say people in this category with calcium over 100 are high risk and may benefit from more aggressive blood pressure treatment.

Participants with high systolic blood pressure between 160 and 179 millimeters of mercury had high event rates ranging from 20 to 40 heart disease events per 1,000 person-years regardless of their calcium scores. The researchers say this demonstrates that calcium scores may only be useful in guiding more personalized blood pressure treatment for patients with mild high blood pressure -- the gray zone -- not those with high blood pressure.

"It may be that if patients are in that blood pressure treatment gray zone with a high risk score but their coronary artery calcium score is zero, then they don't need to be treated aggressively to 120 millimeters of mercury and can be treated to 140 instead," says McEvoy. "But if patients have a high calcium score and are in the gray zone, then it would make sense to go with 120 as a treatment goal."

The researchers caution that results are from an observational study, and a randomized trial would be needed to confirm the recommendations.

Coronary artery calcium scans aren't usually covered by insurance and can range in cost from $100 to $400. The scans use radiation, so there is a very small cancer risk for susceptible individuals.

About 70 million adults in the U.S. have high blood pressure -- a systolic blood pressure over 140 millimeters of mercury -- putting them at increased risk for heart attacks, stroke, heart failure and kidney disease, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Additional authors on the study included Seth Martin, Zeina Dardari, Wendy Post, Khurram Nasir and Michael Blaha of Johns Hopkins; Michael Miedema of the Minneapolis Heart Institute; Veit Sandfort of the National Institutes of Health; Joseph Yeboah of Wake Forest Baptist Health; Matthew Budoff of the University of California, Los Angeles; David Goff of the Colorado School of Public Health; and Bruce Psaty of the University of Washington.

The study was funded by the P.J. Schafer Cardiovascular Research Fund, the Johns Hopkins Magic That Matters Research Fund for Cardiovascular Research, grants from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (UL1-TR-000040 and UL1-TR-001079), and contracts from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (HHSN268201500003I, N01-HC-95159, N01-HC-95160, N01-HC-95161, N01-HC-95162, N01-HC-95163, N01-HC-95164, N01-HC-95165, N01-HC-95166, N01-HC-95167, N01-HC-95168 and N01-HC-95169).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release says that coronary artery calcium scans “aren’t usually covered by insurance and can range in cost from $100 to $400.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Doctors can use a patient’s abdominal CT scans to also check for signs of the bone-weakening disease osteoporosis, according to a new study.

The researchers, who published their findings in the Annals of Internal Medicine on Monday, compared patients’ CT scans to their dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), which is traditionally used to diagnose osteoporosis.

“What we found is that there is pretty good correlation,” said the study’s lead author Dr. Perry Pickhardt, professor of radiology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The idea, say the researchers, is doctors can use patients’ CT scans that are ordered for another reason - such as looking for tumors - to also check for signs of osteoporosis. That may spare the patients from additional testing and additional costs.

In an editorial accompanying the study, however, experts wrote that using CT scans to gauge bone density could lead to some people being incorrectly diagnosed, particularly if people at low risk are tested.

In this study, the average age was about 59 years old - six years younger than the age at which the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a government-backed panel, recommends all women begin being screened for osteoporosis. The disease affects over 12 million Americans over 50.

The panel also suggests younger women at an increased risk for bone fractures should be screened, but there’s no recommendation for men of any age.

Despite DXA scans being safe and cost effective, Pickhardt and his colleagues say the test is underused. CT scans, however, are considered overused - with more than 80 million performed in the U.S. during 2011.

For the new study, the researchers analyzed test results from 1,867 patients, who had both types of scans performed within six months of each other over a 10-year period, to see if their CT scans showed osteoporosis as well as the DXAs.

Overall, about 23 percent of the people were diagnosed with osteoporosis, about 45 percent were diagnosed with some bone-weakening and about 32 percent were healthy based on their DXAs.

The researchers then found that their ability to accurately diagnose those same patients with osteoporosis from a CT scan depended on what threshold for bone density they used.

Dr. Sumit Majumdar, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new study, said a lower threshold for bone density would catch most cases of osteoporosis and limit “incidentaloporosis” - incorrect osteoporosis diagnoses “discovered” while doctors were looking for something else.

At the lower threshold, the researchers found 9 percent of those diagnosed with osteoporosis were misdiagnosed.

Pickhardt said the screenings would have to target the right groups of people to prevent overdiagnosis.

“Obviously it’s something we need to worry about, but if you apply it to a population that’s suitable for diagnosis you wouldn’t run that risk,” he said.

Majumdar, a professor of medicine at the University of Alberta in Canada, said CT scans are better tests, but stomach scans don’t include the hip - like a DXA would.

A DXA can cost a couple hundred dollars, while a CT scan can cost about $500. Both involve radiation.

Dr. Beatrice Hull, from the Center for Osteoporosis and Bone Health at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, told Reuters Health that she’d want her patients to have a DXA scan even with a diagnosis from a CT scan.

“I don’t think at this point this one test is going to prevent further testing. I think it will identify patients who are at a higher risk and need more testing,” said Hull, who wasn’t involved with the new research.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained the cost of DXA tests and CT scans.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Three long-awaited studies have shown that mechanically removing a blood clot from a stroke patient’s brain is no more useful than the older treatment of giving an IV dose of a clot-dissolving drug to the whole body.

The results of the clinical trials, presented this week at a meeting in Hawaii, shocked and surprised stroke physicians. Many had already adopted the more aggressive strategy over the past decade.

“For the stroke field, this is a really big deal,” Walter Koroshetz, deputy director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, said of the findings, which were presented over three days at the International Stroke Conference in Hono­lulu.

NINDS paid for two of the trials, one of which cost $27 million. One study took eight years to complete because it was so difficult to enroll patients willing to take the chance that they would be randomly assigned to get the older treatment.

Practitioners hoped that “endovascular treatment,” in which a catheter is threaded into a blocked artery and the clot pulled out, would do for stroke patients what it has done for heart attack patients. In them, going after clots with angioplasty balloons and stents is clearly more effective than giving clot-dissolving drugs through a vein in the arm.

“We did this study with the strong expectation that we would find a positive benefit. We were surprised,” said Joseph P. Broderick of the University of Cincinnati Neuroscience Institute, who headed one of the studies.

His view was echoed by Alfonso Ciccone, a neurologist from Milan who led a clinical trial in Italy: “We were surprised. We wanted the superiority of endovascular treatment.”

Whether the findings will cause physicians to abandon the practice is uncertain.

Insurance companies and Medicare, the health insurer for the elderly, already cover the endovascular procedure. It costs about $23,000 compared with $11,000 for acute stroke treatment using intravenous clot-dissolving drugs, known as thrombolytics.

Further, many practitioners think that newer clot-retrieving devices work better than the ones used in the three trials. Because endovascular procedures were shown to be no more dangerous than IV thrombolytics, physicians may continue to perform them and assume the outcomes can only get better.

“Will it change practice? That’s a good question,” said Koroshetz. “The payers may look at this and wonder if they should continue paying for these procedures. If it gets to that point, then clearly things will change.”

Stroke is the fourth-leading cause of death in the United States. About 800,000 people suffer a stroke each year, and about 130,000 die.

Nearly 90 percent of strokes occur when a clot blocks an artery in the brain, starving the region downstream of blood and oxygen. If flow isn’t restored quickly, brain tissue and the functions it controls — movement, speech, cognition — are damaged or can die.

Over the past 20 years, studies showed that if a person having a stroke gets a thrombolytic drug within three hours of when the symptoms start (4½ hours for certain patients), the process can be reversed and a lifetime of disability avoided. Later than that, little is gained; the brain cells are too damaged to survive. In fact, giving the drugs too late can make matters worse. Uncontrolled bleeding can occur as the dying tissue breaks down.

Early observations suggested that approaching the clot with a catheter and either injecting clot-dissolving drugs into it or snagging it and pulling it out produced better results. In 2004, the FDA began approving use of the catheters in the brain because they had been proved useful elsewhere in the body. The three studies reported this week (which will eventually be published in the New England Journal of Medicine) tested the hypothesis in a rigorous way.

In the largest trial, called IMS III, all patients got the IV clot-dissolving drug tPA within three hours of the start of stroke symptoms. Half were then assigned to get an imaging study that looked at the arteries of the brain to see whether a blockage remained. If it did, the doctors went after it with an endovascular procedure. The other half of the patients got standard treatment, which didn’t include the procedure. Forty-one percent of patients recovered completely in the endovascular group and 39 percent recovered completely in the control group, outcomes that were no different statistically. Death within three months was essentially the same too: 19 percent vs. 22 percent.

In the Italian study, called SYNTHESIS Expansion, 362 stroke patients were randomly assigned to get either IV tPA or endovascular treatment. At three months, 35 percent of the patients in the tPA group were alive without any disabilities, compared with 30 percent of the endovascular group. That also was not significantly different.

The third study, called MR RESCUE, run out of Georgetown University, was more complicated.

It randomly assigned 118 patients less than eight hours out from the start of their strokes to receive standard care or have the clot removed with a catheter device. They also got CAT or MRI scans to see whether they had a large or small amount of brain tissue still alive and salvageable. Removing the clot wasn’t better than standard care in either group — those with a lot or a little brain tissue to lose.

“I think everybody was a little surprised. But mainly disappointed,” said Chelsea S. Kidwell, the Georgetown neurologist who headed the study.

Why endovascular treatment wasn’t better is a mystery that the researchers are struggling to explain. The answer could be in the patients, the device or the timing of the procedure.

In IMS III, patients with large strokes benefited from clot removal more than those with small ones, but there weren’t enough patients in the study to make such a fine distinction with certainty.

“It’s a hint. But it’s not proof,” Broderick said.

In MR RESCUE, only 67 percent of arteries opened up completely after the clot was grabbed. Current devices, which use a mesh stent to hold the clot more firmly, are successful more than 80 percent of the time.

“The stroke community is hopeful that with the new generation devices we will show better outcomes,” Kidwell said.

In the Italian study, patients getting endovascular treatment were 3.75 hours into their stroke — an hour longer than those getting IV treatment, because of the logistics of assembling the procedure team. “That hour could have made a difference. We know that ‘time is brain,’ ” Ciccone said.

The three trials demonstrated how hard it is to test things once they’re in widespread use. History is replete with treatments (such as supplemental oxygen for premature infants) and devices (such as pulmonary artery catheters) used routinely before being shown to be harmful or of little value.

It took from 2004 to 2011 for the MR RESCUE team to recruit the 118 patients in the trial. It had permission to run the study in 30 hospitals but found only 22 that were willing to participate. More than 10 other hospitals were invited to join but declined because their neurologists were already convinced the catheter treatment was better — a view that turns out not to be true.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Nice job on this.  The story reported:
“Insurance companies and Medicare, the health insurer for the elderly, already cover the endovascular procedure. It costs about $23,000 compared with $11,000 for acute stroke treatment using intravenous clot-dissolving drugs, known as thrombolytics.”
(and)
“Will it change practice? That’s a good question,” said Koroshetz. “The payers may look at this and wonder if they should continue paying for these procedures. If it gets to that point, then clearly things will change.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study “has wide-reaching implications,” said Dr. Louise Wilkins-Haug, director for maternal-fetal medicine and reproductive genetics at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, who was not involved in the research. “Individuals need to be careful” to ensure that companies use rigorous laboratory procedures and support accuracy claims with data, she added.

One potential worry is that women might abort fetuses of an undesired sex. Several companies do not sell tests in China or India, where boys are prized over girls and fetuses found to be female have been aborted. While sex selection is not considered a widespread objective in the United States, companies say that occasionally customers expressed that interest, and have been denied the test. A recent study of third pregnancies in the journal Prenatal Diagnosis found that in some Asian-American groups, more boys than girls are born in ratios that are “strongly suggesting prenatal sex selection,” the authors said.

At least one company, Consumer Genetics, which sells the Pink or Blue test, requires customers to sign a waiver saying they are not using the test for that purpose. “We don’t want this technology to be used as a method of gender selection,” said the company’s executive vice president, Terry Carmichael. Sex-determination tests are part of a new frontier of fetal DNA testing, which can be used to determine paternity and blood type, and is being used to develop early screening tests for genetic diseases or disorders like Down syndrome.

The new study found that to be reliable, the sex-determination tests had to be performed after at least seven weeks of gestation. Most tests that were highly accurate were conducted on a mother’s blood, not urine. And certain rigorous laboratory procedures had to be followed. For the blood tests, women prick their fingers and send blood samples to labs. If the Y chromosome is detected, the fetus is male. Absence of a Y chromosome would probably mean the fetus is female, but could mean that fetal DNA was not found in that sample.

The tests are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration because they are not used for medical purposes, a spokeswoman said, but the agency is investigating the explosion of home genetic tests like these and genome-sequencing kits.

Dr. Diana Bianchi, executive director of the Mother Infant Research Institute at Tufts Medical Center in Boston and the lead author of the sex-determination report, said, “A very important aspect of the study is how this advances prenatal care.”

But there are potential concerns too, she said, including that women may spend more than $250 for the tests when they don’t have insurance for prenatal care. A typical blood test like Pink or Blue, for example, costs $25 for the kit. Lab fees and shipping costs, which vary, bring the total expense to $265 to $330.

Dr. Bianchi is conducting another study to “try to find out why people are buying these things and what are the consequences,” she said. “It’s very important to educate health care providers that pregnant women are buying these tests.”

Another type of test not studied by the researchers has become popular because it is cheaper and can be done at home. These tests analyze hormones in women’s urine, a method that several experts said has not been studied as rigorously as DNA. Rebecca Griffin, a founder of the biggest seller, Intelligender, said two independent studies found it 90 percent accurate at 10 weeks.

Another company, TrovaGene, has developed a DNA test using urine, which, according to Gabriele Cerrone, TrovaGene’s co-founder and director, is 95 percent accurate at predicting boys at seven weeks, and 88 percent accurate at predicting girls. TrovaGene is also developing a test for Down syndrome.

Most DNA tests on the market use blood.

Raylene Lewis, 34, of College Station, Tex., had a frustrating experience with a now-defunct company, Acu-Gen, which guaranteed 99.9 percent accuracy with its blood tests. In 2005, she was told she was having a boy, and she chose a name, bought boy clothes and told everyone. When an ultrasound revealed she was carrying a girl, “I was absolutely shocked,“ she said. She was not unhappy, she said, but “it was like the baby boy disappeared.”

When the Lewises complained to Acu-Gen’s president, they were told, “We are very sure that genetically you are having a male,” she said, reading a transcript of the conversation, which they recorded. The official suggested that the baby might be “what a baby girl looks like on the outside,” but that “we’re giving you the results on the inside.”

Ms. Lewis, who sued Acu-Gen, said she ultimately received a refund. Lawyers for Acu-Gen could not be reached for comment.

The Pink or Blue test, which claims 95 percent accuracy at seven weeks and gives refunds for wrong results, appears to meet the standards described in the new study.

Chelsea Wallace, 23, of Okeechobee, Fla., was thrilled early this year when the test she took at seven weeks said she was having a boy, a result confirmed weeks later by ultrasound. Ms. Wallace, who has a 3-year-old daughter, said she also would have been happy with a girl, but that since she and her fiancé could not agree on a boy’s name, finding out early gave them time to choose the name Layton. It also helped her plan, she said.

“As soon as I found out I was pregnant,” said Ms. Wallace, whose son is due in September, “I wanted to know what I was having.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes one price estimate of about $250 for the testing. We would have liked more detail about whether new details on accuracy of the tests might change their status in the marketplace, or whether insurability status might change.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Pathway Genomics, a company known for pushing the boundaries of direct-to-consumer genetic testing, on Thursday will launch a cancer screening test designed to detect bits of cancer DNA in the blood of otherwise healthy people.

The test represents a first in the rapidly developing field of “liquid biopsies,” which use gene sequencing technology to screen blood samples for trace amounts of DNA associated with different cancers.

Several cancer diagnostic companies have been working on the tests, a field that has recently been joined by makers of DNA blood screening tests for fetal abnormalities after the tests detected early cancers in expectant mothers. Cowen & Co estimates that use of DNA blood tests for cancer screening will exceed $10 billion a year by the end of the decade.

But the move by Pathway, a privately owned maker of genetic tests ranging from cancer risk and heart health to drug response, underscores a growing debate over how much genetic information should be made available to healthy people if it is not yet clear how it can improve their health.

The company has already run into trouble on a similar issue. In 2010, Walgreens pulled Pathway’s genetic testing kits from its pharmacies after U.S. health regulators warned patients might take action without understanding the results.

Several oncology experts said liquid biopsy tests like Pathway’s, while exciting, still require large clinical studies proving they help people beat cancer through early detection. Doctors will also need a clear assessment of their accuracy.

“For any given test, the rate of false positives causing unnecessary alarm and false negatives that provide false security should be known,” said Dr. Keith Stewart, an oncologist who heads Mayo Clinic’s Center for Individualized Medicine.

Pathway’s screening test looks at 96 genetic markers associated with major cancer types such as breast, ovarian, lung, colon and melanoma. The company is focusing on mutations that are relatively well-understood, and for which there are specific treatments, said Chief Executive Jim Plante.

The cost to consumers begins at $299 to periodically check for DNA in their blood that could act as an early warning sign of cancer. The tests must be ordered by a doctor, based on a patient’s risk profile. A positive test will require additional checks to find where the cancer is growing.

Pathway also launched a blood test for patients already diagnosed with cancer to help determine whether a treatment is working, or whether the disease is likely to return.

Scientists have long known that cancers shed bits of genetic material into the blood. Privately held Guardant Health and Personal Genome Diagnostics Inc already offer blood tests for cancer patients. Roche-backed Foundation Medicine Inc, Genomic Health Inc, Illumina Inc and Sequenom Inc say they have similar tests in the works.

But cancer experts say there are major differences between using such tests to screen for cancer and monitoring patients who are already known to have it.

For example, some early cancers may not secrete DNA fragments into the bloodstream and require other types of detection. A colonoscopy can find and remove polyps before they pose a threat as colon cancer.

“If we are relying on a test that can only detect cancer after it has formed, we miss a huge opportunity to intervene,” said Dr. Scott Kopetz of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Patients might be attracted to a less-invasive test for colon cancer, but if it is less effective, it might result in more cases of colon cancer, not fewer.

Another concern is that the tests may pick up on markers that are never destined to be cancer, something already known to occur in blood tests for prostate cancer, Kopetz said.

Pathway says its test is more than 99 percent accurate in detecting mutations in blood samples that contain at least nine copies of a tested mutation.

“We do expect to detect cancer DNA when the tumors are small - much sooner than stage three or four,” Plante said.

Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a cancer geneticist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, said Pathway’s figure represents the test’s technical ability to detect DNA in the blood.

Doctors, however, need an indication of how many patients will get a false positive result, something that can only be determined in a very large clinical trial, said Vogelstein. He is advising two companies developing liquid biopsy tests for cancer screening: Sysmex and Personal Genome Diagnostics.

Plante said the company has started two clinical trials involving patients but has yet to publish any results on how the tests perform in people.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned the cost of the test, but the competing Bloomberg story gave a more detailed breakdown of costs. There was no mention of insurance coverage, or of total costs of work ups of positive tests and the need for continual testing.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Bariatric Surgery's Benefits Wane, This Procedure Can Help

For most of her life Fran Friedman struggled with compulsive eating. At 59 years old she was 5 foot 2 and weighed 360 pounds. That's when she opted for bariatric surgery.

The surgery worked. Friedman, who is now 70 and lives in Los Angeles, lost 175 pounds. "It was a miracle," Friedman says, not to feel hungry. "It was the first time in my life that I've ever lost a lot of weight and was able to maintain it."

Friedman kept the weight off for almost 10 years. But then to her dismay she started to gain it back. "I thought I was cured," she says. "I thought I could eat like regular people."

She's not alone, says Dr. Rabindra Watson, Assistant Clinical Professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, Division of Digestive Diseases.

About one in three patients regain significant amounts of weight a few years after surgery to reduce the size of the stomach pouch. Bariatric surgery shrinks the stomach to about the size of an egg, so people feel full from eating very little food. The problem is that over the years the stomach stretches, and when that happens, Watson says, "Patients are able to eat more at one sitting and they feel hungrier more often."

At the same time, hormonal changes that reduce the appetite and take effect immediately after the surgery begin to decline. Watson says we don't know for sure, but it's possible the body begins to adapt to those changes, which is why the weight loss is reversed over time.

For Fran Friedman, it meant a 20-pound weight gain and a bout of depression. "The reality hits," she says. "Do I want to go back to where I was or do I want to maintain this level of quality of life?"

So Friedman opted for a less invasive procedure to make her stomach smaller again. It's called Transoral Outlet Reduction – or TORe for short. It's one of several procedures designed to help people maintain the benefits of bariatric surgery. This procedure involves inserting an endoscope through the mouth into the stomach while the patient is under anesthesia. It costs $8,000 to $13,000 and insurance coverage varies.

If the stomach pouch has stretched, new sutures are put in place to once again reduce the size of the stomach. After the surgery, Watson says, patients report feeling fuller and less hungry and they ultimately gain greater control over what they are eating. And research conducted over the past decade suggests it works. There are no significant side effects to the surgery, and patients can return to work the day after they have the procedure.

For Friedman, it did the trick. She has lost 30 pounds since her second surgery. And now, she says, with the help of a support group she is recommitted to watching what she eats and how much she exercises. She wants to lose another 20 pounds. And more importantly, she wants to keep the weight off.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly provides the reader with an estimate of the costs of the procedure and highlights issues related to insurance coverage. A strong point in this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Sept. 2, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental test that can diagnose tuberculosis in less than two hours, making only one doctor visit necessary before treatment starts, is being hailed as a potentially significant advance against a disease that kills nearly 2 million people annually, most of them in developing countries.

"This is a very important discovery," said infectious disease expert Dr. Marc Siegel, an associate professor of medicine at New York University. "This could be an important tool worldwide, and even here in the United States."

The test, known as the "Xpert MTB/RIF" test for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and resistance to rifampin (RIF), appears to be more than 97 percent accurate and is even able to diagnose drug-resistant TB, researchers said.

A report on the researchers' work was published in the Sept. 2 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. Further trials of the new test are planned, the researchers said.

Current testing for tuberculosis (TB) involves looking at sputum (respiratory mucus) under a microscope. But Siegel said such testing, which has been in use for more than a century, isn't always accurate. It also can take weeks for results from a TB culture, and infections can be missed.

"That [the existing test] is knives and bearskins compared to this" new test, Siegel said. The one potential drawback to the new test would be the expense, he said, adding, "The key question is what's it going to cost?"

For the study, a research team led by Dr. Catharina C. Boehme, of the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics in Geneva, Switzerland, used the Xpert MTB/RIF test on 1,730 patients suspected of having drug-sensitive or multidrug-resistant pulmonary tuberculosis. The patients were from Azerbaijan, India, Peru and South Africa.

The test diagnosed tuberculosis in 99.2 percent of the patients, the researchers found. It also detected TB in 72.5 percent of people with the disease who had not been diagnosed with the conventional microscopic exam.

"The test that we developed finally makes it possible to detect TB in a single clinic visit," Dr. David Alland, chief of infectious diseases at the UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, said in a university news release.

"The test also indicates rapidly whether difficult-to-treat, drug-resistant forms are present," he said.

The test was created by the California-based corporation Cepheid, which plans to seek U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval for the test, which went on sale late last year in Europe.

The test costs about $63 in Europe, but the company has agreed to provide it for less than half that in poor countries, said John Bishop, Cepheid's chief executive officer, as quoted in a story by the Associated Press. The machine costs around $30,000, but would be priced under $20,000 in poor countries, he told the AP.

Tuberculosis is a chronic bacterial infection that's spread through the air and usually infects the lungs, although other organs of the body can be involved. Most people who are infected with tuberculosis bacterium (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) don't have symptoms, but some will develop the disease, according to the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

Some 2 billion people -- one-third of the world's population -- are thought to be infected with tuberculosis bacteria. Though largely eliminated in developed countries, TB remains a leading killer of young adults worldwide. The World Health Organization estimates that 8 million people develop active TB each year and nearly 2 million die.

To learn more about tuberculosis, visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story does more than pay lip service to cost, flagging it as the key to making this test available in the developing world. It notes the price tag of the diagnostic machine itself and says that the $63 cost per test may be discounted by more than half in developing world countries. It fails however to compare the cost of the new test with the existing TB test. Even more important, it fails to explain that a $20 or $30 expense, which might sound modest to U.S. readers, would actually represent a huge cost burden in many developing world countries, where annual per capita health care expenditures are sometimes less than $30. A close call, but since the story made a good-faith effort to address this issue, we’ll award a satisfactory with deficiencies noted.    
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A small study suggests that deep brain stimulation, which is currently being investigated as a treatment for general depression, may also help patients with bipolar disorder.

There are some caveats. The surgery necessary to allow deep brain stimulation is extremely expensive. And for now, the research is preliminary, so it's too early to know for sure if the treatment is appropriate to be used for any kind of depression.

Still, the study suggests that brain stimulation "not only just helps patients who haven't been able to recover from depression, but it seems to be associated with the absence of relapses. They're not only getting better, they're staying better," said study co-author Dr. Helen Mayberg, a professor in both the departments of psychiatry and behavioral sciences, and neurology, at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta.

In deep brain stimulation, surgeons insert wires into the brain that allows a specific region to be continuously hit with an electronic pulse. The level of stimulation is controlled by a pacemaker-like device implanted in the chest.

Deep brain stimulation has been around for more than 20 years, Mayberg said, and is commonly used to treat Parkinson's disease. The cost of the surgery is about $50,000, she said.

Previous research by Mayberg and others suggested that deep brain stimulation had potential as a treatment for depression. The St. Jude Medical Neuromodulation company, which has provided consulting fees to Mayberg and some of the other study authors, is currently recruiting patients for a study that could pave the way for its approval as a treatment for depression, Mayberg said.

The new study, which appears online Jan. 2 in the Archives of General Psychiatry, began with 10 patients with depression and seven with bipolar disorder -- a condition that causes severe mood swings and is also known as manic depression. They all received deep brain stimulation for 24 weeks after going through four weeks either with or without stimulation.

Most of the patients continued to receive the treatment over two years, although researchers temporarily turned it off in three of them as part of the study before realizing that doing so caused their depression to return.

The researchers found that 18 percent of patients went into remission after 24 weeks, 36 percent (of 14 patients) after one year. After two years, of the 12 patients still in the study, seven patients (58 percent) were in remission.

"The number of patients who got better increased over time, but it's not quite clear as to why," Mayberg said. The workings of deep brain stimulation as a whole are a mystery, although Mayberg said it may work by changing the brain's rhythms.

Dr. Samuel James Collier, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Austin, predicted that even if deep brain stimulation turns out to be an effective treatment for depression, it'll be far from the first line of defense.

"Medications and ECT -- electroconvulsive therapy -- are clearly safer, better tolerated, and do not embody a large surgical risk," Collier said. "I can't think of a scenario where deep brain stimulation would be considered even remotely before medications and ECT were exhausted."

Still, he said, it's important to note that "we seem to be making progress and hopefully those who are suffering the most can find solace in that and not give up hope."

For now, research continues. If patients are interested in deep brain stimulation treatment, they should try to get into the study that's ongoing, Mayberg said.

For more about deep brain stimulation, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We would have liked to have seen a little more information on costs, but we are glad that costs are mentioned up high. In the third sentence, the story says, “The surgery necessary to allow deep brain stimulation is extremely expensive” Later it says, “The cost of the surgery is about $50,000”. It would have been interesting to note whether deep brain stimulation is covered by Medicare or any insurance companies for treatment of any disorders, including Parkinson’s.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This article is featured in Newsweek's Special Edition: Nature's Remedies—Heal Your Body.

One of the leading causes of disability in the United States isn’t physical—it’s mental. According to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America (ADAA), 15 million adults—approximately 6.7 percent of the population—suffer from major depressive disorder, which is most often treated through a combination of talk therapy and medication. Those who struggle with depression have imbalanced levels of serotonin, which maintains mood, and dopamine, which controls the pleasure and reward zones. The brain’s synapses control how much of these chemicals are released, and drugs like Zoloft effectively prevent the little serotonin being produced from reabsorbing back into the nerve cells from which they were released, resulting in a higher concentration of serotonin. Some pill-averse patients have longed for a natural cure for depression, while others complain that the drugs they’re on aren’t enough. Hope for both groups may have arrived through an unlikely source: magnets. Researchers discovered they can harness the power of magnetism to increase serotonin production and combat depression through a process called Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS).

“Each [symptom of depression] maps onto a given circuit of the brain,” neurologist Alvaro Pascual-Leone told NPR in April 2016 about treating patients using TMS. “The reason why that circuit of the brain is not functioning properly...has to do with a deficit of a certain chemical in the brain. But the point is that if we can identify the circuit that causes the symptoms, we can target that circuit and make it function better through brain stimulation. So, in a sense, [TMS is] not a treatment...for the ultimate cause of the disorder, but it’s an intervention that improves how the patient is able to function.”

TMS has a lot in common with a traditional MRI scan. In fact, the only clue TMS treatment contains magnets at all is that patients must remove any jewelry and stow their credit cards (to prevent demagnetization) before treatment. According to Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine’s description of the technique, a coil is fitted to the front of a patient’s head so the electromagnetic pulses can target the prefrontal cortex of the brain, which controls emotion. A physician then tests the machine to see how much power is needed to affect the patient’s reflexes. Once the patient’s thumb involuntarily twitches, the current is strong enough to affect the patient’s brain activity. At this point, specific symptoms can be targeted depending on the patient’s needs.

The biggest drawback to TMS, according to advocates, is the limitations on just who can undergo the treatment. Though it was approved by the FDA in 2008, its use is federally restricted with exemptions only for those with severe depression, autism or Parkinson’s. Even those who are approved to undergo the treatment face another barrier as TMS is not widely covered by health insurance. Its efficacy varies from patient to patient and, like most prescriptions for depression, TMS has its own set of side-effects. The most common, not surprisingly, are headaches. Although one-third of patients have reported experiencing painful scalp sensations and facial twitching, these tend to fade after several treatments.

Despite these setbacks, researchers are optimistic about TMS—and not just as a form of treatment for depression. Experiments treating Parkinson’s and autism, the other two conditions for which TMS is approved, have seen some success among neurologists. More studies will be needed to determine whether this method can be used as a widespread treatment for other brain-related disorders, but if today’s research is any indication, TMS could be a key to improving the lives of Americans suffering from a multitude of disorders.

This article was excerpted from Newsweek's Special Edition: Nature's Remedies—Heal Your Body. For more on the definitive guide to alternative methods of healing the mind, body and soul, pick up a copy today.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Cost is mentioned in the photo caption. And, the reader will find a cautionary comment lower in the story warning that “TMS is not widely covered by health insurance,” although other TMS stories indicate that insurance companies are slowly coming to the table.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Maryland medical group has started treating autistic children in South Florida with shots of a drug used for chemical castration, a therapy widely panned by mainstream experts.

The group gives children the cancer drug Lupron to stop their bodies from making testosterone, saying the drug helps expel toxic mercury and quells aggressive or sexually explicit behavior by kids with excessive levels of the male hormone.

A Boca Raton mother who just put her 18-year-old son on the drug said it seems to help.

But numerous physicians, researchers and therapists insist there's no proof mercury causes autism, that Lupron removes mercury or that autistic kids have excessive testosterone. What's more, the drug carries a risk of bone damage, stunted growth and heart trouble, and can render children impotent.

These experts contend that Lupron, costing about $5,000 a month but seldom covered by insurance, is one of many treatments that cash in on the desperation of parents trying to cope with an incurable condition for which medicine has few good answers outside of painstaking behavioral therapy.

"Not only is there no scientific backing whatsoever for Lupron treatments, there are several major concerns for the children's health," said neurologist BethAnn McLaughlin, an adviser to the Dan Marino Foundation autism group in Weston and the mother of two developmentally disabled children.

"These people are preying on the fears of parents. We cannot be using these children who are so vulnerable as guinea pigs in a medical experiment."

Untested autism treatments have flourished while science struggles to explain the disorder, which disrupts the abilities to speak, concentrate, connect with people and control impulses.

For unknown reasons, autism has been on the rise for the past few decades, with an estimated 675,000 children – about one in 100 – now having mild to severe symptoms. Scientists believe it stems from genetic defects that may only cause problems after an environmental trigger.

A vocal subset of parents and activists blame vaccines, especially those with the mercury-based preservative thimerosal, which has been banned from virtually all as a precaution. Numerous studies have found no connection between autism and vaccines or thimerosal.

Lupron therapy grew from the mercury camp. Baltimore researcher Dr. Mark Geier started using the drug in 2005 on the theory – disputed by mainsteam doctors – that testosterone binds mercury in the body and that many autistic kids have high levels of the hormone.

Lupron halts production of the female hormone estrogen, which the body uses to make testosterone. The drug mainly is used to treat endometrial cancer in women and prostate cancer in men, and sometimes to chemically castrate sex offenders.

Geier's promotional materials said he has treated hundreds of children with Lupron and has launched nine ASD Centers in eight states. In his latest, he teams with Dr. David Clayman, a Boca Raton radiologist who has an autistic teen son and is opening an ASD office beside his MRI center in Tamarac.

Clayman said he would not comment until he treats patients with Lupron therapy for a year. Geier could not be reached for comment despite several attempts by phone. He told one parent he did not plan to comment for this story.

The medical group began recruiting Florida patients in March when Geier spoke at a Fort Lauderdale conference for parents of children with autism.

Teresa Badillo was at the meeting. Her family has searched in vain for a way to help their autistic son, Marco, 18. Badillo said he has little speech or interaction with others, but is doing OK in high school. Lately, though, Marco has grown more aggressive, physical and rebellious.

"We were basically under seige in this house," Badillo said. "This kind of behavior is more scary at 18 [than] at 3. I had choices to make. If you see there is another option out there that can help your child, most parents are going to choose that option."

Also, Marco had discovered sex and sometimes touched himself inappropriately in public, a common problem among those with autism.

"The kids don't understand. They have impulses. It's what happens when you have high testosterone," Badillo said.

The family put Marco on Lupron about six weeks ago. He gets two injections a month at a dosage larger than used on adult cancer patients, plus a small daily shot.

"The therapy immediately stopped the aggression," Badillo said. "This is not castrating a kid. It's just lowering the [testosterone] levels enough to normal range so the kid is not aggressive."

She said Geier plans to continue the Lupron for several months to see if it helps Marco's other autistic behavior. She said she knows the drug has risks but believes Lupron critics do not fully grasp the hard realities of life with an autistic child.

Lupron critics said autism parents may not understand the dangers.

The drug is not approved for children – except a rare few with premature puberty – because it can impair bone development crucial to growth, said Dr. Gary Berkovitz, chief of pediatric endocrinology at the University of Miami medical school.

It's not recommended for people with heart disease, kidney disease, asthma, depression or seizures because it can worsen those conditions. Autistic children are prone to seizures.

"It has not been tested so there's no way to know if it has adverse effects in the long run," Berkovitz said.

Said neurologist McLaughlin: "We have very significant concerns about irreversible damage to sexual function and the brain and sex organs of these children."

In addition, the Food and Drug Administration is investigating complaints that Lupron causes diabetes in adults.

Geier published a 2006 study contending that 11 autistic children taking Lupron did better on tests of awareness, sociability and behavior. He has since issued other studies finding that mercury leads to excess testosterone and that autistic children have excessive levels of the hormone.

Other doctors said Geier's studies were small, were not scientifically sound and were published in journals that do not follow the standard practice of having experts review the methods.

The area's largest autism treatment center jointly run by the University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University, as well as another at Florida Atlantic University, frown on Lupron and other untested therapies, officials at the centers said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that Lupron costs about $5,000 a month but is seldom covered by insurance. Good job to address both points. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Each year, thousands of Americans suffer a traumatic brain injury. In 2013, about 2.8 million TBI-related emergency department visits, hospitalizations and deaths occurred in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Most of these are what are called mild traumatic brain injuries, or mTBIs — head injuries that don't cause a coma. People with an mTBI typically get better within a few weeks, but for as many as 20 percent, problems can linger for months or years.

Many of these patients find themselves stuck with depression, cognitive problems, headaches, fatigue and other symptoms. Known as post-concussion syndrome, this phenomenon is often difficult to treat. Antidepressants can lift moods, painkillers can ease headaches and physical therapy may ease dizziness, but most researchers agree that these remedies don't heal the injury within the brain.

Could oxygen do the trick? A growing group of scientists and physicians say that hyperbaric treatment, which exposes patients to pure oxygen at higher-than-normal air pressure, may work.

"These patients don't have enough oxygen to heal the injured parts of their brains," said Shai Efrati, a researcher and physician at Tel Aviv University in Israel and a leading hyperbaric scientist. "Hyperbaric treatment massively increases the amount of oxygen available to the brain."

But other researchers believe that the treatment has no merit and should not be recommended.

"People want to believe that hyperbaric can fix [brain injuries], and it can't," said David Cifu, a researcher at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, who has spent much of his career treating veterans with brain injuries.

Compressed air has been used by doctors since the 17th century. In 1917, two German inventors first used pressurized pure oxygen to treat decompression sickness, which occurs when undersea divers return to the surface too quickly. For the past 50 years, hyperbaric therapy has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a treatment for non-healing wounds, carbon monoxide poisoning, burns and decompression sickness. Over the past decade, doctors in the United States and internationally have begun using it to treat mTBIs.

MTBIs include sports-related concussions and head injuries caused by traffic accidents. Also, between 2000 and 2017, 308,853 American service members suffered mild traumatic brain injuries, according to the Department of Defense.

Patients with an mTBI typically experience symptoms that include headache, dizziness, fatigue, depression, anxiety and cognitive impairment. Known as post-concussion syndrome (PCS), this phenomenon is difficult to treat. Doctors use antidepressants, pain medications, biofeedback and physical therapy, but these strategies do not always work.

The nature of the human brain makes it particularly susceptible to chronic injury. The organ requires large amounts of energy under normal circumstances, and even more to heal when injured. And often, the initial trauma damages blood vessels that supply the brain with oxygen. So, just as the brain needs extra resources, it faces an energy crisis. Often, Efrati and others say, injured brain cells don't die, but may persist for years or decades, alive but hobbled. Hyperbaric therapy, he said, can return them to full function, even years after the injury.

"Oxygen is different, because it has a direct biological effect on brain tissue," said Paul G. Harch, a physician in New Orleans who over the past three decades has used hyperbaric oxygen to treat hundreds of people with chronic brain injury as well as stroke.

Patients typically receive between 40 and 60 hour-long hyperbaric treatments spread over two to three months. During each treatment, they sit or lie inside a hyperbaric chamber, which varies in size from a person-size tube to a large room that can hold several patients. While in the chamber, patients breathe in pure oxygen, typically pressurized to about twice the density of sea-level air; in this environment, the lungs take in about 10 times as much oxygen as under normal conditions.

Researchers say it remains unclear how hyperbaric oxygen affects injured brains. Efrati and others argue that it probably works through several biological pathways. The extra oxygen appears to trigger the healing of brain cells, and switches on genes specifically related to brain repair. It increases the number of stem cells that migrate to sites of brain injury, promotes the growth of new blood vessels in the brain, and boosts the activity of mitochondria, which provide energy to cells throughout the body. Scientists have linked increased mitochondrial activity to healing in many kinds of tissue.

Efrati said the brain is no different from any other part of the body. Pressurized oxygen has the power to repair many kinds of tissue damage. "A non-healing wound in the leg and a non-healing wound in the brain," he said, "they are the same basic thing."

Efrati came to the field accidentally. Eight years ago, as director of research at Assaf Harofeh Medical Center in Tel Aviv, he was asked to oversee the hospital's small hyperbaric chamber. He knew little about hyperbaric medicine and wasn't especially interested in it. But he soon noticed that pressurized oxygen seemed to have an unexpected effect. A patient had come for treatment of foot wounds that wouldn't heal — a common symptom in diabetes. The man had also suffered a traumatic brain injury several years earlier, which left him unable to speak more than a few words. The hyperbaric treatment healed his feet — and also revived his ability to speak. Other patients with wounds and brain injuries had similar surprising results. He began to examine how hyperbaric treatment affects the brain, and this work has become his focus. In 2008. Efrati founded and now directs the Sagol Center for Hyperbaric Medicine and Research at Tel Aviv University and Assaf Harofeh, where he oversees and collaborates with a range of scientists and manages a large hyperbaric treatment facility.

As the use of hyperbaric therapy for brain injury has grown, it has become increasingly controversial. Critics argue that it remains unproven and that desperate patients are wasting thousands of dollars — the treatment typically costs between $200 and $400 per session and is rarely covered by insurance — on a technique that rarely if ever helps. Between 2009 and 2015, Cifu oversaw three studies for the Department of Veterans Affairs — reportedly at a taxpayer cost of about $70 million — of about 60 active-duty service members with post-concussion syndrome. The studies found that hyperbaric treatment had little effect on their symptoms.

Overall, there is relatively little research on hyperbaric treatment for brain injury, in part because pressurized oxygen can't be patented, which limits its potential profitability. "It's very difficult to get funding for studies on this topic," Harch said.

A few studies besides Cifu's have looked at humans. In a paper published in October, Efrati and colleagues examined 15 post-concussion syndrome patients who had received hyperbaric treatment. Using brain imaging, the scientists found that after treatment, the subjects had increased cerebral blood flow as well as more activity in brain areas that had previously been dormant. They say that this indicates that hyperbaric treatment triggered regeneration of nerve fibers and blood vessels in the brain. In addition, tests showed that the subjects had improved memory and processing speed. In another study, published in 2015, researchers gave hyperbaric oxygen to 56 patients with prolonged post-concussion syndrome. They found that many patients showed significant improvements in cognitive function and overall quality of life.

While the research remains inconclusive, some American doctors are using oxygen to treat chronic brain injuries.

Ziad Mirza is one of them. For most of his career, he dispensed hyperbaric treatment for hospitals around Baltimore. Two years ago, he became chief medical officer for Hyperheal Hyperbarics, a company with three clinics in the Baltimore area. Since then, he said, he has treated about a half-dozen brain-injury patients, with mostly positive results.

One of these patients is Parisa Cook, 29, who in 2016 was found to have a tennis ball-size tumor in her brain. Surgeons removed it, but the operation was not a complete success. Cook, who lives in Baltimore, began to suffer from debilitating symptoms: She had problems with her short-term memory; she had constant headaches and couldn't concentrate; her vision became blurry and dark; and her hearing was altered, so that all sounds were jumbled and very loud. Specialists told her the operation probably had caused collateral brain trauma.

Over the course of a year, she went to eight doctors and tried more than a dozen medications and a variety of other treatments. Nothing helped. A policy analyst for the Maryland Department of Health, she worried that she would have to quit her job. She began to consider suicide. "I felt completely hopeless," she said.

Then Cook read about hyperbaric oxygen treatment. She got in touch with Mirza and began treatments. After a single session, she said, her vision was no longer wobbly; after 20 sessions over a month, she felt "perfect." "It was a complete 180," she said. "This treatment saved my life."

Cook's primary-care doctor, Sujay Pathak, an internist in Baltimore, first saw her in February. "Her life was totally interrupted by this. She couldn't function," Pathak said.

But a few weeks after starting hyperbaric therapy in September, she "got suddenly and rather miraculously better," Pathak said.

Of course, such anecdotes are not the same as rigorous scientific research. Efrati agreed that hyperbaric treatment requires more research. "Definitely, we need more science," he said. "We have a lot to learn. But we are seeing the results with our patients. It works, again and again and again."

Hyperbaric wound treatment, often for diabetics, is booming. Is that a good thing?

A short bike ride put him on a long road to recovery
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that “patients typically receive between 40 and 60 hour-long hyberbaric treatments spread over two to three months” and that a treatment “typically cost between $200 and $400 per session and is rarely covered by insurance.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 15, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- The quit-smoking drug Chantix may also help problem drinkers cut their alcohol consumption, a small new study suggests.

Exactly how this drug curbs drinking is not fully understood, but its use may increase blood pressure, heart rate and feelings of sadness and nausea, thereby blunting the pleasurable effects of alcohol, the researchers said.

"Chantix might reduce alcohol consumption by reducing overall enjoyment of the alcohol drinking experience," said study author Emma Childs, a research associate at the University of Chicago.

"Chantix increased the unpleasant effects of alcohol, for example feeling drowsy and irritable, [and] participants also reported that they didn't like the alcohol effects as much," Childs said.

Approved to help smokers quit in 2006, Chantix (varenicline) has its share of potential side effects. In July 2009, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration mandated that Chantix carry a "black box" warning about the potential risks of depression and suicidal thoughts. Recently, the drug was linked to a small but significant risk of heart attack and stroke among people with pre-existing heart disease. Chantix costs roughly $3 per pill.

The results of the new study were released online in Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research prior to publication in the May print issue.

The study included 15 healthy participants who took part in six sessions. They received a 2-mg dose of Chantix and an inactive placebo, followed three hours later by a beverage containing either a placebo, a low dose of alcohol, or a high dose of alcohol.

Before and after the sessions, the researchers asked the participants about their mood, tested visual ability and measured physiological responses such as blood pressure and heart rate.

The participants found the Chantix-booze combination increased the unpleasant effects of alcohol and reduced the rewarding aspects of drinking.

Whether the drug might someday be approved to help problem drinkers cut back remains to be seen, said the researchers, who acknowledged that the study's small size is a limitation.

"We are not currently performing any studies with Chantix, although other groups are actively pursuing this line of research with a view to developing Chantix as an aid to people wanting to quit or cut down their drinking," Childs said.

Dr. Ihsan Salloum, professor of psychiatry and director of the alcohol and drug abuse treatment program at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, termed the study encouraging.

Noting that new ways of treating alcoholism are much needed, Salloum said that Chantix may have a niche among smokers with alcohol-dependence issues. "We need a lot more options in terms of medicines to help curb drinking," he said. "We have many options for depression and need more for alcoholism, considering it is one of the most common diseases around the world."

More research is needed, he noted, but "this medication may be helpful for people with a drinking problem who are also smokers."

The study was funded by the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse and the U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

Learn more about alcoholism and how it is treated at the U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that Chantix costs about $3 per pill.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATS 2016, SAN FRANCISCO - A new skin test for tuberculosis infection has proven safe, easy to administer and accurate in two Phase III clinical trials, according to research presented at the ATS 2016 International Conference.

The test, known as C-Tb, combines the "field friendliness of the PPD-based tuberculin skin test with the high specificity of interferon gamma release assays, or IGRAs," said lead researcher Morten Ruhwald, MD, PhD, head of human immunology at Statens Serum Institut in Denmark, which developed the test.

The new test measures the body's immune response to two TB antigens, EAST-6 and CFP10. The test is administered like a tuberculin skin test (TST), and results are interpreted by measuring the size of the skin induration two or three days later.

The TST is the most commonly used test to detect TB infection, with about 50 million tests worldwide each year, according to the World Health Organization. The test is easy to administer but produces too many false positives to achieve the WHO's goal of reducing TB deaths by 95 percent and new cases by 90 percent by 2035, Dr. Ruhwald said.

Introduced a decade ago, IGRAs have high specificity, producing few false positives, but require blood samples and complicated lab work, which has limited their widespread use. There is also a dramatic price difference between the two diagnostic tests. According to Dr. Ruhwald, a TST costs about $2; an IGRA is 20 to 40 times more expensive depending on setting.

In the first clinical trial, Dr. Ruhwald and colleagues conducted a double-blinded study of C-Tb in 979 participants enrolled at 13 clinical trial sites in Spain. Participants, all adults, ranged in TB status from presumed uninfected through intermediate and high risk of latent TB to active disease.
• Both C-Tb and the IGRA had a specificity of 97 percent.
• C-Tb was highly concordant to IGRA in 95 percent of study participants.
• The specificity of C-Tb, unlike the TST, was not impacted by the BCG vaccine, the partially effective vaccine that many residents in the developing world receive. TST specificity in this group was only 62 percent.
• The sensitivity of C-Tb was comparable to the IGRA in confirmed TB cases (77 percent vs. 81 percent), indicating similar abilities to detect infection.

In the second double-blinded trial, researchers were primarily concerned with testing how accurate C-Tb was in HIV-positive patients and in young children--populations in which the accuracy of the TST and the IGRA is known to be compromised. The study, conducted in South Africa, enrolled 1,090 participants, including 299 patients with HIV and 402 children as young as 28 days.
• Among participants with HIV, the ability of all three tests to detect TB infection was diminished, though the C-Tb appeared more robust in HIV-infected participants with low CD4 T cell counts.
• Among children under 5, C-Tb was comparable with the other two tests in identifying those infected.

Dr. Ruhwald said another advantage of C-Tb is that the measurement of infection, a 5mm or larger induration, is universal across patients with different risk factors, including HIV infection. With TST, the size of the induration is often adjusted to increase its accuracy in measuring infection in different patient populations.

Regulatory approval for C-Tb is currently being sought and Statens Serum Institute is actively seeking a commercial partner for marketing of C-Tb. The cost of a C-Tb test is to be determined; however, it is expected to be significantly less than an IGRA.

Diagnostic Accuracy of the Novel C-Tb Skin Test for Latent M.tuberculosis Infection; Results from Two Phase III Clinical Trials 

M. Ruhwald1, J.A. Cayla2, H. Aggerbaek1, K. Dheda3, P. Andersen1 

1Statens Serum Institut - Copenhagen/DK, 2Public Health Agency of Barcelona - Barcelona/ES, 3UCT Lung Institute, Lung Infection & Immunity Unit - Cape Town/ZA

Renewed emphasis on the detection and preventive treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected individuals at risk is required to reach the goals of the WHO post-2015 global tuberculosis strategy.

Statens Serum Institut has developed a novel specific skin test, C-Tb, based on the antigens ESAT-6 and CFP10. C-Tb combines the field friendliness of the PPD-based Tuberculin Skin Test (TST), with the high specificity of the interferon gamma release assays (IGRA).

This presentation outlines the results from two recently completed phase III trials (TESEC-05 and -06). The results have not previously been published or presented.

The TESEC-06 trial included 979 participants from 13 clinical trial sites in Catalonia, Galicia and Basque Country (Spain) with various risk profiles of M.tuberculosis infection. The TESEC-05 trial included 1090 participants with symptoms of TB and 100 endemic controls from Cape Town (South Africa).

In both trials C-Tb and TST were administered in a double-blinded fashion to one or the other forearm. Skin indurations were read 2 to 3 days later. A reading ?5mm was considered positive for the TST and C-Tb (cut off preset in phase II). Blood for IGRA testing (Quantiferon, QFT-GIT) was drawn prior to skin testing.

The safety profile of C-Tb was acceptable and not different from TST. Test specificity was assessed in 212 presumed unexposed Spanish controls. Here, C-Tb had comparable specificity to QFT-GIT (both 97%, p=1.0, and there was no impact of BCG vaccination). By contrast, previous BCG vaccination subverted TST specificity [62% (67/108) in BCG vaccinated compared to 95% (99/104) in BCG unvaccinated persons; (p<0.001)]. Sensitivity of C-Tb and QFT-GIT was comparable in patients with confirmed TB [77% (235/307) vs 81% (250/307); p=0.08]. In contacts, mirroring the findings with QFT-GIT, there was a strong trend in increasing C-Tb test positivity with M. tuberculosis exposure (figure 1). The impact of age and HIV infection on C-Tb, TST and QFT reactivity was assessed in 1090 individuals with symptoms suspect of TB disease, analysis is ongoing and will be included in the presentation.

These phase III trial results demonstrate that C-Tb is safe, has comparable diagnostic performance to QFT-GIT and addresses the problem of false positive TST results in BCG vaccinated persons.

The field-friendliness and high specificity offered by the C-Tb test could allow for improved targeted treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected persons in also in resource-constrained settings, where IGRAs are too complicated to implement.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This release provides a very good discussion of costs, stating, “There is also a dramatic price difference between the two diagnostic tests. According to Dr. Ruhwald, a TST costs about $2; an IGRA is 20 to 40 times more expensive depending on setting.” This gives readers a clear idea of the fiscal advantage of using the new test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Is a drug really needed for what seems like a trivial use? Novalar and some dentists who advise the company said it might be useful for children, who can injure themselves by biting their lip or tongue without knowing it.

“Kids tend to chew on their tongue when it’s numb,” said Dr. Athena Papas, a professor at the Tufts University School of Dental Medicine. The drug, however, is not approved for children younger than 6 or weighing less than 33 pounds.

Dr. Papas, an adviser to Novalar and an investigator in its clinical trials, said she thought the drug would appeal especially to those receiving cosmetic dentistry “who like to look good when they leave the dentist’s office.”

Novalar said its surveys showed great interest in the product among consumers and among dentists, some of whom said they would mark up the price of the drug as a source of profit.

With about 300 million anesthesia injections given by dentists each year, company executives say the drug could easily achieve sales of hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

OraVerse is a formulation of a decades-old drug, phentolamine mesylate, which is used to treat severe episodes of hypertension.

When dentists administer lidocaine or another local anesthetic, they usually combine it with another drug called epinephrine, which acts to constrict the blood vessels. That keeps the blood from carrying away the anesthetic from the mouth too quickly.

OraVerse does the opposite, dilating the blood vessels and speeding up blood flow so the anesthetic can be carried away.

“We aren’t reversing the local anesthesia,” said Dr. Paul A. Moore, chairman of anesthesiology at the University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, who is an adviser to Novalar. “It is reversing the epinephrine.”

The label for the hypertension drug phentolamine contains warnings about heart attacks and occlusion of blood flow to the brain. Novalar said the label of OraVerse would also contain the warnings, but note that OraVerse is given in a different manner. In the clinical trials there were no serious side effects, Novalar said.

Novalar also said patients did not have pain because the anesthesia wore off more quickly, except for a little extra pain at the injection site. But the trials excluded people who got root canals or tooth extractions. Those patients would be expected to have lingering pain, and should not get Oraverse, Dr. Moore said.

In two trials of 484 patients in total, people were given either OraVerse or a sham injection. (Patients were blindfolded so they could not see the needle and, being numb, supposedly could not tell if the needle penetrated.)

People then tapped their lips every five minutes for five hours, feeling for sensation. Observers measured the symmetry of their smiles, checked for drool and listened to them read sentences.

About 41 percent of patients who got OraVerse reported normal lower lip sensation one hour after getting the drug, compared with 7 percent of those getting the sham injection. About 59 percent of those who got OraVerse had normal sensation in the upper lip after one hour, compared to 12 percent in the control group.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article reports the company will sell the drug to dentists for $12.50 per injection. It also says some dentists will mark it up to make profit.  How big that markup may be is the key question for consumers.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Blood drawn from expectant mothers could offer parents an earlier sneak peek at their baby’s sex than methods currently used in the U.S., researchers said Tuesday.

The test may be particularly valuable for families that harbor sex-linked genetic disorders like hemophilia, they add.

Because such disorders mostly strike boys, knowing that the baby is a girl could spare the mother diagnostic procedures, such as amniocentesis, that carry a small risk of miscarriage.

“It could reduce the number of invasive procedures that are being performed for specific genetic conditions,” said Dr. Diana Bianchi of Tufts University School of Medicine, who worked on the new study.

But other researchers voiced concerns, saying it could be misused to terminate a pregnancy if the baby isn’t of the desired sex.

“What you have to consider is the ethics of this,” said Dr. Mary Rosser, an obstetrician and gynecologist at the Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

“If parents are using it to determine gender and then terminate the pregnancy based on that, that could be a problem,” she told Reuters Health. “Remember, gender is not a disease.”

The test looks for small pieces of the male sex chromosome in the mother’s blood, which would mean she is carrying a baby boy. Some European hospitals already rely on the method, called cell-free fetal DNA, although it’s not available from doctors in the U.S.

“What they are finding in England is that many women are not going on to have the invasive tests,” Bianchi told Reuters Health.

In those procedures, doctors either extract a small amount of the fluid that surrounds the fetus (amniocentesis) or they take a sample of the placenta (chorionic villus sampling). Between one in 100 and one in 600 mothers miscarry as a result, according to Bianchi.

In a fresh look at the medical evidence for the blood test, she and her colleagues analyzed 57 earlier studies that included more than 6,500 pregnancies.

They found parents could trust the test 98.8 percent of the time when it said they’d have a boy, and 94.8 percent of the time when it indicated a girl.

That leaves some room for error, which could be important if parents are making medical decisions based on the results — such as whether or not to get an invasive procedure to look for genetic disorders.

However, the current non-invasive alternative — an ultrasound done at the end of the first trimester — isn’t always good at spotting a baby’s sex, Bianchi’s team reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

And the blood test is reliable as early as seven weeks into the pregnancy, whereas ultrasound is not.

Bianchi said one study had estimated the blood test costs about 255 pounds in the UK (about $413), all included. While it’s available over the Internet, she said her team had only looked at hospital-based test performance.

“I don’t know why it is not being incorporated in the US,” she said.

Rosser, however, chalked that up to the ethical issues it raises.

“It is a great test that can be part of our armamentarium of noninvasive testing that we use,” she said. “But it should only be used by families that are at risk for sex-linked diseases.”

Bianchi said she owns stock in Verinata Health, a company that is developing cell-free fetal DNA tests for Down syndrome, although that company had no role in the new study.

The American College of Medical Genetics did not respond to requests for comment on the DNA tests.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions the estimated cost of test, but does not note that consumers can get the test without a doctor’s involvement in the US.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dermatologists will soon get some high-tech help deciding which suspicious-looking moles should be removed and checked for melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a first-of-its-kind device, called MelaFind, that makes detailed, digital images of skin growths and uses a computer to analyze them for signs of cancer, offering a sort of second opinion to doctors. The device is approved only for dermatologists and only for use on growths that don't have obvious signs of cancer but still have one or two worrisome traits.

The hope is to find more melanomas sooner. Nearly all patients diagnosed with early-stage melanoma can be treated and cured, but 85 percent of patients with late-stage melanoma die from it within five years.

More than 70,000 people in the U.S. will be diagnosed with melanoma this year, and 16 percent are diagnosed only after the disease has spread to other parts of the body, according to estimates from the National Institutes of Health.

To diagnose the disease, doctors decide which moles to remove and biopsy using an entirely visual set of guidelines involving size, shape and color. Most dermatologists easily spot late-stage lesions that have obvious signs of cancer, including irregular edges, uneven color and a width greater than 6 millimeters. But many others are tough calls.

"Every day patients come in with 20 moles on their back and the dilemma is, which ones are suspicious and need to be biopsied?" said Dr. David Pariser, former president of the American Academy of Dermatology. "The diagnosis of melanoma is the most serious one a dermatologist makes, and we have sleepless nights worrying about it," said Pariser, who consulted for the device's maker, Mela Sciences Inc. of Irvington, N.Y., on its presentation to FDA.

The device's handheld attachment, about the size of a blow dryer, emits light that penetrates below the surface of the skin, taking multicolored images that reflect the depth and shape of skin growths. A computer compares these to a database of 10,000 archived images and recommends whether a biopsy should be done.

In a company-sponsored study published last year involving around 1,300 patients, some with multiple growths, doctors reported that MelaFind correctly suggested biopsies on 125 of 127 melanomas that doctors had removed. MelaFind correctly identified about 10 percent of non-cancerous growths, which was better than doctors in the study who were correct less than 4 percent of the time, on average. The study was published in the Archives of Dermatology.

The company's study was not intended to show that screening with the device saves lives, only that it can help improve a doctor's ability to spot melanoma.

For now, experts say MelaFind will help dermatologists make better decisions on which moles to remove.

"There is no such thing as 100 percent certainty in medicine," said Dr. George Elias, a melanoma expert at Georgetown's Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center who had no ties to the company or the device.

"Ultimately it's the responsibility of the dermatologist to use his clinical judgment to make the best decision. This machine is there to help him, not replace him."

Elias voted with the majority of an FDA panel that narrowly endorsed the device last year.

Dermatologists say it's too early to tell whether MelaFind will lead to fewer unnecessary biopsies.

"A biopsy takes a few minutes in my hands, so if there's an issue with any lesion we will always biopsy, whether we have a MelaFind picture or not," said Dr. Leonard Goldberg, a dermatologist at the Texas Medical Center and vice president of the Skin Cancer Foundation, a disease awareness group that accepts donations from makers of sunscreen.

MelaFind underwent a contentious, years-long review by the Food and Drug Administration, which initially rejected the device and concluded it could "potentially cause more harm than good."

Regulators worried that the device could give physicians a false sense of certainty, leading to fewer biopsies. Another concern was that doctors could misinterpret the device's feedback, particularly error messages when a mole cannot be scanned. About 8 percent of growths scanned in the company study came back as "unevaluable."

At a meeting last fall, FDA scientists said Mela Sciences had not shown how its device would influence day-to-day decisions by doctors. The agency also worried about its use by general doctors not accustomed to identifying suspicious skin moles. Despite these concerns, the panel of advisers narrowly backed the overall safety and efficacy of the device in a 8-7 vote.

Regulators said this week that they ultimately approved the device after Mela Sciences agreed to limit its use to board-certified dermatologists who undergo a specialized training course.

"The device is only good for certain lesions, and that's why you have to be a dermatologist to be able to classify and categorize those lesions appropriately," said Christy Foreman, director of FDA's Office of Device Evaluation.

Foreman said an FDA-required follow-up study would help determine how much of a benefit MelaFind represents for patients.

"This device represents new technology. At the end of the day I don't know that this will be the best technology out there, but it is a step forward to allow continued innovation in this area," Foreman said.

Don't expect to see a MelaFind machine at your next doctor's appointment. The company plans to bring them next year to just 200 dermatologists on the East coast, all of whom must undergo company training before they can begin using the device.

Doctors will pay a one-time fee of $7,500 to lease and receive training on the device. Patients will pay $150 out of pocket for a MelaFind scan, which analysts say may limit use to more affluent patients who are willing to pay extra for the latest medical care. Mela Sciences does not plan to ask insurers to cover the device until several years from now, after it is more widely used.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story takes the rare step of talking about costs from three different angles. The cost to the physician. The cost to the patient. And the cost to insursers. “Doctors will pay a one-time fee of $7,500 to lease and receive training on the device. Patients will pay $150 out of pocket for a MelaFind scan, which analysts say may limit use to more affluent patients who are willing to pay extra for the latest medical care. Mela Sciences does not plan to ask insurers to cover the device until several years from now, after it is more widely used.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have developed an ultraviolet (UV) lamp that kills the influenza virus but isn’t harmful to human skin or eyes, according to a new study in . They hope the technology can be commercialized and marketed to prevent the spread of seasonal flu in public places, such as schools, hospitals, and airports.

“We’ve known for a century that UV light is extremely efficient at killing microbes, bacteria, and viruses,” says study leader David Brenner, director of the Center for Radiological Research at Columbia University Irving Medical Center. For that reason, UV devices are often used for sterilization — for medical equipment in hospitals, for example, or drinking water for backcountry campers.

But conventional germicidal lamps aren’t safe for humans to be around. With prolonged exposure, they can cause skin cancer and cataracts in the eyes. “So up until now, they’re only really practical when people aren’t around,” say Brenner. “You can sterilize a hospital room, but not when anyone’s inside.”

About five years ago, Brenner says, the Columbia team came up with a potential solution. Light on the far end of the UV-C spectrum, known as far-UVC, has very short wavelengths. The researchers suspected that it can penetrate and destroy microscopic bacteria and viruses, but can’t travel through the protective outer layers of human skin or eyes.

“We wanted to get all the benefits of UV light in terms of killing microbes, but none of the health hazards,” says Brenner. Earlier studies, on animals and humans, have shown that exposure to far-UVC light does indeed appear to be safe. “We haven’t seen any biological damage to skin cells or eye cells, whereas with conventional UV light we’ve always seen lots of biological damage,” he says. Previous research has also shown that far-UVC light can kill MRSA bacteria, a common cause of infections after surgery.

Now, Brenner and his colleagues have show that UVC light can effectively kill airborne influenza. In their new study, aerosolized particles of the H1N1 seasonal flu virus were released into a test chamber and exposed to very low doses of far-UVC light. The light inactivated the viruses with about the same efficiency as conventional germicidal UV light, while a control group of bacteria not exposed to light remained active.

“We think that this type of overhead light could be efficacious for basically any public setting,” says Brenner. “Think about doctor’s waiting rooms, schools, airports and airplanes—any place where there’s a likelihood for airborne viruses.” And unlike the flu vaccine, he says, far-UVC light is likely to be effective against all airborne microbes, including newly emerging virus strains.

Brenner says his team is working with a company to develop a commercially available version of the lamp, which could become a cost-effective way to battle flu epidemics on a population level. “The lamp we’re using at the moment costs less than $1,000, and you can imagine that if it were put into general circulation, the price would drop dramatically,” he says. “We don’t see cost as being a limiting factor here.”

UVC lamps could also have potential implications in clinical settings, as well — in the operating room during surgeries, for example. “No matter how well you sterilize a room beforehand, the medical staff can still bring in dangerous bacteria like MRSA,” says Brenner. “If you have a lamp over the surgical site that can sterilize the air, you can prevent the bacteria from floating down and contaminating the wound.”

Brenner can’t predict how long it might take for these lamps to be commercially available, but he says he’s “extremely optimistic” about the technology. “There has been no way of killing viruses in the air in public spaces, and this is an approach that may solve that problem.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The lead author of the study is quoted as saying “The lamp we’re using at the moment costs less than $1,000, and you can imagine that if it were put into general circulation, the price would drop dramatically … we don’t see cost as being a limited factor here.”
The first part of the quote gives a frame of reference, though “less than $1,000” is somewhat ambiguous. The second part also is speculative, so this is a barely passing satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using an artificial breath-sensor system dubbed the "electronic nose," Italian researchers were able to spot more cases of asthma than with traditional diagnostic tools.

The electronic nose detected nearly 90 percent of people with asthma compared to about 70 percent who were accurately diagnosed in the traditional way with lung function tests, according to new research published in the April issue of the journal Chest.

When combined with another test, called the fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) test, the electronic nose did an even better job at detecting asthma, the study found.

"The electronic nose discriminates between patients with asthma and healthy subjects and its performance is increased when combined with FENO," wrote the Italian team led by Dr. Paolo Montuschi of the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Rome.

The device works by identifying volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in exhaled breath. These VOCs produce a unique smell print for each individual and specific patterns are seen in people with asthma.

The new study included 27 people with intermittent or mild persistent asthma and 24 healthy people. None of the study volunteers had a history of smoking. Those with asthma had a history of allergies, and none had been treated with corticosteroids for at least four weeks prior to the start of the study.

Currently, asthma is diagnosed "based on your medical history and symptoms, and with spirometry (lung function testing) and exhaled nitric oxide," said Dr. Thomas Leath, director of allergy and immunology at Scott & White Healthcare in Round Rock, Texas.

The Italian researchers wanted to compare the electronic nose to the other commonly used tests -- spirometry and FENO -- to see which test was best at confirming a diagnosis of asthma.

To do this, all of the study volunteers were given all three tests. Each test is non-invasive, requiring only the use of exhaled air.

The electronic nose was able to correctly differentiate healthy people from those with physician-diagnosed asthma in 87.5 percent of the cases. FENO was able to correctly identify asthma in 79.2 percent of the study volunteers and lung function testing (spirometry) discerned just 70.8 percent of the people with asthma.

When the electronic nose and FENO were combined, the two tests together correctly identified almost 96 percent of the asthma cases.

"This is potentially a great tool. It could be used for screening if it's affordable or for seeing the effect of anti-inflammatory medicines. But, it definitely needs more research," said Leath.

"This device is interesting and warrants a further look, but it still needs to be perfected and the researchers need to figure out its niche," said Dr. Jennifer Appleyard, chief of allergy and immunology at St. John Hospital and Medical Center in Detroit. "We need to know if it's good for diagnostics or for measuring improvements after treatment. In some diseases, you use blood markers to monitor treatment response. Could you use this to see if patients are responding? We also need to know if it's good for diagnosing all types of asthma."

Dr. David Rosenstreich, director of the division of allergy and immunology at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, added: "An objective and fast test for diagnosing asthma would be helpful, and this test seems to be a non-invasive way of sampling for the underlying problem. This test seems relatively easy for patients and it does have potential, but they've only looked at a very narrow collection of people who have allergic asthma."

Both Appleyard and Leath noted that cost might initially limit the use of an electronic nose.

Learn more about how asthma is currently diagnosed from the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Since this device is experimental, we can accept the fact that the story didn’t put a specific price tag on the technology. The story did note that cost might limit initial use of the device.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A small, preliminary study finds that ginger root supplements seem to reduce inflammation in the intestines -- a potential sign that the pills might reduce the risk of colon cancer.

However, more study needs to be done, and the researchers aren't yet recommending that people head to the supplements' aisle or start gobbling up more ginger at meal times.

"If you want to add ginger to part of a healthy diet, that's great. But you can't make any conclusions about definite health benefits" based on the study findings, said lead author Suzanna M. Zick, a naturopathic physician and research associate professor at University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor.

The study, funded by the U.S. National Cancer Institute, was published online Oct. 11 in Cancer Prevention Research.

Ginger, an herb, is found in supplements and in many foods such as ginger snaps and Asian dishes. Research has supported its use to treat stomach problems such as nausea and vomiting; the U.S. National Library of Medicine says it's "likely safe," although some people may develop mild side effects.

Previous research in animals has suggested that ginger can reduce inflammation but isn't potentially toxic to the stomach like aspirin, Zick noted. And scientists have linked chronic inflammation in the gut to colon cancer, suggesting that easing this inflammation could reduce the risk of the disease.

In the new study, Zick's team randomly assigned 30 people to take pills containing 2 grams of ground ginger root extract or a "dummy" placebo pill each day for 28 days. They measured the level of inflammation in the participants' intestines before and after the test period.

The amount of ginger in the pills is equivalent to 20 grams of raw ginger root, the authors said. That is probably well beyond what most people would eat in their regular diet, Zick noted. As for cost, she said that a month's supply of similar ginger supplements typically runs about $10 to $30.

The researchers found that the level of inflammation in the subjects who took the ginger pills fell by an average of 28 percent, while staying about the same in those who took the placebo.

If more funding becomes available, the researchers hope to launch a larger study, Zick said. But for now, she said, "if you want to embrace ginger because you like the taste, go ahead," but there's no solid evidence that it prevents colon cancer.

Dr. Andrew Chan, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and a gastroenterologist at Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, said the findings are promising because they hint at how ginger may prevent colon cancer.

It's already clear that people with inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease are at higher risk of colon cancer, he noted. "We know there are anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin that appear to have anti-cancer properties. And we know there are certain basic mechanisms which seem to be common to both inflammation and cancer," he said.

Still, Chan said, "it's much too early to tell whether ginger has anti-cancer properties."

There's more on ginger at the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that a month’s supply of ginger supplements typically runs about $10 – $30.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"But the study offers evidence that targeting beta-amyloid can benefit patients," she says. Larger studies in many more patients are needed before the drug will be available, though, she says.

The benefit is small and studies have been inconsistent, says researcher Rachelle Doody, MD, head of Alzheimer’s disease research at Baylor College of Medicine.

Called solanezumab, the drug attaches to a protein called beta-amyloid that builds up and clumps together to form sticky plaques that riddle Alzheimer's patients' brains. The drug is designed to prevent those clumps from forming.

Oct. 8, 2012 (Boston) -- An experimental Alzheimer ’s treatment slowed memory loss by about one-third in people with mild Alzheimer's , offering hope that the drug can alter the course of the progressive disease.

Maria Carrillo, PhD, a neuroscientist and vice president for medical and scientific relations for the Alzheimer’s Association, calls the results "encouraging" and says she hopes development will continue.

"While [beta-amyloid] is the leading hypothesis of what causes the disease, that has remained unproven. This study may not have hit on everything, and it is not the home run we wanted, but it is the first time we’ve seen cognitive benefit with an amyloid treatment," she says.

The latest results come from a combined analysis of a 1,012-patient study and a 646-patient study, both of which involved people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease.

When the findings of the two studies were looked at individually, patients given solanezumab for 18 months didn’t do better on either a test used to measure patients' symptoms or a measure of how well patients are functioning than patients given a placebo.

Combining the two studies to give them more statistical power showed that patients on solanezumab didn’t lose their memories as quickly as those on placebo.

The results really became clear when the researchers looked only at those patients with mild, early-stage disease. In the analysis, those given solanezumab had a 34% reduction in memory loss and other mental symptoms compared with those on placebo. There was even a hint that the drug helped to slow the decline in functioning.

Asked if the 34% improvement in cognitive decline is meaningful to a patient, Carrillo said, "I have a family member with AD. I would be happy with a sustained cognitive benefit for my mother-in-law."

The only side effect that happened more often in people on solanezumab than patients on placebo was chest pain: 1.1% vs. 0.2%.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Though it is too early to have a firm price, the story notes that similar drugs can cost hundreds of dollars per month. This price reference is more specific than the one in the AP story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alyssa Gold had planned on getting married by age 26 and having kids by age 30 — but life worked out differently.

Instead, at age 34, she was single and successful, and about to start an MBA program. But her dreams of having a family were real and she began to be concerned as she got older about her chances of having a baby.

“I knew starting a family was a few years off,” said Gold. “I was very career-minded and very focused and had relationships throughout my 20s and early 30s, but still wasn't in that forever relationship.”

Women are born with a finite number of eggs: they start out with roughly one to two million in their ovaries. Once a woman hits puberty the number drops to 300,000 and by age 30 the amount decreases by 90 percent. In her mid-30’s Alyssa worried how many eggs she had left.

Turns out there’s a simple blood test that could tell her.

For years, it’s been a staple in fertility clinics; it’s officially called the Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) test. Some doctors are now offering it as an option to healthy women to assess what they call their ovarian reserve.

It’s now being called the “baby deadline test.”

“There are some young, healthy women who are living their lives in shape and taking very good care of themselves who might not know that their reserve strength of their ovaries is lower than it should be.” said Dr. Joshua Hurwitz a reproductive endocrinologist and infertility specialist with Reproductive Medical Associates of Connecticut. “It's a question of having the knowledge and awareness of keeping your options open.”

The test is a simple blood analysis that usually costs less than $100. It measures the amount of AMH circulating in a women’s bloodstream. This hormone is released by follicles in the ovaries and predicts the amount of possible eggs a woman has. The higher the result the more eggs, the lower the result the fewer eggs. The test doesn’t measure the quality of the eggs and it’s not a guarantee of fertility. The test has traditionally been offered to women who are struggling to get pregnant and helps assess the possible next steps, such as getting pregnant sooner or freezing eggs.

For Alyssa Gold, the AMH test was a wakeup call. At her regular gynecology visit, Gold took the AMH test and received news she didn’t wanted to hear but it helped her take the next right step for her.

“I took the AMH test and I'm glad I did because the results were not what I was hoping them to be,” said Gold. “My tests were really below normal and that was an indicator to me that I needed to move ahead with taking control of my fertility at that time and doing something, which was egg freezing.”

Gold finished her graduate studies, and soon after met her future husband. She is now happily married, and at age 38, thinking about starting a family soon. She’s grateful to the Baby Deadline Test for giving her that option.

“Completely fortunate that I was able to get the information and make that decision that there is this medical technology out there to help me in that way,” said Gold. “If I had waited until I met my husband and we were trying now to have a child it would be a very different story.”

“Even the best AMH level in the world is not a guarantee for someone going forward or even right now but they are good indicators for fertility,” said Hurwitz. “There's no way you should lose hope, there's so many things we can do these days and starting early enough we can use this information to keep options open, no matter what the result is you're going to be okay.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’re giving this a Satisfactory rating since the story did mention that the test “usually costs less than $100.”
The story would have been stronger if it had explained if insurance companies typically cover the test–especially if it’s being given to women without any history of infertility. There also may be associated costs with follow-up testing.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Hochman presented the results yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart Association in Chicago. The study was also published online yesterday by The New England Journal of Medicine and will appear in the Dec. 7 issue.

Her report is the latest warning from researchers who suspect that stents are being overused and may even be causing heart attacks and deaths. Manufacturers sell $6 billion in stents a year, and hospitals charge $10,000 to $15,000 per patient to implant them.

The devices, which came into widespread use in the 1990s, are made of either bare metal or metal coated with a drug meant to help keep the artery from closing again. Recent studies have found that drug-coated stents can increase the risk of blood clots, even years after they are implanted.

Use of the drug-coated stents has fallen since last spring, but they still account for more than 80 percent of stents implanted in the United States.

Stents have been increasingly used in people with clogged arteries who are not having heart attacks, but some studies suggest that those patients would be better off taking drugs to reduce cholesterol, inflammation and clotting. The reasoning is that artery disease tends to be systemic and extensive, but stents can treat it only in tiny spots.

A million Americans a year have heart attacks, and half of them die, according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. A common symptom is severe pain in the chest, left arm, jaw or back, but about a third of patients do not have chest pain. Symptoms may also include feeling faint, sweaty, short of breath or nauseated and having a sensation that the heart is pounding.

Clots are often the cause of heart attacks, and health authorities urge people with symptoms to go to the hospital immediately so that doctors can use balloons and stents, or clot-dissolving drugs, to try to prevent heart damage. But some patients do not realize what is happening, or do not want to believe it.

About a million angioplasties a year are performed in the United States, including those in heart attack victims and those in people with blocked arteries who have not had heart attacks. The study did not address the use of angioplasty and stents in people who have not had heart attacks.

Dr. Hochman emphasized that angioplasty was still the best treatment for many heart attack patients who go to the hospital early, within 12 hours of when the attack began. The people who generally do best are those who arrive at the hospital and have angioplasty within 90 minutes of the heart attack.

Opening a clogged artery in the early stages of a heart attack — “early angioplasty” — can restore blood flow and reduce damage to the heart muscle. It can sometimes save the muscle after 12 hours, but then doctors decide case by case whether it is worthwhile. About a third of heart attack patients show up after 12 hours.

After a few days have passed, though, there is little or no chance of preventing heart damage. But many doctors open the artery anyway, thinking it may still have long-term benefits and prolong the patients’ lives. In that situation, the procedure is called late angioplasty. It can be helpful in people who are still suffering from chest pain or have certain other complications from the heart attack.

But what about people who see a doctor more than a day later and are medically stable and free of chest pain? The new study tried to determine if late angioplasty could help them. Although angioplasty is not open surgery, it is an invasive procedure with risks, and the researchers wanted to know if there was any reason to put these patients through it when they seemed to be on the road to recovery. The study showed there was no need for the procedure.

The findings may come as a rude surprise to many cardiologists, who have come to believe that opening a blocked artery, even days or weeks after a heart attack, is bound to be good for patients.

Even Dr. Hochman was surprised by the results. She said she and her colleagues expected to find that angioplasty would reduce the risks of heart failure, subsequent heart attacks and death. But their theory failed the test.

“This is why we have clinical trials,” she said. She added that cardiologists were such strong believers in angioplasty that some major medical centers in the United States and Europe had refused to participate in her study, saying it would be unethical to let some patients go without the procedure for a study.

The 2,166 patients in the study had all suffered heart attacks 3 to 28 days before, caused by a completely blocked coronary artery. The median time since the heart attack was eight days. They were in stable condition and free of chest pain, and were picked at random to receive either heart medicines only or balloon treatment and stents with heart medicines. Most got plain metal stents, but about 8 percent got drug-coated ones. The researchers tracked their health for an average of three years.

There were no differences between the groups. They had the same rates of heart attack, death and heart failure. If anything, those who had angioplasty seemed to fare a bit worse than those who did not, but the differences were not statistically significant and might have been because of chance, Dr. Hochman said.

An expert not involved in the research, Dr. Steven E. Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic and president of the American College of Cardiology, said the study was independent and well conducted.

“Having an artery open ought to be good for you,” Dr. Nissen said. “Why not open it late? Like a lot of things in medicine, however, when you actually test it in an organized way, in a randomized, controlled trial, you find out it doesn’t work.”

He added, “It will change what I do.”

In an editorial accompanying the study in the journal, two other cardiologists say that late angioplasty may still be worthwhile for some patients. The ones who might benefit, they say, are a small minority — perhaps 10 to 15 percent — who cannot take the class of heart medicines known as beta blockers, which have been proved to increase survival after a heart attack.

A spokesman for Boston Scientific, the leading stent maker in the United States, said Dr. Hochman’s study would not have much impact because the findings applied to only a small subgroup of patients. But the company’s stock price dropped sharply yesterday morning when news of Dr. Hochman’s study first hit the news. It recovered by the end of the day, however, as analysts said the findings were likely to have little effect on stent use. By late afternoon, the rally had wiped out all the morning losses. Boston Scientific ended trading at $15.94, up 8 cents.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The estimated cost for having a stent placed in a coronary artery was mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
That, said Dr. Leon of Columbia, who was the trial’s principal investigator, was remarkable. “If we treat five patients, we would save a life in the first year,” he said. “There are very few treatments in all of cardiovascular medicine that could claim that — I can think of heart transplant, and that’s it.”

The results were even more notable, he said, because the early versions of the devices were clunky, stiff and difficult to use.

The F.D.A. approved the method with the Edwards device for patients at extremely high risk in 2011.

That year, Dr. Mack, who was then the president of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and other leaders met with the F.D.A. and Medicare to devise a plan to restrict the device’s spread to places where doctors had sufficient skill to implant them safely. The result was a requirement that a hospital should be doing at least 50 surgical aortic valve replacements a year to have access to the technology. It was written into the Medicare coverage decision, a first for a medical device.

“This technology is expensive and high risk,” Dr. Mack said. The consensus of the group, he said, was that “not every one of the 1,150 cardiac surgery programs or the 1,600 cath labs in the U.S. should be able to do it.”

In June 2014, after another company, Medtronic, did similar studies, its device was approved, too, for high-risk patients.

Former skeptics like Dr. Cohn now recommend the procedure for high-risk patients.

More recent 2015 data from Medtronic indicates that its valve is better than surgery for high-risk patients, resulting in fewer deaths, at least in the first two years. And new data from another large study by Edwards found that patients at intermediate risk did better with the newest version of its valve than would be expected with surgery in the first 30 days, when most deaths occur. “Truly phenomenal early results,” Dr. Herrmann said.

Last Wednesday, the F.D.A. approved the new Edwards valve for high-risk patients; it had been available only in clinical trials. Medtronic also has a new version of its valve that cardiologists expect will soon be approved.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’ll award a Satisfactory here with some reservations. Although the article addresses the cost of the procedure, and in particular of the valve, readers should have been told how the cost compares to conventional surgery, rather than just the bottom line risks for hospitals. Here’s how the story presents it: “It’s a hard proposition when $32,500 goes right out the door to Edwards,” the valve manufacturer, he said. The hospital gets about $40,000 from Medicare, which is fine if there are no complications. But older patients, in their late 80s and 90s, often end up with four-, five- or even seven-day hospital stays. “We could lose $25,000,” he said.”
According to the Healthcare Blue Book, a reasonable charge to the consumer for heart valve surgery is $50,000.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
INDIANAPOLIS -- In the first study of its kind, researchers found real-world massage therapy to be an effective treatment for chronic low back pain.

Niki Munk, an assistant professor of health sciences in the School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis and one of the co-first authors of the study, said that the study's findings are important, given the large number of people who suffer low back pain in the U.S.

Low back pain leads all disorders in years lost to disability in the U.S. Most patients improve rapidly, but one-third report persistent back pain, and 15 percent develop chronic low back pain with significant physical limitations.

More than 50 percent of those who participated in the study experienced clinically meaningful improvements in their low back pain with disability, according to Munk.

"The study can give primary care providers the confidence to tell patients with chronic low back pain to try massage, if the patients can afford to do so," Munk said. Generally, massage is not covered by insurance, Medicaid or Medicare.

Previous studies of the effectiveness of massage were conducted in controlled research situations. In this study, patients were referred by a physician to a massage therapist. The massage therapist designed and provided a series of 10 massages -- at no cost to the patient -- in a clinical treatment environment, mimicking the experience of people who choose to seek massage therapy in the real world.

The study also looked at different characteristics associated with patients being more likely or less likely to experience clinically meaningful change from massage. Among the study's findings:

Adults in the baby-boom and older generations tended to be much more likely to experience clinically meaningful changes.

Obese patients experienced significant improvements, but those improvements were not retained over time.

Patients who were taking opioids experienced improvements in their pain from disability in some cases but were two times less likely to experience clinically meaningful change compared to those who were not taking opioids.

While the study results are promising, much more work needs to be done, Munk said: "The fact of the matter is that chronic lower back pain is very complex and often requires a maintenance-type approach versus a short-term intervention option."

Additional investigation is needed to replicate the results of the initial study and to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of massage therapy, Munk said.

"Massage is an out-of-pocket cost," she said. "Generally, people wonder if it is worth it. Will it pay to provide massage to people for an extended period of time? Will it help avoid back surgeries, for example, that may or may not have great outcomes? These are the types of analyses that we hope will result from this study."

The study, "Real-World Massage Therapy Produces Meaningful Effectiveness Signal for Primary Care Patients with Chronic Low Back Pain: Results of a Repeated Measures Cohort Study," was published online March 14 in the journal Pain Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We give the release credit for stating that massages are generally not covered by insurance and that patients typically pay out-of-pocket. And the release provided some important context about cost with this statement from the lead author: “Generally, people wonder if it is worth it. Will it pay to provide massage to people for an extended period of time? Will it help avoid back surgeries, for example, that may or may not have great outcomes? These are the types of analyses that we hope will result from this study.”
While massage is now offered in nearly all cities and towns, not all readers know how much they will need to shell out for the 10 sessions used in this study.
A one hour massage averages $60 an hour nationally, so 10 sessions would cost about $600. That’s something people considering this type of therapy would like to know.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After decades of dreaming about getting patients' immune systems to fight cancer, immunotherapy is finally here. The Food and Drug Administration approved Provenge this spring to treat advanced prostate cancer.

But now the study that led to FDA approval is finally out in this week's New England Journal of Medicine. And it's clear that experts are still scratching their heads about just how Provenge works.

It does work, sort of.

In the study, men with prostate cancer that no longer responds to hormone therapy (basically, chemical castration) lived about four months longer if they took Provenge than if they got placebo treatment. That's better than the only other approved treatment for such advanced cancers.

But, as the study's lead author Dr. Philip Kantoff acknowledges, "It's not a home run; this is not going to cure prostate cancer."

The primary mystery is how Provenge extends life, since it doesn't shrink prostate tumors, as far as anyone can tell. "Prolongation of survival without a measurable antitumor effect is surprising," writes Dr. Dan Longo of the National Institute on Aging in a NEJM editorial.

Deep in the data is further mystery.

Provenge is supposed to work by, in effect, vaccinating patients against their own cancers using a patient's own white blood cells.

The theory is that the custom-made vaccine incites patients' immune cells to attack the cancer. The study shows that patients who got Provenge were indeed more likely to mount immune-cell responses to a prostate cancer antigen in the test tube. But oddly, the patients who had these activated immune cells didn't survive any longer than those who didn't.

The other side of the immune system – the antibody arm -- showed a different picture. Patients who had a good antibody response to Provenge lived longer than those who didn't.

Nobody yet knows just how to explain these results. Longo, the NEJM editorialist, says he'd be more convinced if the placebo patients had received infusions of white blood cells that had been exposed just to the general immune-stimulating part of the Provenge treatment, without the prostate antigen part.

The way the study was done, he says, "does not allow one to conclude" that Provenge is working because it mobilizes the immune system specifically against prostate cancer.

But, after all, Provenge is just the first cancer immunotherapy on the market. So it's not surprising there's a lot to be learned, and that it's pretty pricey.

Other immunotherapy approaches are in the pipeline, along with fancier versions of drugs to block the hormones that feed prostate cancer.

Meanwhile, Dendreon, the Seattle-based company that makes Provenge, says there's a waiting list for the drug. The company estimates 100,000 American men have the kind of hormone-resistant, metastatic cancer the drug is approved to treat. But the company can only make enough at this point for 2,000 patients in the first year.

So does the waiting list contain thousands of men? Tens of thousands? "Can't say," replies Dendreon COO Hans Bishop.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story itself only says "it’s pretty pricey."  But those words provide a hyperlink to another NPR story that discloses the drug cost as $93,000.  It would have taken the same amount of space to just state the cost in the current story.  Why make people click away to get the cost in another story?  Is the need to improve click rates driving this? Regardless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Patients who have robot-assisted surgeries on their kidneys or prostate have shorter hospital stays and a lower risk of having a blood transfusion or dying — but the bill is significantly higher, a study found.

The analysis, which appeared in the Journal of Urology, compared increasingly common robotic surgery with two other techniques for the same surgery and found that direct costs can be up to several thousand dollars higher for the robotic type.

Touted as less invasive and more efficient, robotic surgeries typically use a laparoscopic or “keyhold surgery” approach, in which tools and a tiny video camera are inserted into the body through one or two small incisions.

Robotic surgery replaces a surgeon’s hands with ultra-precise tools at the ends of mechanical arms, all operated by the surgeon from a console.

“I think the take home message is that robotic (surgery), looking at our study, had certain beneficial outcomes compared to open and laparoscopic procedures,” said study leader Jim Hu at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

Hu and his team analyzed surgery data from a national government database to see if the costlier robotic surgeries were cost effective with extra benefits over older techniques.

During the last three months of 2008 — the most recent data available that allowed a comparison among robotic, open and laparoscopic surgeries — more than half of all prostate removals involved robot-assisted surgery.

About three percent of prostate patients had standard laparoscopic surgery and 44 percent had open surgery. Open and laparoscopic surgeries were still more common than robotic surgeries for kidney repairs and removals.

Among patients who had their prostate removed, none died from laparoscopic or robotic surgery, whereas two out of every 1,000 died after the open procedure.

About five percent of the men who had open surgery needed a blood transfusion, compared to less than two percent of men who had robot-assisted surgery. The open-surgery group also stayed in the hospital about one day longer than the robotic group.

The results were similar for people who had kidneys removed.

The trade-off was the cost, with robotic prostate removal costing about $10,000 on average, roughly $700 more than laparoscopic surgery and $1,100 more than open surgery.

For kidney removal, robotic surgery cost $13,900, which was $2,700 more than laparoscopic and $1,300 more than open surgery.

David Penson, a surgeon at Vanderbilt University Medical Center who was not part of the study, said more consideration should have been given to the state of patients afterwards. Emphasis should be lmited on procedure, he said, as opposed to surgical skill.

“Years ago, this was thought to be the be-all-end-all operation, particularly with prostate surgery. We were going to get patients out of the hospital quicker, have better potency and incontinence outcomes,” he told Reuters Health.

"And the reality of it is that... there are some benefits -- but not as much as we had hoped." SOURCE: bit.ly/zZIYa1
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Much of the focus of the piece was on costs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Instead of shrinking as expected, as part of the normal aging process, the memory center in the brains of seniors maintained their size and, in men, grew modestly after two years in a program that engaged them in meaningful and social activities, new Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health-led research suggests.

At the same time, those with larger increases in the brain's volume over two years also saw the greatest improvements on memory tests, showing a direct correlation between brain volume and the reversal of a type of cognitive decline linked to increased risk for Alzheimer's disease.

The research, published online in Alzheimer's & Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer's Association, studied participants in the Baltimore Experience Corps, a program that brings retired people into public schools to serve as mentors to young children, working with teachers to help them learn to read in understaffed school libraries.

"Someone once said to me that being in this program removed the cobwebs from her brain and this study shows that is exactly what is happening," says study leader Michelle Carlson, PhD, an associate professor in the Department of Mental Health at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. "By helping others, participants are helping themselves in ways beyond just feeding their souls. They are helping their brains. The brain shrinks as part of aging, but with this program we appear to have stopped that shrinkage and are reversing part of the aging process."

For the study, Carlson and her colleagues randomized 111 men and women to either participate in the Experience Corps (58) or not (53). They took MRI scans of their brains at enrollment and then again after 12 and 24 months. They also conducted memory tests. Participants were an average of 67.2 years old, predominantly African-American, were in good health, came from neighborhoods with low socioeconomic status and had some college education.

The control arm of the study, those not involved in Experience Corps, exhibited age-related shrinkage in brain volumes. Typically, annual rates of atrophy in adults over age 65 range from .8 percent to two percent. The men who were enrolled in Experience Corps, however, showed a .7 percent to 1.6 percent increase in brain volumes over the course of two years. Though not statistically significant, women appeared to experience small gains, as compared to declines in the control group of one percent over 24 months.

Carlson notes that many cognitive intervention studies last one year or less. One strength of this study, she says, is that the participants were followed for two years, which in this case was long enough to see changes that wouldn't have been detected after just one year.

The researchers were particularly interested in the results, considering that people with less education and who live in poverty are at greater risk for cognitive decline.

Carlson says it's not entirely clear which elements of Experience Corps account for the improved memory function and increased brain volumes. She says the program increases involvement in so many different kinds of activities that retired people may not have engaged in otherwise. Participants need to get out of bed, walk to the bus, and walk up and down stairs inside the schools. They work in teams. They work with young people. They share their knowledge and know they are doing good in the world. They engage in problem solving and they socialize in ways they wouldn't have if they stayed at home.

"We're not training them on one skill, like doing crossword puzzles," she says. "We're embedding complexity and novelty into their daily lives, something that tends to disappear once people retire. The same things that benefit us at 5, 10, 25, 35 - contact with others, meaningful work - are certain to benefit us as we age."

Experience Corps is a national program, however it can be costly and isn't available everywhere. But Carlson says she believes finding purpose and civic engagement may forestall some of the damage of aging on the brain.

"Impact of the Baltimore Experience Corps Trial on cortical and hippocampal volumes" was written by Michelle C. Carlson, Julie H. Kuo, Yi-Fang Chuang, Vijay Varma, Greg Harris, Marilyn Albert, Kirk I. Erickson, Arthur F. Kramer, Jeanine M. Parisi, Qian-Li Xue, Erwin Tan, Elizabeth K. Tanner, Alden Gross, Teresa E. Seeman, Tara Gruenewald, Sylvia McGill, George W. Rebok and Linda P. Fried.

The study was supported by the Johns Hopkins Neurobehavioral Research Unit, the National Institutes of Health's National Institute on Aging (P01 AG027735-03), the Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation and the Johns Hopkins Epidemiology and Biostatistics of Aging Research Fellowship (NIA T32AG000247).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The program under study welcomes study participants as volunteers, so there is no “cost” to them.  It is not a drug or device, but we still might encourage the next release to quantify the costs a bit better. Bare minimum Satisfactory for this mention: “Experience Corps is a national program, however it can be costly and isn’t available everywhere.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
While breathing fresh, clean air can boost productivity, sleep and overall health, not everyone can live in the great outdoors and it’s difficult to know just how clean the indoor air in your home or office is.

Since most people spend about 90 percent of their time inside, having poor indoor air quality could affect your health and the health of your family members—especially during winter.

“Low dry humidity in the winter can make asthma worse and children who have dried mucosa can acquire some nasal infections easier,” Dr. Robert G. Lahita, chairman of medicine at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center in New Jersey, told FoxNews.com. “Heating ducts that have mold and spores in them can make respiratory symptoms worse in the winter when hot air is blowing through them. Dry air can also exacerbate some illnesses and can be a problem as well.”

Different sources of air pollution in your home could include paints that release lead or volatile organic compounds (VOCs), carpets that harbor dirt, dust mites, and fungus and even nitrogen dioxide from gas stoves, but these aren’t the worst culprits, Lahita said.

“In the winter the biggest issue is carbon monoxide poisoning, with emergency medical services we see a few of these every year-- it is from faulty heaters, cooking without ventilation or fireplaces,” he said.

Every room in your house could be susceptive to some form of an air pollutant, but now there is a new device and app that says it can help you breathe easier by tracking air quality.

Awair is the first smart air quality device that monitors, analyzes and provides feedback to improve the air you breathe. The device collects data such as indoor temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide, fine dust particles and VOCs. It analyzes the data in real-time and gives an Awair score on a 0 to 100 color-coded scale, 0 being the worst air quality.

“The goal for the user is to keep five green dots. As soon as you see other colored (amber and red) dots show up on top of the green dots, your environment is getting off the healthy ranges whether it being temperature, humidity, CO2, VOCs, and dust,” Ronald Ro, the CEO and co-founder of Bitfinder Inc., the makers of Awair, told FoxNews.com.

Based on your air score, the monitoring gadget will send personalized alerts and advice to the user via its corresponding Awair mobile app. When air conditions are harmful, like when a bedroom has a high carbon dioxide level, it will send a notification to the user and advise them to open up a window through the app. The app also provides Mayo Clinic “message cards” that give relevant information and recommendations for ways to keep your indoor environment healthy.

If you already have a smart device system for your home, Awair is working on partnerships with several connected devices like Nest thermostat and other smart appliances so you can manage the air quality in your home or office when you're not there.

The Awair app is free to download, but each device costs $199 dollars.

For more information go to GetAwair.com.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that the Awair app is free, but that each air monitoring device costs $199 dollars. Presumably, one would need multiple devices to monitor air quality throughout a residence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
June 2, 2010 (San Francisco) -- A quick spray of a new drug may help men who suffer from premature ejaculation last nearly six times longer, new research suggests.

The numbers aren't huge. Men who sprayed the head of their penis with PSD502 five minutes before sex lasted an average of just over three minutes after three months of treatment, compared with just over 30 seconds before.

Nonetheless, doctors like Irwin Goldstein, MD, director of San Diego Sexual Medicine at Alvarado Hospital in San Diego, tell WebMD they're excited because this is the first time a drug is being rigorously tested for men with really serious premature ejaculation problems.

Up to 30% of men suffer some degree of premature ejaculation, defined as ejaculation that occurs within one minute of vaginal penetration. It's the No. 1 sexual health problem in men.

Premature ejaculation can be devastating for both a man and his partner, triggering anxiety, depression, and relationship problems, says Goldstein, who heard the results presented at the annual meeting of the American Urological Association.

Not all men with premature ejaculation suffer to the same degree as the men in the study, says researcher Ira Sharlip, MD, clinical professor of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. He consults for Shionogi Pharma Inc., which makes the spray and funded the work.

"Yet I think a substantial number of [men with premature ejaculation] would use it," he tells WebMD, alternatives being unproven products with names like "Stay Erect" and "Play Longer."

At the meeting, Sharlip presented the pooled results of two pivotal studies of PSD502 involving 530 men with premature ejaculation.

A total of 358 of the men gave themselves three quick sprays of PSD502 to the head of the penis five minutes before sex and then wiped it off right before penetration.

PSD502, which contains two common topical painkillers, lidocaine and prilocaine, is "slightly oily, but not objectionably so," Sharlip says.

The rest of the men used a placebo spray. All used the product for three months, for a total of 23,000 doses.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that "No price has been set."  We give it credit for thinking about cost and addressing it – even if the answer is uncertain at this point.  70 percent of the stories we review fail to adequately address costs. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Neil M. Bressler of Johns Hopkins University, the chairman of the group that conducted the trial, said a two-line improvement in vision would allow some people to read normal-size print or to drive again.

Lucentis is not approved as a treatment for macular edema. But it is approved for another eye disease, age-related macular degeneration.

So doctors can — and some already do — use the drug off-label for the diabetic condition. With this successful Phase 3 trial, insurers will now be more likely to pay for such off-label use.

Some doctors criticized the organizers of the trial for testing Lucentis rather than another Genentech drug, Avastin, which works in the same way as Lucentis.

Although it is a cancer drug, Avastin is often used off-label for eye diseases because it is far cheaper than Lucentis, costing only $20 to $100 a dose, compared with $2,000 for Lucentis.

Avastin is undercutting sales of Lucentis, which totaled $1.1 billion in the United States last year.

Organizers of the trial conceded that a major reason Lucentis was chosen was that Genentech, which is now owned by Roche, agreed to provide the drug free of charge and to contribute $9 million in additional financing — but only if Lucentis were used.

“Obviously you can’t underplay $9 million,” said Dr. Ferris of the eye institute, which is part of the part of the National Institutes of Health. But he said there were other factors as well, like a belief that Lucentis might have been the better drug.

Dr. Philip J. Rosenfeld, a professor of ophthalmology at the University of Miami, said the decision was “clearly a case of pay to play” since Genentech’s money dictated the choice of drugs.

Retinopathy results from damage to the blood vessels in the eye. In macular edema, fluid from those damaged vessels leaks into the macula, the part of the retina that is responsible for the straight-ahead vision important for driving, recognizing faces and reading.

Lucentis, also known as ranibizumab, works by drying up leaky blood vessels and preventing the growth of new ones.

John Bevan, who has diabetic macular edema, said that every two months or so he used to have an incident in which blood leaked into his eye, blurring his vision.

“It’s like a paintball hits a plate-glass window — there’s a big splat and it drips downward and takes three days to a week to dissipate,” said Mr. Bevan, the school superintendent in north central Indiana. He said treatment with Lucentis in the clinical trial virtually eliminated those incidents.

The trial involved 691 patients, some of whom had both eyes treated, resulting in 854 total eyes. There were four treatment groups: One group got Lucentis injections into the eye as often as every four weeks, plus laser therapy. Another got Lucentis, with laser therapy used only after six months and only if needed. The third group got laser therapy plus injections into the eye of triamcinolone, a steroid sold by Allergan under the name Trivaris. The fourth group got laser therapy plus a sham injection.

After the first year, only 3 to 4 percent of the eyes treated with Lucentis suffered a visual loss of two or more lines compared to 13 percent that got only laser therapy.

Researchers said the results seem to be holding up for the second year of the three-year trial.

About 1 percent of those getting Lucentis injections suffered an inflammation of the eye from an infection.

The steroid treatment did not improve eyesight more than laser therapy alone and caused side effects.

Results of the trial were published online on Tuesday by the journal Ophthalmology.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  Kudos!  This story reported on the costs of the drug Lucentis as well as the less expensive Avastin.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEWTOWN, Pa., Sept. 20, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- KVK Tech, Inc. announced today that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved Lomaira™ (phentermine hydrochloride USP) 8 mg tablets CIV, a low-cost, low-dose prescription medicine used for a short period of time (a few weeks) for weight reduction in adults with an initial body mass index* (BMI) of 30 or more (obese) or 27 or more (overweight) with at least one weight-related condition such as controlled high blood pressure, diabetes, or high cholesterol. Lomaira should be used together with regular exercise and a reduced-calorie diet.

Lomaira is the only strength of phentermine hydrochloride that can be taken up to three times a day before meals. The limited usefulness of agents of this drug class (anorectics), including Lomaira, should be measured against possible risk factors inherent in their use.

"At KVK Tech, we are committed to developing high-quality, FDA-approved medicines that address unmet medical needs, while ensuring affordable options for all appropriate patients. With Lomaira, we're giving physicians and patients access to a low-cost, low-dose version of a weight-reduction medicine, phentermine, that has been prescribed by physicians for over 50 years. Appropriate patients can take Lomaira up to three times a day, before meals – not just in the morning as with the higher dose formulations of phentermine," said Anthony Tabasso, President and Chief Executive Officer of KVK Tech. "We developed Lomaira with this dosing flexibility and affordability in mind."

Phentermine hydrochloride, an appetite suppressant, is the most commonly prescribed drug for weight loss. Over 7 million prescriptions are written for phentermine yearly by a wide range of healthcare professionals (HCPs), including obesity medicine specialists, family practitioners, endocrinologists, internists and cardiologists. 1

Phentermine hydrochloride is typically prescribed in doses ranging from 15 to 37.5 mg and taken before or within a few hours of breakfast. The usual adult dose of Lomaira is one tablet three times a day 1/2 hour before meals. The butterfly-shaped tablet is scored to facilitate administering one half of the usual dosage for patients not requiring the full dose, enabling doctors and patients to work together to customize a weight-loss treatment plan to best meet each patient's needs. Dosage should be individualized to obtain an adequate response with the lowest effective dose. Phentermine is not recommended for use in pediatric patients 16 years of age or younger. Late evening medication should be avoided because of the possibility of resulting insomnia.

Lomaira is reasonably priced to ensure that cost does not create a hurdle, despite the fact that two-thirds of Americans pay out-of-pocket for their weight-loss prescription medications. Through KVK Tech's , eligible patients will pay no more than 50¢ per tablet for the duration of treatment.

"Obesity is a chronic metabolic disease that must be managed appropriately to reduce the risk of serious health conditions. Many physicians have used phentermine to help patients as part of a comprehensive weight-management plan. Now, the flexibility in dosing with Lomaira allows doctors to personalize dosing. They can prescribe a lower dose, a good option for some patients. They can also prescribe up to three times a day, which is particularly helpful when patients struggle to control their appetite in the afternoon," said Donna Ryan, MD. "Regrettably, many patients are still not covered by insurance for weight-loss medications and the low cost for Lomaira makes it an affordable treatment option."

In relatively short-term clinical trials, adults with obesity who were instructed in dietary management and treated with "anorectic" drugs (appetite suppressants) lost more weight on the average than those treated with placebo and diet. It has not been established that the primary action of such drugs in treating obesity is one of appetite suppression since other central nervous system actions, or metabolic effects, may also be involved. 2

"Even modest weight loss can dramatically improve risk and health," continued Dr. Ryan. "It is not necessary to lose a lot of weight to get a lot of benefit." Losing five to 10 percent of total body weight is likely to produce health benefits, such as improvements in blood pressure, blood cholesterol, and blood sugars.3

Some side effects of phentermine that have been reported include pulmonary hypertension, valvular heart disease, palpitations, increased heart rate or blood pressure, insomnia, restlessness, dry mouth, diarrhea, constipation and changes in sexual drive. These are not all of the potential side effects of phentermine. See Full Prescribing Information.

Lomaira is anticipated to be available by the end of September 2016. As with all KVK Tech products, Lomaira will be exclusively manufactured and packaged in the United States, in the strictest accordance with FDA, DEA, and DEP guidelines.

*Body Mass Index (BMI) measures the amount of fat in the body based on height and weight. BMI is measured in kg/m2.

3 Benefits of Modest Weight Loss in Improving Cardiovascular Risk Factors in Overweight and Obese Individuals With Type 2 Diabetes; Diabetes Care, July 2011. Rena R. Wing, Wei Lang, Thomas A. Wadden, Monika Safford, William C. Knowler, Alain G. Bertoni, James O. Hill, Frederick L. Brancati, Anne Peters, Lynne Wagenknecht, and the Look AHEAD Research Group

Don't take LomairaTM if you have a history of cardiovascular disease (e.g., coronary artery disease, stroke, arrhythmias, congestive heart failure or uncontrolled high blood pressure); are taking or have taken a monoamine oxidase inhibitor drug (MAOI) within the past 14 days; have overactive thyroid, glaucoma (increased pressure in the eyes), agitation or a history of drug abuse; are pregnant, nursing, or allergic to the sympathomimetic amines such as phentermine or any of the ingredients in Lomaira.

Taking phentermine with other drugs for weight loss is not recommended. Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH), a rare fatal lung disease, has been reported in patients who had taken a combination of phentermine and fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine for weight loss. The possible association between phentermine use alone and PPH cannot be ruled out. Patients should report immediately if they experience any decrease in the amount of exercise that they can normally tolerate, shortness of breath, chest or heart pain, fainting or swelling in the lower legs.

Serious heart valve problems or disease have been reported in patients taking a combination of phentermine and fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine for weight loss. The possible role of phentermine has not been established, therefore the possibility of an association between heart valve disease and the use of phentermine alone cannot be ruled out.

If your body becomes adjusted to the maximum dose of phentermine so that its effects are experienced less strongly, the maximum dose should not be exceeded in an attempt to increase the effect.

Caution is advised while engaging in potentially hazardous activity such as driving or operating machinery while taking phentermine. Phentermine has the potential to be abused. Keep Lomaira in a safe place to prevent theft, accidental overdose, misuse or abuse. Using alcohol with phentermine may result in an adverse drug reaction.

Phentermine can cause an increase in blood pressure. Tell your doctor if you have high blood pressure, even if it's mild. If you are taking medicines for type 2 diabetes, your doctor may have to adjust these medicines while taking phentermine.

Some side effects of phentermine that have been reported include pulmonary hypertension, valvular heart disease, palpitations, increased heart rate or blood pressure, insomnia, restlessness, dry mouth, diarrhea, constipation and changes in sexual drive. These are not all of the potential side effects of phentermine. For more information, ask your doctor or pharmacist.

To report negative side effects of prescription drugs, contact FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or visit www.fda.gov/medwatch.

KVK is a leader in the development and manufacture of high-quality, FDA-approved medicines that address unmet patient needs. Founded in 2004, KVK takes pride in its ability to advance medical care and offer low-cost alternatives in response to today's healthcare challenges. All of KVK's products are made in the U.S.A. in a state-of-the-art facility in Newtown, PA. KVK is committed to maintaining its entire business operations in America, as it continues to build strong, lasting relationships with the nation's largest pharmacy chains, wholesalers and distributors.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This release makes the specific point that this newly approved dosage of the drug Lomaira (phentermine hydrochloride USP) will cost eligible patients “no more than 50¢ per tablet for the duration of treatment” if they qualify for the manufacturer’s assistance program. It makes the point that many insurance plans will not cover the cost of weight management drugs and that the low cost of this formulation should aid those who are prescribed it. The low-cost aspect of the drug is mentioned in both the headline and in the first paragraph of the release. The release would have been stronger had it mentioned the basic cost of the drug, regardless of any manufacturer’s qualifying discount.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
David Longnecker lay on a table in the cardiac catheterization lab of George Washington University Hospital, steeling himself for a procedure that would reveal the cause of the bout of crushing chest pain that had triggered the ambulance trip from his Dupont Circle office. Doctors had ruled out a heart attack and ordered an angiogram to check for blockages in his coronary arteries. If one was found, he would undergo angioplasty, which involves placement of a metal stent to prop open the artery.

Shortly before the procedure, Ramesh Mazhari, the interventional cardiologist assigned to Longnecker's case, asked an unexpected question. Instead of the usual approach, in which a catheter is inserted in the groin and threaded up the large femoral artery, would Longnecker agree to Mazhari's preferred method: accessing the heart through the smaller radial artery on the underside of the wrist?

"I said, 'If you're confident doing it, fine,' " recalled Longnecker, 70, former chairman of anesthesiology and critical care at the University of Pennsylvania. A member of the Institute of Medicine and a director of the Association of American Medical Colleges, Longnecker said he had never seen catheterization performed in this manner, and few of his physician friends who are not cardiologists had heard of it.

That is likely to change. A small but growing cadre of cardiac specialists, among them Mazhari, are embracing the newer approach, convinced it is more comfortable and safer for many patients than femoral access, the standard for more than three decades. Some recent studies have found the approach has a lower rate of complications, including severe bleeding, than femoral procedures.

Only 1 percent of the 1.2 million cardiac catheterizations performed annually in the United States are done through the wrist; the newer approach is often preferred for patients who are extremely obese or have poor leg circulation. But in Europe, Canada and Japan, about 50 percent of catheterizations are performed using the technique devised in the early 1990s. The approach allows patients to sit up immediately afterward and even walk, an impossibility in femoral procedures, which require that they lie flat on their backs for several hours to prevent severe bleeding.

Because patients tend to recover faster, Mazhari said, she discharges some patients the same day, avoiding an expensive overnight hospital stay.

Questions about the best method of performing cardiac catheterizations, one of the most common procedures in medicine and among the most profitable for hospitals -- Medicare reimburses GWU about $10,600 for an angioplasty involving one stent -- reflect some of the issues in the roiling health-care debate. Is the radial approach, which has a steep learning curve, actually superior or largely a fad? Can it cut costs by reducing hospital stays? And if patients are given a choice of catheterization sites, what factors should they consider?

"I think there is a reluctance among physicians who are used to doing procedures a certain way" to change, said Mazhari, who learned to do the procedure last year and uses it about 80 percent of the time. She and others say they know of no other physician in the Washington area who favors the radial approach.

In Boston, a city brimming with teaching hospitals and interventional cardiologists -- heart specialists with advanced training who perform procedures -- only a handful of physicians specialize in radial catheterization, said Pinak B. Shah, director of interventional cardiology training at Brigham and Women's Hospital.

"There's no data out there to suggest it is worse and growing evidence that it may be better," said Shah, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, who performs 60 to 70 percent of procedures through the wrist.

Shah said he believes a combination of financial self-interest, the relative paucity of medical devices designed for radial access, resistance by older physicians and the general tendency of doctors to regard patient discomfort as secondary have contributed to under-use of the approach.

Some senior interventional cardiologists say they worry that the method may be hyped.

"I think it's a good procedure in the right hands for the right reasons," said Bryan Raybuck, director of the cardiac catheterization lab at the Inova Heart and Vascular Institute in Fairfax. Raybuck, who learned to perform the procedure in Quebec 12 years ago, estimates he uses it fewer than two dozen times annually, and only when circumstances require it.

"There's a lot of buzz about this right now," he said of radial procedures, which account for about 150 of the 8,000 cardiac catheterizations done at his hospital annually. "I don't think it's worth going across the river to do it. It's not that good."

William O. Suddath, an interventional cardiologist at Washington Hospital Center, home to the area's busiest cardiac catheterization lab, said doctors there also prefer the femoral approach, which has benefited from improvements in devices used to stop bleeding. "There's an inherent conservatism in medicine for many reasons," he said.

Suddath said he is concerned about the "tremendous amount of competition going on in centers around the country." And he worries that radial procedures are being used as a "marketing ploy" by some hospitals "to lure patients to particular cath labs."

Shah is familiar with such skepticism. "I think the people who pooh-pooh it don't spend the time learning how to do it," said Shah, who has performed more than 250 radial procedures in the two years since he trained to do them in Canada.

In the cath lab, he noted, "time is money" and radial procedures are "among the most challenging things we do." Until doctors achieve proficiency, they can be agonizingly slow; the fee remains the same, whether a case takes 30 minutes or five hours. Shah said it took him 50 cases "before a lot of the butterflies in my stomach had flown away." Some doctors say it takes 100 cases to achieve true proficiency.

One reason for the greater difficulty is anatomical. The femoral artery, approximately the width of a pinkie, presents a direct route to the heart; to a physician, it's a straight stretch of freeway that can be navigated easily. The radial artery is thinner and offers a much more circuitous path, more like driving on a two-lane mountain road with frequent switchbacks.

"You have to be very patient and very meticulous," Mazhari said.

Severe bleeding is a feared complication in femoral procedures; the risk of a major complication is 1 to 3 percent. Arterial spasms top the list of radial complications. They are most common, Shah said, in "little old ladies," who tend to have small arteries that can clamp shut. "There are some horror stories about that," he said.

Shah and Mazhari say that their patients, many of whom have undergone both kinds of catheterizations, much prefer the wrist approach.

"We've got a lot of repeat customers, unfortunately," Shah said. Lying flat and motionless for two to six hours while recovering, he said, can be hard for patients with bad backs, and many older men find it difficult to urinate in this position.

William Sanford, who underwent angioplasty in April, was thrilled not to be among them.

"I could get right up and go to the bathroom," said Sanford, 64, who lives in Silver Spring and was taken by ambulance to GWU after suffering chest pain while working the night shift as a maintenance supervisor in the Capitol. "I was so surprised at how easy it was and how comfortable it was."

Two recent studies that compared the approaches found a lower rate of serious complications among patients undergoing radial procedures.

A report in the August 2008 Journal of the American College of Cardiology: Cardiovascular Interventions compared outcome data for more than 593,000 procedures -- 7,800 of them radial -- performed between 2004 and 2007 at 606 hospitals.

Led by Sunil V. Rao at the Duke Clinical Research Institute, the authors found that outcomes were similar but that bleeding complications were 58 percent lower in the wrist group. The reduction was most pronounced among high-risk patients, including women and those over 75.

"These data support the efficiency and safety [of radial surgery] . . . and suggest that wider application of the radial approach may enhance the safety of coronary intervention," the researchers concluded.

In the January issue of American Heart Journal, a meta-analysis of 28 years of studies, some of them conducted in Europe and Canada, found a 73 percent reduction in bleeding and shorter hospitals stay among radial patients.

Longnecker, who lives in Annapolis, said that for him, the benefit is clear.

Four years ago he underwent a spinal procedure that was performed through the femoral artery. "Afterward I had to lie flat for eight hours with five- or six-pound sandbags on the site" to prevent bleeding, he recalled. His groin was black and blue for two weeks.

After his radial angioplasty, he was allowed to sit up immediately and walk. A clear wristband equipped with a small inflatable balloon was affixed to his wrist to close the artery. It was removed after about eight hours and replaced by a simple bandage.

"It was remarkably more comfortable and less constraining," Longnecker said. "All that remained the next day was a little red dot. My wrist felt fine. I could have played tennis.

"If somebody offered me the option of having a procedure radially or femorally," Longnecker said, "I would make the decision before their sentence was finished."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that using the wrist may better enable patients to avoid an "expensive overnight hospital stay" and that Medicare reimbursement was the same even though this route for catheterization may involve more physician time. But the story didn’t include any specific cost information about this new approach.  Shouldn’t the physicians interviewed know whether their charge to patients depends on the vessel used? Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gone With A Shot? Hopeful New Signs Of Relief For Migraine Sufferers

Humans have suffered from migraines for millennia. Yet, despite decades of research, there isn't a drug on the market today that prevents them by targeting the underlying cause. All of that could change in a few months when the Food and Drug Administration is expected to announce its decision about new therapies that have the potential to turn migraine treatment on its head.

The new therapies are based on research begun in the 1980s showing that people in the throes of a migraine attack have high levels of a protein called calcitonin gene–related peptide, or CGRP, in their blood.

Step by step, researchers tracked and studied this neurochemical's effects. They found that injecting the peptide into the blood of people prone to migraines triggers migraine-like headaches, whereas people not prone to migraines experienced, at most, mild pain. Blocking transmission of CGRP in mice appeared to prevent migraine-like symptoms. And so a few companies started developing a pill that might do the same in humans.

Clinical trials of the first pills were effective against migraine but halted in 2011 over concerns about potential liver damage. So, four pharmaceutical companies rejiggered their approach. To bypass the liver, all four instead looked to an injectable therapy called monoclonal antibodies — tiny immune molecules most commonly used to treat cancer. Not only do these bypass the liver to block CGRP, but one injection appears to be effective for up to three months with almost no noticeable side effects.

Two manufacturers, Amgen (in collaboration with Novartis) and Teva Pharmaceuticals, have completed clinical trials and expect to hear from the FDA by June whether the therapies have been approved. Two more companies, Eli Lilly and Alder Biopharmaceuticals, plan to file for FDA approval later this year.

It's been a long time coming. Right now, the only available preventive treatments are accidental discoveries: A number of people prescribed medications for depression, high blood pressure and epilepsy discovered migraine relief, too. Now, many of those drugs, including propranolol and topiramate, have been tested and approved for migraine. But no one drug works for everyone, and side effects can prove intolerable or downright unpleasant.

Migraines are throbbing, one-sided headaches that can be accompanied by nausea as well as sensitivity to light, sound, smell, and movement. At their best, the headaches are an annoyance. At their worst, they can be completely debilitating. So for those of us who get numerous migraines each month, the prospect of a new approach feels almost life-changing.

According to one recent survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 10 percent of men and 20 percent of women in the U.S. reported having had a migraine in the last three months. And up to 2 percent of all Americans has at least 15 migraine days every single month. The toll such pain can take on health, morale, and productivity is substantial.

My own migraines started when I was 13. They struck a few times a week and I thought they were normal headaches. For a while, I tried the usual over the counter pain relievers but, one by one, they stopped working. By age 25, I started to wonder if there was something seriously wrong with my head. My general practitioner diagnosed me with migraines, gave me my first preventive medication — an antidepressant — then sent me to see a specialist.

Since that day more than 17 years ago, I have tried six preventive prescription medications. Not one helped. I alternated among four different, neurologist-recommended supplements, all to no avail. I received bi-monthly injections of magnesium and participated in one of the first clinical trials of Botox. And while Botox seemed to decrease my migraines by one or two per month, it wasn't enough to bother fighting about it with a new insurance company. I exercised regularly. I experimented with an elimination diet that left me eating nothing but broccoli and white rice, but still the migraines came. I averaged about 15 to 20 each month.

Still, I considered myself lucky. The headaches almost never came with nausea, and I had medications that typically ousted them within an hour or two. All told, I usually lost only a few hours of productivity a week.

When I grew older and had two children, my body changed and my migraines changed, too. I get them less frequently now, but when they come, they can stick around for a few days or even a week. Abortive medications still work, except when they don't. So when I heard about a new approach that was making its way through a number of pharmaceutical company pipelines, I began combing through the national clinical trials database to find a trial near me. I found one about 80 miles away, which didn't seem too far a trek considering the tantalizing reward of a migraine-free life. I made an appointment.

Neurologist David Dodick, at the Mayo Clinic in Phoenix, has been involved in multiple clinical trials with each of the four anti-CGRP antibody treatments in development. And, he admits, he's optimistic. He has good reason to be: Each of the therapies decreases migraine frequency by at least one to two days per month. "In a field where, over time, the progress and pace of research in understanding the underlying biology and mechanism of disease has been slow, this was very exciting," he says.

Because migraines are not life-threatening, most drugs have to pass a pretty high bar to be approved. And so far, patients on the experimental treatments report limited side effects that consist mostly of pain at the injection site. Unlike the current preventive medications, there is no nausea, no fuzzy thinking, no nerve pain, no weight loss or gain. And instead of remembering to take a daily pill, there is just a once-monthly injection.

Neurologists already have patients eager to test these therapies, especially when everything else they've tried hasn't worked. "There's a big hole to fill, both in prevention and acute therapies," says Alexander Mauskop, director of the New York Headache Center in New York City. (Disclosure: He's my former neurologist.) "If I have someone who's really suffering and can't find a solution, I tell them that in June I might have something new for them to try." Right now, he says, he has a list of about two dozen such patients.

Even if the new therapies are approved, however, patients may still have to jump through a number of hoops to get them. Biologic therapies like these are expensive, and treatment could reportedly range anywhere from $8,000 to $18,000 a year. At that price, Mauskop and other neurologists expect insurance companies to require patients to have tried just about everything else first.

The other hitch at this stage is a lack of long-term safety data. "If someone is well-controlled with Botox or another drug, I'd not suggest they switch," Mauskop says. "With Vioxx, it took 10 years before they discovered that it increased the risk of heart problems."

Side effects are a potential concern. Elizabeth Loder, chief of headache at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, points out that because CGRP constricts blood vessels, there may be potential long-term effects on blood pressure or other cardiovascular function. In women of childbearing age, who are the ones most prone to frequent migraines, "you can imagine that might have effects on fertility or placental function."

Right now, the longest patients have been on one of these new therapies is one to two years.

I ask Mauskop whether he'd recommend I enroll in a clinical trial, given my failure to respond to most everything else. He pauses, noting that he's no longer my neurologist and that he can't really give me any suggestions. But then he says that, since I'd previously shown some response to Botox, perhaps I might want to give it another try. I think about my two young children and my risk tolerance. Perhaps in 10 years I'll feel differently. For now, however, I pick up the phone and cancel my clinical trial appointment.

Lauren Gravitz is a science writer and editor in Hershey, Penn. Her work has appeared in Nature, The Economist, Aeon, Discover, The Oprah Magazine, and more. Find her at www.laurengravitz.com and @lyrebard.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says these treatments could cost “anywhere from $8,000 to $18,000 a year.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- Acupuncture gets a thumbs-up for helping relieve pain from chronic headaches, backaches and arthritis in a review of more than two dozen studies -- the latest analysis of an often-studied therapy that has as many fans as critics.

Some believe its only powers are a psychological, placebo effect. But some doctors believe even if that's the explanation for acupuncture's effectiveness, there's no reason not to offer it if it makes people feel better.

The new analysis examined 29 studies involving almost 18,000 adults. The researchers concluded that the needle remedy worked better than usual pain treatment and slightly better than fake acupuncture. That kind of analysis is not the strongest type of research, but the authors took extra steps including examining raw data from the original studies.

The results "provide the most robust evidence to date that acupuncture is a reasonable referral option," wrote the authors, who include researchers with Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and several universities in England and Germany.

Their study isn't proof, but it adds to evidence that acupuncture may benefit a range of conditions.

The new analysis was published online Monday in Archives of Internal Medicine. The federal government's National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine paid for most of the study, along with a small grant from the Samueli Institute, a non-profit group that supports research on alternative healing.

Acupuncture's use has become more mainstream. The military has used it to help treat pain from war wounds, and California recently passed legislation that would include acupuncture among treatments recommended for coverage under provisions of the nation's new health care law. That law requires insurance plans to cover certain categories of benefits starting in 2014. Deciding specifics is being left up to the states.

Some private insurance plans already cover acupuncture; Medicare does not.

In traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture involves inserting long, very thin needles just beneath the skin's surface at specific points on the body to control pain or stress. Several weekly sessions are usually involved, typically costing about $60 to $100 per session. Fake acupuncture studied in research sometimes also uses needles, but on different areas of the body.

Scientists aren't sure what biological mechanism could explain how acupuncture might relieve pain, but the authors of the new study say the results suggest there's more involved than just a placebo effect.

Acupuncture skeptic Dr. Stephen Barrett said the study results are dubious. The retired psychiatrist runs Quackwatch, a Web site on medical scams, and says studies of acupuncture often involve strict research conditions that don't mirror how the procedure is used in the real world.

The new analysis combined results from studies of patients with common types of chronic pain -- recurring headaches, arthritis or back, neck and shoulder. The studies had randomly assigned patients to acupuncture and either fake acupuncture or standard pain treatment including medication or physical therapy.

The authors explained their statistical findings by using a pain scale of 0 to 100: The patients' average baseline pain measured 60; it dropped to 30 on average in those who got acupuncture, 35 in those who got fake acupuncture, and 43 in the usual treatment group.

While the difference in results for real versus fake acupuncture was small, it suggests acupuncture could have more than a psychological effect, said lead author Andrew Vickers, a cancer researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. The center offers acupuncture and other alternative therapies for cancer patients with hard-to-treat pain.

The analysis was more rigorous than most research based on pooling previous studies' results, because the authors obtained original data from each study. That makes the conclusion more robust, said Dr. Andrew Avins, author of an Archives commentary and a physician and researcher with the University of California at San Francisco and Kaiser-Permanente.

Acupuncture is relatively safe and uncertainty over how it works shouldn't stop doctors from offering it as an option for patients struggling with pain, Avins said.

"Perhaps a more productive strategy at this point would be to provide whatever benefits we can for our patients, while we continue to explore more carefully all mechanisms of healing," he wrote.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that sessions cost $60 to $100 and are covered by some private insurance, but not Medicare.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHAPEL HILL - University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center researchers have found that mailing self-collection kits to test for high-risk human papillomavirus infection has the potential to boost cervical cancer screening - especially for low-income women who are overdue for testing.

In the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology, researchers published the results of mailing at-home, HPV self-collection kits to 193 low-income women in North Carolina who were overdue for screening according to national guidelines. They reported this screening approach detected high-risk HPV in all of the cases of women who were found to have high-grade, abnormal cervical precancerous growths, showing that self-collection at home for HPV may be a viable method to identify women at high-risk for cervical cancer.

"This is a demonstration that mailing self-collection kits and returning them to test for high-risk HPV infection has big potential to increase screening access among under-screened women, and to do that successfully," said UNC Lineberger's Jennifer S. Smith, the study's senior author, and a professor in the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health.

Although cervical cancer is preventable through early detection and treatment, the American Cancer Society estimates that more than 4,100 women will die from cervical cancer in the United States this year. Nearly 20 percent of women in the United States who are eligible for cervical cancer screening report they haven't been tested for cervical cancer within the recommended time interval, national surveys have shown.

"Women are dying unnecessarily of cervical cancer because they either haven't been vaccinated against HPV in adolescence, or they've not been getting screened according to national guidelines," Smith said. "Increasing screening rates among under-screened women is of paramount importance."

In 2014, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration signed off on using an HPV test alone to screen for cervical cancer for women 25 years and older, in conjunction with the Pap test. Earlier this year, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force gave an "A" rating to HPV primary screening alone for women aged 30 to 65.

"There are a lot of different barriers that cause women to be underscreened," said the study's first author Andrea Des Marais, MPH, project manager with the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health. "HPV tests are being widely used now in the United States, but only through physician collection in clinical practice, which requires that women come to a clinic. Offering HPV testing using self-collection by mail has a lot of potential to reach women who are the highest risk of being screened: those who don't access regular medical care."

For the study, researchers mailed at-home, self-collection kits to low-income women in North Carolina who were overdue for screening by national guidelines. They included women between the ages of 30 and 64 years who had reported no history of receiving a Pap test, which checks for precancerous or cancerous cells, within the past four years.

Researchers provided study participants with self-collection brushes along with instructions for how to take a sample from inside the vagina. The brush samples were then tested in a lab for HPV and other sexually transmitted infections. Participants also self-collected samples at a clinic and handed them to a nurse, and had a pelvic exam for a clinician to collect a Pap smear sample.

The researchers compared the results from self- and clinician-samples - which were tested for high-risk HPV strains that are linked to cervical cancer - to the Pap results and the results of cervical biopsies collected during colposcopy, which is a secondary diagnostic test that confirms the presence of cervical pre-cancerous lesions among women with abnormal Pap smear results.

The home self-collection test indicated that 12.4 percent of women were infected with high-risk HPV, the self-collection tests used in the clinic found 15.5 of the women had high-risk HPV infection, and the clinician-collected test identified 11.4 percent of the women had high-risk HPV infection.

"We found comparable detection between self-collection and physician-collection," Des Marais said.

All women found to have high-grade cervical lesions by Pap smear or by cervical biopsy were positive for high-risk HPV on their home self-collected sample.

"We found in this sample, all of the women who had high-grade lesions had HPV-positive home self-collection results," Smith said. "We didn't miss any of those high-grade cases by conducting home self-collection."

Smith said there is more work to be done, such as identifying ways to make the self-collection process more efficient and cost-effective, and getting FDA approval for the clinical use of self-collection for cervical cancer screening.

"This is a proof-in-principle study that we used to determine whether home self-collection is highly effective for detecting high-grade disease," Smith said. "We are already working on the next step, which is a clinical trial in which women who aren't up-to-date on screening get either a referral to a free clinic appointment to receive a screening, or receive a self-collection kit in the mail, followed by referral to a free clinic appointment. This will allow us to determine the effect that self-collection has on screening uptake."

In addition to Des Marais and Smith, other authors included Yuqian Zhao, Marcia M. Hobbs, Vijay Sivaraman, Lynn Barclay, and Noel T. Brewer.

The study was supported by the National Cancer Institute, the National Institutes of Health, and the University Cancer Research Fund. Individual researchers were supported by the China Scholarship Council.

Financial disclosure: High-risk HPV and sexually transmitted disease tests, sample preservation media, ThinPrep processor slides, and other equipment were donated by Hologic, Inc. Self-collection brushes were donated by Rovers Medical Devices. Some travel expenses for Des Marais were paid by Hologic, and others have consulted for the company. Smith has received research funding, supply donations, and consultancies, and served as a paid speaker for Arbor Vita, BD Diagnostics, Hologic, Rovers Medical Devices, and Trovagene. Neither Hologic nor Rovers had input into the research design, analysis or interpretation of results.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does not place a pricetag on HPV screening — which would include the test kit, analysis and follow-up clinical visit. However, the release does explicitly say that “there is more work to be done, such as identifying ways to make the self-collection process more efficient and cost-effective.” That acknowledgment is enough to earn it a satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When actress and author Lena Dunham went public about having endometriosis, a disorder of the uterus, she wanted to make something clear: The pain it causes can be completely debilitating, and women desperately need better treatments.

Soon, it seems, women like Dunham with endometriosis pain will have a new option for relief. An endometriosis pain treatment was just approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and it’s expected to arrive at pharmacies as soon as August. The pill, called elagolix (brand name Orilissa), from the drugmaker AbbVie, is the first FDA-approved oral treatment in more than a decade for the moderate to severe pain that comes with endometriosis.

“This [medication] could really be transformative,” said Hugh Taylor, an OB-GYN at Yale Medical School who led the key trials testing the drug.

Endometriosis is one of the most common gynecological conditions, affecting as many as one in 10 women of reproductive age. And it can be incredibly painful. The reason is simple: Women with the condition are growing excess tissue in their abdomen that they can’t shed.

Every month, a woman’s uterine lining thickens and sheds during her period if she’s not pregnant. With endometriosis, that tissue thickens and bleeds, but it happens outside of the uterus — on the fallopian tubes, or even in the nose or lungs. Because the extra tissue has no way to exit the body (it can’t go through the vagina since it’s not growing in the uterus), it builds up and becomes trapped, leading to pain and, in some cases, infertility.

There’s no cure for endometriosis. To manage symptoms, women are usually prescribed birth control or over-the-counter painkillers as a first-line approach, but they don’t always work. In severe cases, a doctor may suggest “excision surgery” to remove the extra tissue. (Dunham had eight surgeries and ended up getting a hysterectomy, which was considered an extreme measure.)

Enter elagolix. Endometriosis is an estrogen-driven disease, and the drug works by lowering estrogen levels. Two large double-blind, placebo-control randomized trials, which 1,285 women completed, tested whether it can help women control endometriosis pain. The results, published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine, were impressive. The patients in those trials scored their pain from 0 (no pain) to 3 (severe pain). On average, they had pain levels of 2.2 out of 3 before starting on the drug — and they experienced a 2-point reduction in pain after taking the treatment for three months.

“It’s a major advance,” said Dr. Louis DePaolo, head of the fertility and infertility branch at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, “and another option women have that’s effective.”

Now the less good news: The drug won’t cure endometriosis; it’ll only tamp down the pain it causes. Many women in the trial experienced the symptoms of menopause — hot flashes, headache, insomnia — and researchers have also found the drug causes bone loss. We have no idea about the long-term effects of taking the drug because there are no trials lasting for longer than a year, or how it stacks up against other painkillers (since the trials only compared it to placebo). That’s not to mention cost: The drug’s price is listed at $850 per month. But for some, the risks and costs may be worth it. Here’s why.

Endometriosis is incredibly common — but it can go undiagnosed for years

Endometriosis is a chronic, sometimes highly disruptive condition. The three main ways it manifests are through pelvic pain, infertility, and pelvic masses such as cysts, scar tissue, and fibroids. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, some important signs of endometriosis include:
• Pain before and during periods

But many women don’t know they have endometriosis. It’s sometimes mistaken or dismissed for regular period pain. Definitively diagnosing the disorder requires invasive surgery; doctors need to peer inside the pelvis through a laparoscopy. (Imaging is rarely helpful in getting a clear diagnosis.) This involves making a small incision in the belly and inserting a tube with a tiny camera to see if the pelvic organs show signs of tissue scarring and buildup. So it’s no surprise it takes between three and 11 years after the onset of symptoms to diagnose endometriosis.

Doctors aren’t sure why some women get it

Adding to the mystery around endometriosis: No one knows exactly what causes it, but doctors have some theories.
• Retrograde menstrual flow: During a period, when a woman is shedding her uterine lining, some of that tissue can flow through her fallopian tubes and into her pelvis, which researchers think may cause endometriosis. But doctors have also found that the rate of retrograde menstruation is about the same in women with and without endometriosis, so they think additional factors spur the disorder in some.
• Genes: The disorder runs in families, so doctors believe there’s a genetic component. If a woman’s mom or sister had endometriosis, the woman is believed to be at a higher risk.
• Somatic mutations: Researchers are also finding that somatic mutations — acquired changes to DNA that happen after a person is born — may also be an endometriosis driver.
• Immune system dysfunction: Problems with the immune system can hamper a woman’s ability to clear her menstrual debris, leading to endometriosis.
• Environmental factors: There’s some evidence to suggest environmental exposures to certain chemicals may contribute to one’s risk of developing endometriosis.

The treatments available don’t always help, and some have severe side effects

When birth control pills or over-the-counter painkillers fail to help endometriosis pain, women are often left choosing between a monthly injection called Lupron Depot, which can put women into a profoundly menopausal state, or Danazol, a male hormone that often causes acne and facial hair growth.

In women for whom these drugs aren’t effective, or who don’t want to take medications, surgery to remove the displaced endometrial tissue can be a highly effective option. But the trouble with surgery is that endometriosis can recur, so women may need more surgeries. The success of surgery also depends on finding a skilled and experienced surgeon, and there’s always the risk of surgical complications.

The new drug elagolix is not risk-free, either. In the trials, women who took the drug had greater bone loss than did those who received placebo, and this wasn’t entirely surprising. Like other endometriosis treatments, the drug works by lowering estrogen levels (since endometriosis needs estrogen to grow). When that happens, women experience menopausal side effects. The most common in the trials were hot flashes, headaches, and insomnia. (Elagolix is available in two doses — 150 mg per day, or 200 mg twice daily — and the women on the higher dose experienced the side effects more frequently.) Mood swings and night sweats were less common, and one woman in the trial died by suicide (though there’s no indication that the medicine was a cause of her death).

DePaolo pointed out, “[Elagolix] doesn’t have the pronounced side effects some of the other compounds have.” That’s because, he said, it doesn’t drive down estrogen levels as severely.

But for patients who have tried other estrogen-lowering medicines, elagolix isn’t all that appealing. “This drug is palliative in nature. It does not cure or shrink the disease,” Casey Berna, director of programs and partnerships for the advocacy group EndoWhat. The drug’s side effects also concerned her, as did the lack of knowledge about its long-term impact.

For other women, though, the trade offs may be worth it. But in either case, women with severe endometriosis are still left choosing between terrible pain, surgery, or drugs with serious side effects.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the monthly cost ($850) for women who do not have health insurance. The inference is that insurers will cover the cost for others.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors have long debated the effectiveness of a relatively new class of blood pressure medicines known as angiotensin receptor blockers, or ARBs. Since they came on the market in 2000, they have been widely used by patients -- but usually only as a second-line therapy when older drugs had failed to work or when their side effects had become intolerable.

Now a large new analysis involving 250,000 patients shows that these medications may be as effective and safe as their older cousins, the angiotensin converting enzyme, or ACE inhibitors.

Sripal Bangalore, an associate professor of cardiology at NYU Langone Medical Center who is lead author of the new study, said in an interview that the previous studies comparing the two may have been misinterpreted due to what he called a "generation gap" in participants and changes in their health care and lifestyle choices.

The idea that ACE inhibitors are more effective than ARBs was based on comparing studies on ACE inhibitors going as far back as the 1980s and into the 1990s with newer studies on ARBs in the 2000s.

These studies appeared to show a larger difference between ACE inhibitors and placebos versus ARBs and placebos. Most significantly, research showed a significant effect in reducing the risk of death with ACE inhibitors but not with ARBS. That led many doctors and standards groups to conclude that ACE inhibitors were more effective than ARBs.

But some doctors and researchers were puzzled by the fact that in head-to-head comparisons between the two classes of drugs they appeared to equally safe and effective. If there really was such a big difference between the medications, why didn't it show up in these types of studies?

That inconsistency created a confusing split in the medical community. Most guidelines set forth by the major medical groups suggest starting a patient with an ACE inhibitor first, but the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC) considers ACE inhibitors and ARBs to be equal.

Bangalore noticed that one assumption made in comparing the placebo trials -- that the patients in the group were about the same -- was incorrect. During that time period there was a remarkable shift in cardiovascular health care in America -- with a greater emphasis on not smoking, more statin use for cholesterol, better management of diabetes, lower targets for blood pressure.

"The patients in the '80s and '90s were a higher-risk group than those in the 2000s," Bangalore explained. "If your risk is higher it's easier to show a benefit. If your risk is lower it's harder to show a benefit."

The new analysis, published in Mayo Clinic Proceedings on Monday, involves a second look at 106 randomized trials with 254,301 patients that took place after 2000 and shows that during this time period patient outcomes on the two medications were remarkably similar. The one difference they found was that ARBs tend to be better tolerated by patients, meaning that they have fewer side effects or result in fewer adverse events. ACE inhibitors are poorly tolerated by many patients because they can produce a bothersome dry cough, and some end up stopping medication as a result.

Bangalore said this is critically important because "compliance is big issue with our patients."

"With hypertension they are on these medications for decades, and it's important to choose one that will be the most tolerable," he said.

The other piece of good news regarding the medications is that ACE inhibitors, as well as many ARBs, are now generic -- meaning that the cost difference is minimal.

The study was limited to patients who did not have heart failure, and because it involved a retrospective analysis of trials it was unable to control for differences in the design or data gathering of the previous work.

Happiness won’t help you live longer (but unhappiness won’t kill you either)

Guinea is finally declared Ebola-free, but that does not mean the crisis is over

Most popular Washington Post health stories of 2015: A mother tells her story of how she lost her darling daughter a few weeks short of her 29th birthday when she stepped in front of a train in Baltimore.

Top health issues to pay attention to in 2016: The rise of personalized diets and medical treatments

For more health news, you can sign up for our weekly newsletter here.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While the story could have been a bit more specific, it gets points for stating that most ACE inhibitor drugs, and many ARB drugs, are now available in generic form, which means the cost for the medications would usually be considerably less than their comparative name-brand compounds. We’ll rate this Satisfactory, but we’d add that though more ARBs are generically available, this class of medications continues to be more expensive than ACEIs. For patients struggling to meet the cost of their medications, this is a major consideration, and important information for any news story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - In a new study of middle-aged New Jersey men, taking cholesterol-lowering drugs was linked to a lower chance of dying from prostate cancer.

The findings don’t prove that the drugs, called statins, ward off aggressive cancer. But they jibe with previous studies suggesting that getting cholesterol levels under control might help reduce the risk of life-threatening disease, researchers said.

“People may be on these medications for their heart, but it may actually be doing them some good for their prostate,” said study author Dr. Stephen Marcella, from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in New Brunswick.

“If a person’s on the fence about taking a statin medication for their heart, this is another potential benefit they may have by taking one of these,” he told Reuters Health.

Marcella and his colleagues collected the medical records of 380 men who had died of prostate cancer and another 380 of the same age and race without prostate cancer or with non-lethal cancer.

Most of the men were white and in their mid- to late-60s, on average. Close to one in four of the men in both groups combined had ever taken a statin.

The researchers found that men who died of prostate cancer were half as likely to have taken a statin at any time, and for any duration, than men in the “control” group.

When they accounted for whether or not men were overweight and their other health problems and medications, it turned out that those with fatal cancers were 63 percent less likely to have ever taken a statin, according to findings published in Cancer.

But, Marcella added, “I would not tell a person if they don’t have a risk of heart disease, (if) they don’t have hypertension...to take a statin just to prevent lethal prostate cancer.”

The evidence that’s effective, he said, just isn’t there yet.

And even if statins do turn out to help prevent fatal prostate cancer, researchers said, previous studies have suggested they don’t lower a man’s risk of getting less aggressive forms of the disease.

According to the American Cancer Society, about one in every six men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some point, and one in every 36 men will die of the disease.

Marcella’s team didn’t have the data to figure out if taking a statin for longer, or starting one earlier, was more beneficial than more limited use of the drugs.

The researchers also couldn’t tell whether men started using statins before or after they were diagnosed with aggressive cancer.

But they did find that while high-potency, often newer statins were linked to a lower risk of fatal prostate cancer, lower-potency drugs were not. That suggests it’s something about the drugs themselves that lower men’s chances of dying from prostate cancer, Marcella said.

Statins may protect against fatal prostate cancer through their known cholesterol-lowering effects, said Dr. Stephen Freedland, who studies prostate cancer at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, but wasn’t involved in the new study.

He said that cholesterol is a “key nutrient” for cancer cells, so lower cholesterol levels in the body could prevent more aggressive forms of cancer from developing.

But it’s also possible that statins don’t prevent certain cancers at all, Freedland said, and it’s something else about men who take statins — for example, if they also change their diet and start exercising — that explains their lower risk of fatal cancer.

“It gets very, very tricky to sort out,” Freedland told Reuters Health.

To prove that statins protect against aggressive cancer would require a large study in which cancer-free men, or those with early-stage disease, are randomly assigned to take statins or not and then tracked for years to see how many of them die from cancer.

That type of study, especially involving healthy, disease-free men, would be very expensive and time consuming, said Dr. Nelly Tan, from the University of California, Los Angeles, who has studied statins and prostate cancer risk.

About one-quarter of adults age 45 and older in the U.S. take statins to lower cholesterol and protect against heart attacks. The drugs run anywhere from $11 to more than $200 per month, and sometimes cause side effects including muscle pain, nausea and gas and liver dysfunction.

Researchers agreed that until there’s clearer evidence for benefit, men with healthy hearts shouldn’t seek out statin prescriptions for the purpose of lowering their prostate cancer risks.

But Freedland said that other strategies for lowering cholesterol — such as eating better and exercising regularly — are ways almost everyone can lower their disease risks in the meantime.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Cost range estimates for statins are given in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When doctors saw the report on Bill Ludwig’s bone-marrow biopsy, they thought it was a mistake and ordered the test repeated. But the results came back the same: His lethal leukemia had been wiped out by an experimental treatment never before used in humans.

“We were hoping for a little improvement,” remembered the 72-year-old retired New Jersey corrections officer, who had battled the disease for a decade. He and his oncologist both broke down when she delivered the good news in 2010. “Nobody was hoping for zero cancer.”

The pioneering therapy administered to Ludwig and a few other adults at the University of Pennsylvania hospital paved the way for clinical trials with children. Six-year-old Emily Whitehead, who was near death, became the first pediatric recipient in 2012. Like Ludwig, she remains cancer-free.

Such results are why the treatment is on track to become the first gene therapy approved by the Food and Drug Administration. An FDA advisory committee will decide Wednesday whether to recommend approval of the approach, which uses patients’ own genetically altered immune cells to fight blood cancers.

If the panel gives the nod, the agency probably will follow suit by the end of September. That would open the latest chapter in immunotherapy — “a true living drug,” said Penn scientist Carl June, who led its development.

The CAR T-cell treatment, manufactured by the drug company Novartis, initially would be available only for the small number of children and young adults whose leukemia does not respond to standard care. Those patients typically have a grim prognosis, but in the pivotal trial testing the therapy in almost a dozen countries, 83 percent of patients went into remission. A year later, two-thirds remained so.

And childhood leukemia is just the start for a field that has attracted intense interest in academia and industry. Kite Pharma of Santa Monica, Calif., has applied for FDA approval to treat aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and a similar Novartis application is close behind. Researchers also are exploring CAR T-cell therapy’s use for multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, the disease that afflicted Ludwig. They are also tackling a far more difficult challenge — using the therapy for solid tumors in the lungs or brain, for example.

The excitement among doctors and researchers is palpable. “We’re saving patients who three or four years ago we were at our wit’s end trying to keep alive,” said Stephen Schuster, the Penn oncologist who is leading a Novartis lymphoma study. That study and a Kite trial have shown that the treatment can put about one-third of adults with advanced disease — those who have exhausted all options — into remission.

Yet along with the enthusiasm come pressing questions about safety, cost and the complexity of the procedure.

It involves extracting white blood cells called T cells — the foot soldiers of the immune system — from a patient’s blood, freezing them and sending them to Novartis’s sprawling manufacturing plant in Morris Plains, N.J. There, a crippled HIV fragment is used to genetically modify the T cells so they can find and attack the cancer. The cells then are refrozen and sent back to be infused into the patient.

Once inside the person’s body, the T-cell army multiplies astronomically.

Novartis has not disclosed the price for its therapy, but analysts are predicting $300,000 to $600,000 for a one-time infusion. Brad Loncar, whose investment fund focuses on companies that develop immunotherapy treatments, hopes the cost does not prompt a backlash. “CAR-T is not the EpiPen,” he said. “This is truly pushing the envelope and at the cutting edge of science.”

The biggest concerns, however, center on safety. The revved-up immune system becomes a potent cancer-fighting agent but also a dangerous threat to the patient. Serious side effects abound, raising concerns about broad use.

“Treating patients safely is the heart of the rollout,” said Stephan Grupp of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, who as director of the hospital’s cancer immunotherapy program led early pediatric studies as well as Novartis’s global trial. “The efficacy takes care of itself, but safety takes a lot of attention.”

One of the most common side effects is called cytokine release syndrome, which causes high fever and flulike symptoms that in some cases can be so dangerous that the patient ends up in intensive care. The other major worry is neurotoxicity, which can result in temporary confusion or potentially fatal brain swelling. Juno Therapeutics, a biotech firm in Seattle, shut down one of its CAR T-cell programs after five patients died of brain swelling. Novartis has not seen brain swelling in its trials, company officials said.

To try to ensure patient safety, Novartis is not planning a typical product rollout, with a drug pushed as widely and aggressively as possible. The company instead will designate 30 to 35 medical centers to administer the treatment. Many of them took part in the clinical trial, and all have gotten extensive training by Grupp and others.

Grupp said he and his staff learned about the side effects of CAR T-cell therapy — and what to do about them — through terrifying experiences that began five years ago with Emily Whitehead.

The young girl, who had relapsed twice on conventional treatments for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, was in grave condition. Grupp suggested to her parents that she be the first child to get the experimental therapy.

“I said, ‘Surely, this has been tried on kids somewhere else in the world,’ ” recalled her father, Thomas Whitehead of Philipsburg, Pa. “But Steve said, ‘Nope, some adults got it, but that was a different kind of leukemia.’ ”

After she received the therapy, Emily’s fever soared, her blood pressure plummeted, and she ended up in a coma and on a ventilator for two weeks in the hospital’s intensive care unit. Convinced his patient would not survive another day, a frantic Grupp got rushed lab results that suggested a surge of the protein Interleukin 6 was causing her immune system to relentlessly hammer her body. Doctors decided to give Emily an immunosuppressant drug called tocilizumab.

She was dramatically better within hours. She woke up the next day, her seventh birthday. Tests showed her cancer was gone.

The approval of CAR T-cell therapy would represent the second big immunotherapy advance in less than a decade. In 2011, the FDA cleared the first agent in a new class of drugs called checkpoint inhibitors. It has approved five more since then.

There are big differences between the two approaches. The checkpoint inhibitors are targeted at solid tumors, such as advanced melanoma and lung and bladder cancer, while CAR T-cell therapy has been aimed at blood disorders. And although checkpoint inhibitors are off the shelf, with every patient getting the same drug, CAR T-cell therapy is customized to an individual. Many immunotherapy experts think the greatest progress against cancer will be achieved when researchers figure out how to combine the approaches.

For the Penn team, the CAR T-cell story goes back decades, starting at the then-National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., where June and a postdoctorate fellow named Bruce Levine worked on new HIV treatments. In the process, they figured out a way to turbocharge T cells to make them more powerful and plentiful.

The pair moved to Philadelphia in 1999 and dove into cancer research. Two years later, June’s wife died of ovarian cancer, something he has credited as spurring him to work even harder in the field. In the years that followed, researchers across the country, including at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, racked up an array of tantalizing discoveries involving T cells.

Fast-forward to 2010, when Ludwig, who lives in Bridgeton, N.J., became Penn’s first patient to receive CAR T-cell therapy. Two other men got the treatment not long after. One is still in remission; the other relapsed and died.

But after those three patients, the Penn researchers ran out of money for more treatments. To try to raise interest and funding, they decided to publish the results of their work. The article that appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine in August 2011 created a “firestorm,” June said — one that brought them new resources. David Porter, a Penn oncologist working with June, was on vacation in western Maryland and had to stop at a Kohl’s to buy a dress shirt for the immediate TV interviews.

The pediatric trial opened the following spring with Emily. Six months later, Penn licensed its technology to Novartis in exchange for financial support, which included a new on-campus cell-manufacturing facility.

With FDA approval seeming imminent, the researchers who were so instrumental in the therapy’s development and testing are almost giddy. Grupp is especially pleased that the advance will be available first to children. “Usually everything is developed first for adults,” he noted recently, “and children are an afterthought.”

‘This is not the end’: Using immunotherapy and a genetic glitch to give cancer patients hope

This 8-year-old is free of cancer — for now — after a ‘breakthrough’ treatment

For a 6-year-old with cancer, a future staked on medicine’s hottest field
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story tackles this issue head on, as here: “Novartis has not disclosed the price for its therapy, but analysts are predicting $300,000 to $600,000 for a one-time infusion.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The promise of genetic medicine is beginning to be fulfilled, but it's been a long, hard slog.

Take the story of Kalydeco. It's designed to treat people with a lung disease called cystic fibrosis. While not quite a cure, the drug is extremely effective for some CF patients.

But the success of Kalydeco has been more than two decades in the making.

A good starting point for the story is Aug. 24, 1989. That's the day scientists from the U.S. and Canada announced the discovery of the gene associated with the disease. It was the early days of gene hunting, and the CF gene was a big prize.

CF is the most common genetic disease in Caucasians. When people inherit a damaged form of the CF gene, a critical protein inside cells doesn't work properly. As a result, sticky mucus builds up in a patient's lungs, causing infections and making it hard to breathe.

The announcement was supposed to be made in conjunction with three papers in the Sept. 8 issue of Science, but a reporter for Reuters got hold of the story early. Science took the unusual step of allowing the scientists to speak to the media before publication.

At the time, scientists predicted that a genetic test for CF was just around the corner. But they also thought a drug to treat the disease was in reach.

The first prediction turned out to be right. "But it wasn't until 20 years later that we were able to find drugs that directly target the underlying cause of cystic fibrosis," says Fred Van Goor, who led the team at what is now Vertex Pharmaceuticals that developed Kalydeco. "So it was a long time between the discovery of the gene and the discovery of Kalyedco."

It took awhile to find a drug that would help restore the function of the protein the CF gene makes. "We tested over 600,000 chemicals in cells with the defective protein that causes cystic fibrosis," says Van Goor.

One of those chemicals ultimately became a successful drug, but it had to be modified so patients could take it by mouth, and so it would last the right length of time in a patient's body.

From the start, Van Goor and his colleagues knew there was a problem with Kalydeco: It only works on a small subset of people with CF. They have to have a particular mutation in the CF gene, or the drug is of little use.

But for people who do have that mutation, the drug works remarkably well.

Emily Schaller was in one of the early studies of Kalydeco. As part of the study, researchers first gave her a placebo, then switched her to the active drug. She knew within days that something was different.

"I was with my brother in Florida, and we were walking down the street, and I took a deep breath, and when I took a deep breath in and I let it out, I didn't cough," says Schaller. "But not only did I not cough, but I felt that my lungs were clear, and that something huge had happened. It was just something I had never felt in my life before."

Schaller isn't cured. She still has a damaged CF gene. The only way to fix that would be gene therapy, where a healthy form of the gene would supplant the damaged one. Although it seems simple in theory, in practice gene therapy has been incredibly difficult to accomplish.

Schaller isn't particularly bothered by that. "Everyone talks about curing a disease — cure CF, cure these other diseases. [But] Kalydeco controls CF at the basic defect, so I'm OK with the other 'c' word, control, because I'm living it and I've never felt better in my life."

The time from gene discovery to successful drug may be shortening, but there are only a handful of successful drugs so far, and for a while at least, the appearance of new ones will be slow.

They're also likely to be expensive. Kalydeco costs in the neighborhood of $300,000 per year.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It doesn’t come until the last sentence in the story, but it also leaves listeners and readers with a pretty sobering reality: “The time from gene discovery to successful drug may be shortening, but there are only a handful of successful drugs so far, and for a while at least, the appearance of new ones will be slow. They’re also likely to be expensive. Kalydeco costs in the neighborhood of $300,000 per year.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A small U.S. study suggests daily hormone injections may boost mental agility in older people with and without mild cognitive problems.

People who got growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), as opposed to inactive injections, improved on tests of attention and concentration skills - what psychologists call executive function.

And participants who got the hormone shots also felt the effects in their daily life, said Laura Baker, a memory researcher at the University of Washington & VA Puget Sound Health Care System in Seattle.

“On self-report, many of the folks in the active group reported they felt better,” Baker, who led the study, told Reuters Health. “They wanted to know where they could get (the hormone) after the study was over.”

But that’s jumping the gun, she warned, because the treatment is still experimental and GHRH is not approved to treat mental decline. What’s more, the hormone, which was provided free by the manufacturer in the study, today costs $700 for a single shot, Baker said.

An expert who wasn’t involved in the research echoed the cautions.

“I think it’s potentially good news, but I don’t think it’s to the point where people should go out and start using it,” said Dr. Ronald C. Petersen, who heads the Mayo Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center in Rochester, Minnesota.

The new study, published Monday in the Archives of Neurology, included 152 people aged 55 to 87. Sixty-six had “mild cognitive impairment,” which falls somewhere between normal forgetfulness and dementia.

Baker said researchers have failed so far to come up with effective drugs to treat mild cognitive impairment, just as there is no known treatment to stave off the normal memory decline that comes with age.

But recent work by one of Baker’s co-authors hints that nasal sprays with the hormone insulin may have a positive impact on memory in people with Alzheimer’s disease - although that’s far from conclusive yet.

GHRH, a hormone produced by the hypothalamus in the brain, is linked to the insulin system, but also has a host of other effects. It dwindles naturally with aging, which has been linked to declines in memory and executive function.

“All you have to do is supplement that hormone and it then will result in a whole cascade of effects that then restore an aging system to a younger system,” said Baker.

In her study, people injected a synthetic version of GHRH or a placebo daily for five months. At the end, those who got the drug did better on psychological tests of executive function - whether or not they had mild cognitive impairment.

It’s unclear how the test differences will translate into real life, said Baker. One test, for instance, asked participants to name the color of a font - say, green - used to write the name of a different color - say, “red”. But Baker said people who got the hormone were more likely to report improvements in their ability to focus during the day.

The researchers found no serious side effects in the study, although people who got the hormone more often complained of symptoms like skin reactions and joint pain.

Still, both Baker and Petersen said more work is needed to gauge the long-term consequences of GHRH injections. It’s possible health problems could show up down the road, and the mental boost may be short-lived.

“Is it going to work in the long run and is it going to be safe? That is still unknown,” said Petersen.

Baker added that it’s too early to say whether the hormone could play a role in thwarting the development of Alzheimer’s, which may affect as many as five million Americans.

Still, she said, “There are things we can all do to postpone (mental) decline.” Keeping medical conditions such as diabetes under control and getting regular exercise are two examples.

“We recommend commonly that people start exercising when they are having mild cognitive impairment,” Baker said. “Our work and others’ has shown that exercise really does make a difference.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Not only did the story estimate cost – $700 for a single shot – but it put it up high in the 5th paragraph along with caveats about “jumping the gun.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Worcester, Mass. - When the standard malaria medications failed to help 18 critically ill patients, the attending physician in a Congo clinic acted under the "compassionate use" doctrine and prescribed a not-yet-approved malaria therapy made only from the dried leaves of the Artemisia annua plant. In just five days, all 18 people fully recovered. This small but stunningly successful trial offers hope to address the growing problem of drug-resistant malaria.

Details of the cases are documented in the paper "Artemisia annua dried leaf tablets treated malaria resistant to ACT and i.v. artesunate: case reports" by an international team lead by Pamela Weathers, PhD, professor of biology and biotechnology at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI), who has pioneered the use of dried leaves of Artemisia annua (DLA) as a malaria therapy.

"To our knowledge, this is the first report of dried-leaf Artemisia annua controlling ACT-resistant malaria in humans," the authors of the Phytomedicine paper note, adding that more comprehensive clinical trials on patients with drug-resistant malaria are warranted. "Successful treatment of all 18 ACT-resistant cases suggests that DLA should be rapidly incorporated into the antimalarial regimen for Africa," they added, "and possibly wherever else ACT resistance has emerged."

Watch a video about research at WPI related to this study.

The report documents the experiences of 18 patients in the North Kivu province of the Democratic Republic of Congo who showed symptoms of malaria and were originally treated with the recommended medication: artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT), which blends artemisinin, a chemical extract from Artemisia annua, with one or more other drugs that attack the malaria parasite in different ways.

The 18 patients, ranging in age from 14 months to 60 years, did not respond to the standard ACT treatment, and all lapsed into severe malaria, defined by symptoms that can include loss of consciousness, respiratory distress, convulsions, and pulmonary edema. One patient, a five-year-old child, became comatose. All were then treated with intravenously administered artesunate, the frontline medication for severe malaria, but again they showed no improvement.

As a last resort, doctors turned to dried-leaf Artemisia (DLA), a therapy developed and extensively studied by Weathers and her team at WPI. After five days of treatment with tablets made from only the dried and powered leaves of Artemisia (which has been prepared and analyzed using methods developed by Weathers and postdoctoral fellow Melissa Towler), all 18 patients fully recovered. Laboratory tests showed they had no parasites remaining in their blood. (Weathers noted more than 100 other drug-resistant patients also have been successfully treated with DLA tablets.)

"These 18 patients were dying," Weathers said. "So to see 100 percent recover, even the child who had lapsed into a coma, was just amazing. It's a small study, but the results are powerful."

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), more than 212 million people contracted malaria in 2015 and some 429,000 died, with young children and pregnant women being particularly vulnerable. Caused by a mosquito-borne parasite, the illness is reported in nearly 100 countries and threatens nearly half of the world's population. ACT, the current recommended therapy, is expensive to produce and is in short supply in areas hit hardest by the disease. In addition, while the combination therapy is designed to be less prone to the drug resistance that has rendered previous antimalarial agents ineffective, increasingly the malaria parasite is showing signs of resistance to ACT, particularly in Southeast Asia.

Weathers began her research on artemisinin and Artemesia annua (also known as sweet wormwood) more than 25 years ago. In recent years, she has turned her attention to the use of DLA as an alternative to conventional antimalarial drugs. Noting that Artemisia annua, which is classified as a generally regarded as safe (GRAS) herb, has been consumed by humans and used as an herbal therapy for thousands of years, often in the form of a tea, she became intrigued by the potential for using the dried plant, rather than just a chemical extract, as a malaria treatment. A study she published in Photochemistry Reviews in 2011 was the first to demonstrate that dried leaves of the Artemisia annua plant delivers 40 times more artemisinin to the blood than does the drug based on the chemical extract of the plant.

In a paper published in PLOS ONE the following year, Weathers and her team showed that not only does DLA have antimalarial properties, it is more effective in knocking out the parasite and reduced the level of parasite infection more completely in mice. In a 2015 study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the WPI researchers, with colleagues at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, showed that dried Artemisia leaves cured rodents infected with malaria strains that were known to be resistant to artemisinin. And, in an experiment that accelerated the evolution of the malaria parasite by passing it through up to 49 generations of mice, the parasite showed no signs of resistance to DLA.

Weathers says the superior performance of DLA in comparison to ACT, as well as its ability to kill drug-resistant parasites and avoid the resistance trap, itself, is likely due to the synergistic effects of a complex array of phytochemicals contained in the plant's leaves, several of which are also known to have antimalarial properties and others of which may act both to enhance the absorption of artemisinin into the bloodstream and bolster its effectiveness against malaria. In effect, the dried leaves constitute a robust natural combination therapy, one whose benefits far surpass those of ACT and other combination drugs.

"We have done a lot of work to understand the biochemistry of these compounds, which include a number of flavonoids and terpenes, so we can better understand the role they play in the pharmacological activity of the dried leaves," Weathers said. "The more we learn, the more excited we become about the potential for DLA to be the medication of choice for combatting malaria worldwide. Artemisia annua is known to be efficacious against a range of other diseases, including other tropical maladies and certain cancers, so in our lab we are already at work investigating the effectiveness of DLA with other diseases."

Another advantage of DLA over conventional malaria treatments is its low cost and the relative simplicity of its manufacture, Weathers said. While the processes for manufacturing ACT is costlier and requires a higher degree of expertise, producing DLA tablets can be accomplished with simpler equipment and a modest amount of training. Growing Artemisia annua and producing and testing the tablets, Weathers noted, are ideal local business that can provide jobs in impoverished areas and greatly expand access to antimalarial therapy.

In fact, she has already established a supply chain in Africa that includes growing and harvesting high-producing cultivars in East Africa, along with GMP (Good Manufacturing Practice) processing operations in Uganda where the leaves are dried, pulverized, and homogenized, where the powder is compacted into tablets, and where the tablets are tested to verify their dosage. This supply chain helped produce the tablets used to treat the 18 patients in the Democratic Republic of Congo. "This simple technology can be owned, operated, and distributed by Africans for Africans," Weathers said.

Founded in 1865 in Worcester, Mass., WPI is one of the nation's first engineering and technology universities. Its 14 academic departments offer more than 50 undergraduate and graduate degree programs in science, engineering, technology, business, the social sciences, and the humanities and arts, leading to bachelor's, master's and doctoral degrees. WPI's talented faculty work with students on interdisciplinary research that seeks solutions to important and socially relevant problems in fields as diverse as the life sciences and bioengineering, energy, information security, materials processing, and robotics. Students also have the opportunity to make a difference to communities and organizations around the world through the university's innovative Global Projects Program. There are more than 40 WPI project centers throughout the Americas, Africa, Asia-Pacific, and Europe.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions this would be an “inexpensive treatment option” and goes into some detail about the economics of the region where the drug was tested and the advantage of a low cost therapy.
“Another advantage of DLA over conventional malaria treatments is its low cost and the relative simplicity of its manufacture, Weathers said. While the processes for manufacturing ACT is costlier and requires a higher degree of expertise, producing DLA tablets can be accomplished with simpler equipment and a modest amount of training. Growing Artemisia annua and producing and testing the tablets, Weathers noted, are ideal local business that can provide jobs in impoverished areas and greatly expand access to antimalarial therapy.”
Normally we like to see specific costs but in this case, an attempt is made to discuss the challenges and opportunities of developing a low cost therapy which seems appropriate here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OAK BROOK, Ill. - MRI screening improves early diagnosis of breast cancer in all women-not only those at high risk-according to a new study from Germany published online in the journal Radiology.

MRI has long been known as an effective breast cancer screening modality that offers better sensitivity than mammography and ultrasound. Currently, guidelines reserve breast MRI screening for women who have a strong family history or other specific breast cancer risk factors. MRI screening has not been considered necessary for women at average risk, and there has been resistance to expansion of MRI into this population due, in part, to concern over higher costs.

However, with breast cancer remaining a major cause of cancer death in women, there is good reason to pursue the search for improved screening methods, according to the study's lead author, Christiane Kuhl, M.D., chair of the Department of Radiology at RWTH Aachen University in Aachen, Germany.

Between 2005 and 2013, Dr. Kuhl and colleagues studied breast MRI's impact on 2,120 women, ages 40 to 70, with less than a 15 percent lifetime risk of breast cancer. The women had normal screening mammograms and, in the case of those with dense breast tissue, normal screening ultrasound. Breast MRI detected 60 additional breast cancers, including 40 invasive cancers, for an overall supplemental cancer detection rate of 15.5 per 1,000 women. Of the 60 cancers detected in the study group over the observation period (7,007 screening rounds), 59 were found only using MRI, one was found also by mammography, and none by mammography or ultrasound alone.

According to Dr. Kuhl, the results suggest that MRI can serve as a useful supplemental screening tool for women at average risk, especially those with dense mammographic tissue, and that MRI is superior to supplemental ultrasound for this purpose.

The results also highlight the ability of MRI in the detection of more aggressive types of cancer.

"The faster a cancer grows and the better it is in seeding metastases, the better will it be picked up early by MRI," Dr. Kuhl said. "In our cohort, cancers found by MRI alone exhibited features of rapid growth at pathology."

This ability is especially important in women with dense breast tissue in which aggressive cancers may be missed on mammography. Left undetected, these cancers will grow to become clinically palpable cancers, also known as interval cancers. The new study showed that, consistent with previous research, breast MRI can depict these rapidly growing cancers with high reliability.

According to Dr. Kuhl, interval cancers exhibit an adverse biologic profile and are the main driver of breast cancer mortality. Additional cancers detected by MRI screening in the study had a skewed distribution towards a higher-than-normal prevalence or incidence of rapidly growing (grade 3) cancers.

"The interval cancer rate in our study was zero percent. Not a single cancer was undetected that became palpable," she said. "This suggests that MRI finds breast cancers that also mammography would find, but MRI detects them earlier, and it finds the cancers which, if MRI had not been done, would have progressed to interval cancers."

"Supplemental Breast MR Imaging Screening of Women with Average Risk of Breast Cancer." Collaborating with Dr. Kuhl were Kevin Strobel, M.D., Heribert Bieling, M.Sc., Claudia Leutner, M.D., Hans H. Schild, M.D., Ph.D., and Simone Schrading, M.D., Ph.D.

Radiology is edited by Herbert Y. Kressel, M.D., Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass., and owned and published by the Radiological Society of North America, Inc. (http://radiology. )

RSNA is an association of 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although the news release does not specify the exact price tag, it makes the reader aware that MRI screening is often avoided due to higher cost than other screening options:
“MRI screening has not been considered necessary for women at average risk, and there has been resistance to expansion of MRI into this population due, in part, to concern over higher costs.”
It would have been helpful if the release had stated whether or not this rapid MRI will have a lower cost than traditional breast MRI.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Amgen Inc said its potent cholesterol fighter Repatha significantly reduced the risk of heart attacks, strokes and death in patients with heart disease, according to initial results of a large, eagerly-anticipated trial released on Thursday. The data should pave the way for greater acceptance by health insurers and pharmacy benefit managers, who have been rejecting about 75 percent of prescriptions written for the expensive medicine despite multiple appeals by physicians.

No new safety problems cropped up in the 27,500 patient study called Fourier, Amgen said. It also said Repatha’s effect on mental function was similar to placebo, likely alleviating concerns that it might impair cognition in some patients.

The trial was widely expected to be positive, especially after a smaller study presented in November showed Repatha therapy led to regression of artery-clogging plaque, an underlying cause of heart disease.

“These results show unequivocally the connection between lowering LDL cholesterol with Repatha and cardiovascular risk reduction, even in a population already treated with optimized statin therapy,” Amgen research chief Sean Harper said in a statement.

Details on the magnitude of benefit will be revealed in mid-March at the American College of Cardiology meeting in Washington, D.C. Industry analysts have been looking for a 15 percent to 20 percent reduction of major adverse heart events.

Repatha, with a list price of more than $14,000 a year, was approved based on its ability to dramatically lower “bad” LDL cholesterol in patients who require more intensive therapy on top of widely-used statins, such as Lipitor, or who are unable to tolerate statins.

But those who control budgets wanted concrete proof that the drug could actually reduce the risk of heart attacks and death before making it easier for patients to get the medicine.

Repatha and a rival drug from Regeneron Corp and Sanofi have had endured anemic sales as a result.

Amgen reported just $40 million in third-quarter sales. The company said Repatha would be well on its way to becoming a $1 billion seller if all prescriptions written had been filled.

The primary and secondary goals of the study are composites of several adverse outcomes. At the heart meeting in March, researchers will also provide details on risk reduction for each of the components, such as non-fatal heart attack, non-fatal stroke, and heart-related death.

The primary goal also included need for a new artery-clearing procedure and hospitalization for angina.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: To its credit, the story mentions the high cost of the drug Repatha — $14,000 per year — and cites reluctance on the part of some insurers to cover that cost without more substantive data on its efficacy.  The news release issued by the drug’s manufacturer, Amgen, didn’t include either point.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Exposing sleeping people to a series of short flashing lights at night might help them adjust more quickly to time zone changes, according to a new U.S. study.

In experiments, the technique – which is based on the way non-visual parts of the brain respond to light – was much more effective than sustained bright light similar to that from devices sometimes used to combat sleep disorders or seasonal depression.

“Jet lag itself is really a nuisance syndrome as it is self-resolving,” said senior author Jamie Zeitzer, assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the Stanford University School of Medicine in California.

Zeitzer was on the committee that removed jet lag as a “disease” from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), the guide that psychiatrists use to diagnose mental illnesses.

“However, the treatments that are developed for jet lag can be used for less prevalent, though far more significant societal problems including delayed sleep in teens (in whom we have an ongoing clinical trial using the flash technique) and shift workers who try to flip between a night time schedule for work and a day time schedule for leisure,” he told Reuters Health by email.

The study included 39 people, 31 of whom were exposed to a series of two-millisecond light flashes with changing intervals while sleeping, and eight of whom were exposed to 60 minutes of continuous bright light.

A series of flashes similar to a camera flash delivered every 10 seconds over a 60-minute period delayed sleepiness by two hours, compared to a 36-minute delay for those exposed to continuous light for an hour, according to the results published in the Journal of Clinical Investigation.

“In essence, using the night before you traveled from California to N.Y. would move your circadian system two-thirds of the way there before you even left,” Zeitzer said.

Arriving in New York, you would be synced to the local time after one day, he said.

“The circadian clock is the central conductor of the many clocks that are found in nearly all tissues of your body,” Zeitzer said. “This clock remains synchronized with the external day through regular exposure to light.”

Nighttime flashes change the timing of the circadian clock, he said.

“For moving your system to a later time, such as would be necessary when traveling East-to-West, light during the first few hours of the night is ideal,” he said. “For moving your system to an earlier time, such as would be necessary when traveling West-to-East, light during the last few hours of the night is ideal.”

The night flashes require special technology and equipment, beyond just a smartphone, which are still in development, Zeitzer said.

In a previous study, the short flashes of light at night did not interrupt sleep or reduce its quality, he added.

“This is one of the real advantages of this system - you can change circadian timing while you sleep, without interfering with sleep,” he said.

Mistiming light therapy can make jet lag worse, cautioned Anna Wirz-Justice, professor emeritus at the Center for Chronobiology at the University of Basel in Switzerland, who was not part of the new study.

As for frequent flyers trying this themselves, it is “far too early – neither the methodology is available outside research, nor any guidance about safety, nor tests of simulated jet lag in an appropriate ‘realistic’ protocol,” Wirz-Justice told Reuters Health by email.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While no costs were discussed, the suggestion that the device might be expensive was made: “The night flashes require special technology and equipment, beyond just a smartphone, which are still in development, Zeitzer said.” We’ll consider this nod in the direction of cost sufficient for a Satisfactory rating, since it would be difficult to say exactly how much such a device would cost at this stage.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings suggest that the antidepressant Lexapro might make hot flashes a little less of a nuisance to women — adding to the mixed bag of results regarding that drug’s effect on menopause symptoms.

The study, of 205 women, found that those randomly assigned to take Lexapro (escitalopram) for eight weeks reported less daily “interference” from their hot flashes.

Compared with women given inactive placebo pills, they said hot flashes were taking less of a toll on their work, daily activities, sleep and general mood. Women on the placebo also improved over time, however.

The findings come from the same clinical trial that, last year, showed Lexapro halved the number of hot flashes women had each day. (See Reuters story of January 18, 2011.)

A separate study a few months later showed no such benefit, however. In two trials of 36 women, researchers found that Lexapro did not cut the number or severity of hot flashes over eight weeks. (See Reuters Health story of May 26, 2011.)

And the lead researcher on that study said these latest findings are “nothing to write home about.”

“The differences between the treatment and placebo groups are very small,” said Robert Freedman, a professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.

In general, studies of hot-flash remedies over the years have “virtually always found a large placebo effect,” Freedman noted in an interview.

That could mean that study participants’ hot flashes are just getting better over time, which they sometimes do.

“But my feeling is that it’s the placebo effect,” Freedman said, referring to the phenomenon of study participants on placebos improving because they believe they are getting a real treatment.

Hot flashes, which mostly affect women transitioning to menopause and already in that phase of life, involve a sudden sensation of heat, sometimes accompanied by sweating or visible reddening of the skin.

Their exact cause is unknown, but hormonal regulation of body temperature is thought to be involved.

Bouts of hot flashes can happen many times a day and past research has found they can continue for anywhere from a few months to up to 10 years.

So far, Freedman noted, the only hot-flash treatment that has consistently worked in studies is hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

And right now, HRT is the only treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for cooling hot flashes.

But women and doctors are wary of HRT these days — since a 2002 clinical trial linked the hormones to increased risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots.

So researchers have been looking for alternatives. And studies have suggested that a few antidepressants, used at low doses, can be helpful for some women — including paroxetine (Paxil), fluoxetine (Prozac) and venlafaxine (Effexor).

This latest study, reported in the journal Fertility & Sterility, focused on hot flash “interference” — the degree to which women feel hot flashes disrupt their lives.

That’s important because it gets at quality of life, according to the researchers, led by Janet S. Carpenter of Indiana University in Indianapolis.

The trial included 205 women who were having at least 28 bouts of hot flashes or “night sweats” a week. Carpenter’s team randomly assigned half to use Lexapro for eight weeks, while the other half were given placebo pills.

The women kept diaries to record their hot flash symptoms. And every four weeks, they filled out a questionnaire on hot-flash interference.

After four weeks, the study found, women on the antidepressant saw their score on the interference scale fall by half, on average. It remained there at week eight.

But women in the placebo group also improved, albeit more slowly and to a somewhat lesser degree.

In a separate analysis of the same study group, Carpenter’s team found that women on Lexapro also reported bigger improvements in sleep problems: half saw their insomnia symptoms drop by at least 50 percent, versus 35 percent of placebo users.

Those findings appear in a separate report in the journal Menopause.

Freedman said that the overall research on antidepressants and hot flashes is still inconsistent. “Overall, the picture is not optimistic.”

In his own study last year, Freedman used a different approach to measuring hot flashes: instead of asking women to record their symptoms in a diary, the researchers had them wear a “detector” to monitor objective measures of hot flashes.

It is possible for women’s hot flashes to remain unchanged objectively, but have their subjective experience of them change. “But that raises the question of why,” Freedman said.

And for now, he noted, it’s also not clear why antidepressants would have effects on hot flashes.

Lexapro, which costs about $125 a month, belongs to the group of antidepressants called selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They increase levels of the brain chemical serotonin, which may have a role in regulating body heat.

But no one knows if altering serotonin levels actually does affect women’s hot flashes. In fact, Freedman said, there’s some evidence that lowering serotonin levels does not worsen hot flashes — which would be expected if the “serotonin theory” is correct.

Antidepressants can also have side effects, like nausea, drowsiness, headache, constipation and dry mouth.

Right now, no antidepressant is specifically approved to treat hot flashes. But in the U.S., doctors are allowed to prescribe drugs “off-label” for conditions other than their approved uses.

Besides antidepressants, doctors sometimes prescribe certain blood pressure medications or the anti-seizure drug gabapentin, which some studies suggest may be helpful.

Hot flashes often need no drug treatment at all, though.

If they are not severe, experts say simple steps can be enough — like avoiding hot and spicy foods, turning down the thermostat, or trying relaxation techniques, such as yoga or meditation.

There are several herbal or “natural” products marketed for easing menopause symptoms, including black cohosh, soy, red clover and dong quai. But there is little evidence that they work, according to the North American Menopause Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article does discuss how much Lexapro – the antidepressant mentioned in the article – costs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DUARTE, Calif. -- A City of Hope-led study found that the use of low-dose aspirin (81mg) reduces the risk of breast cancer in women who are part of the California's Teacher's Study. This study -- which is the first to suggest that the reduction in risk occurs for low-dose aspirin -- was proposed by City of Hope's Leslie Bernstein, Ph.D., professor and director of the Division of Biomarkers of Early Detection and Prevention, and published online in the journal, Breast Cancer Research.

Bernstein and her colleagues saw an overall 16 percent lower risk of breast cancer in women who reported using low-dose aspirin at least three times per week. Such regular use of low-dose aspirin reduced the risk by 20 percent of estrogen or progesterone receptor positive, HER2 negative breast cancer, which is the most common breast cancer subtype.

"The study found an interesting protective association between low-dose aspirin and breast cancer," said lead author Christina A. Clarke, Ph.D., M.P.H., from the Cancer Prevention Institute of California. "We did not by and large find associations with the other pain medications like ibuprofen and acetaminophen. We also did not find associations with regular aspirin since this type of medication is taken sporadically for headaches or other pain, and not daily for prevention of cardiovascular disease."

This study differed from other studies that have looked at aspirin and cancer risk because it focused on the dose levels of the aspirin women had taken and tracked the frequency of the use of low-dose aspirin as opposed to regular aspirin. It was also able to look in detail at subtypes of breast cancer.

"We already knew that aspirin is a weak aromatase inhibitor and we treat women with breast cancer with stronger aromatase inhibitors since they reduce the amount of estrogen postmenopausal women have circulating in their blood," said Bernstein. "We thought that if aspirin can inhibit aromatase, it ought to reduce the likelihood that breast cancer would develop and it could also be an effective way to improve breast cancer patients' prognosis once they no longer take the more potent aromatase inhibitors." Bernstein added, "Aspirin also reduces inflammation, which may be another mechanism by which aspirin taken regularly can lower risk of breast cancer developing or recurring."

As part of the study, researchers analyzed data recorded in questionnaires submitted by 57,164 women in the California's Teacher's Study. In 2005, participants answered questions regarding family history of cancer and other conditions, use of aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), menstrual and reproductive history, use of hormones, weight and height, living environment, diet, alcohol use and physical activity. In the ensuing years before 2013, 1,457 of these participants developed invasive breast cancer.

The team of researchers chose to focus on low-dose "baby" aspirin, because not only is it inexpensive and readily available as potential means of prevention, but because there are already a lot of people already taking it for prevention of other diseases such as heart disease and even colon cancer.

Now that we have some data separating low-dose from higher-dose aspirin, more detailed research can be undertaken to understand the full value of low-dose aspirin for breast cancer prevention," said Clarke."

Other collaborating authors include Alison J. Canchola, M.S., and Lisa M. Moy, M.P.H., from the Cancer Prevention Institute of California, and Susan L. Neuhausen, Ph.D., The Morris & Horowitz Families Professor in Cancer Etiology & Outcomes Research, Nadia T. Chung, M.P.H., and James V. Lacey Jr., Ph.D., M.P.H., from City of Hope.

Research reported in Breast Cancer Research was supported through grants from the National Cancer Institute and the California Breast Cancer Research Fund under grant numbers: R01 CA77398 and 97-10500. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

City of Hope is an independent research and treatment center for cancer, diabetes and other life-threatening diseases. Designated as one of only 47 comprehensive cancer centers, the highest recognition bestowed by the National Cancer Institute, City of Hope is also a founding member of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, with research and treatment protocols that advance care throughout the world. City of Hope is located in Duarte, California, just northeast of Los Angeles, with community clinics throughout Southern California. It is ranked as one of "America's Best Hospitals" in cancer by U.S. News & World Report. Founded in 1913, City of Hope is a pioneer in the fields of bone marrow transplantation, diabetes and numerous breakthrough cancer drugs based on technology developed at the institution.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes, near the bottom, that low-dose aspirin is inexpensive. That’s enough to earn it a satisfactory rating here since low-dose aspirin is indeed inexpensive. Costs for a bottle of 300 tablets currently range from $3.47 to $12.49 according to an online search.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new cold and flu test can precisely diagnose a dozen winter ailments and reduce unneeded use of antibiotics, says the company that sells it. Physicians say the test is accurate and the most comprehensive available, but some say its long processing time limits usefulness in emergency rooms.

Doctors currently diagnose colds and flus through a patchwork of testing, observation and process of elimination. But many of the current tests available are not very sensitive, and most test for only one or two viruses at a time. According to a 2006 study in the New England Journal of Medicine of some 3,000 children under 5 years old, only 17% who had the flu were properly diagnosed in doctors' offices, clinics and emergency rooms. Poor diagnosis can result in a missed opportunity to prescribe a flu medicine, and also sometimes results in an unneeded antibiotic if doctors wrongly think the illness is caused by bacteria.

The new test, called the xTAG respiratory panel, approved earlier this year by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is the most comprehensive FDA-approved virus-panel to date. It tests for a dozen viruses, including several types of influenza, two types of respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, three types of parainfluenza, adenovirus and even rhinovirus, which causes the common cold. According to manufacturer Luminex Corp. , Austin, Texas, the viruses in the panel are expected to account for about 85% of the viral illnesses in the U.S. this year.

The test is expected to be used mainly in hospitals and emergency rooms, but doctors can send the swab to a local lab.

To use it, doctors take a swab from the nose or throat. In the lab, genetic material from the swab is magnified millions of times and then bound to fluorescent markers, which are then read by a machine. According to data submitted to the FDA, the test detects each virus 78% to 100% of the time, depending on the type, and has few false positives. For example, the FDA-submitted data say it detects RSV, a common cause of infant pneumonia, 100% of the time, while giving false positives 2% of the time.

"This is really the gold standard. It is very sensitive," says Kathryn M. Edwards, a Nashville pediatric infectious-disease specialist and co-author of the New England Journal study.

The downside is that the test is expensive, about $300 to $400, but is covered by most insurers. It also needs extensive processing in the lab. And patients will have to wait at least six to seven hours -- maybe a day or two depending on staffing at the hospital laboratory. "Emergency departments are going to have to think twice about a test like that," says Michael Shannon, senior physician in emergency medicine at Children's Hospital Boston. Currently available tests can yield results in a half hour, though accuracy varies and they typically screen for only one or two viruses.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story does a good job of providing the cost of the XTag respiratory panel, $300-400, and cost-related information.  The test is relatively expensive but is also covered by insurance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A therapy that allows hay fever sufferers to get allergy shots in the form of a tablet or drops can help alleviate symptoms and cut people’s reliance on allergy medication, a new research review confirms.

Known as sublingual immunotherapy, the treatment relies on the same principles as traditional allergy shots, but is delivered by tablets or drops that dissolve under the tongue.

Allergy shots may be used for hay fever when antihistamines and other allergy medications do not control a person’s symptoms adequately, or for people who want to reduce their reliance on medication.

The shots help prevent hay fever symptoms by exposing people, over time, to small amounts of the pollen to which they are allergic, essentially desensitizing the immune system to the allergen.

Allergy shots are typically given weekly at first, followed by monthly injections over several years. The treatment does not cure hay fever but is generally effective at reducing symptoms. However, inconvenience and discomfort limits patients’ willingness to try allergy shots.

Sublingual immunotherapy is an alternative and has become commonly used in Europe, where two tablet-based products against grass-pollen allergies are available: Grazax and Oralair. There are also a number of drop-based products. No sublingual immunotherapy products have yet been approved in the United States, however.

For the new study, reported in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Italian researchers combined the results of 19 clinical trials conducted since 1995 on the effectiveness of immunotherapy tablets and drops against hay fever caused by grass pollen.

The trials lasted anywhere from three months to three years.

Across the studies, which included a total of 2,971 adults and children with grass-pollen allergies, immunotherapy reduced symptoms by about 20 percent to 30 percent, on average. It also allowed patients to reduce their use of antihistamines and other medications.

The researchers, led by Dr. Gabriele Di Lorenzo of the University of Palermo, describe the benefits as “modest.”

In an email, Di Lorenzo told Reuters Health that the findings suggest that sublingual immunotherapy is “highly effective in many, but not in all patients.” He said that more work is needed to identify which patients might be most likely to benefit.

Dr. Harold Nelson, an allergist at National Jewish Health in Denver, said that the body of evidence indicates that sublingual immunotherapy beats antihistamines and other medications used to control hay fever symptoms.

In an interview, he noted that antihistamines reduce symptoms by about 12 percent to 15 percent, on average. Nasal steroids, another hay fever option, appear to cut symptoms by about 17 percent.

On the other hand, Nelson said, allergy shots appear to outperform the oral versions, with a symptom reduction about twice that of sublingual immunotherapy.

In addition, the long-term effectiveness of the grass-pollen tablets is not yet fully clear.

Like allergy shots, the oral immunotherapy takes time. Grazax, for instance, is taken daily, starting several months before the start of the next grass-pollen allergy season and continuing for three years thereafter.

Research so far suggests that the symptom relief persists in the year after patients stop taking Grazax. A study published earlier this year — and not included in the current analysis — found that during that post-treatment year, Grazax patients had one-quarter fewer hay fever symptoms than those who had been given a placebo for comparison.

But longer term data are not yet available. The benefits of allergy shots, by contrast, have been shown to persist for 10 years or beyond, Nelson noted.

The ultimate cost-effectiveness of sublingual immunotherapy has also yet to be determined; in the UK, for example, Grazax treatment costs about 2.25 pounds ($3.50) per day. In theory, that could pay off if long-term use of allergy medications was cut, but that has yet to be shown.

Still, Nelson said that if sublingual products do win approval in the U.S., they will likely boost the number of hay fever sufferers who want to use under-the-tongue immunotherapy. Even though the effectiveness is less than that of allergy shots, the convenience of an at-home version of immunotherapy is a plus, and the sublingual therapy tends to have fewer side effects than shots, according to Nelson.

The most common side effects include itchiness and irritation in the mouth, ears and eyes, swelling of the mouth or tongue, headache and gastrointestinal problems like stomach pain and heartburn.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>1clip_themedata.thmx" rel="themeData"/>1clip_colorschememapping.xml" rel="colorSchemeMapping"/>



 
The story concedes that the “ultimate cost-effectiveness of sublingual immunotherapy has…yet to be determined.” Based on cost in the U.K., the story reports that treatment may be $3.50 per day, adding that it should be “taken daily, starting several months before the start of the next grass-pollen allergy season and continuing for three years thereafter.”    

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For hours on a recent morning at the , Dr. Andrew Lowy painstakingly performed the therapy on a patient.

After slicing the man’s belly wide open, he thrust his gloved hands deep inside, and examined various organs, looking for . He then lifted the small intestine out of the body to sift it through his fingers.

As he found tumors, he snipped them out. “You can see how this is coming off like wallpaper,” Dr. Lowy said as he stripped out part of the lining of the man’s abdominal cavity.

After about two hours of poking and cutting, Dr. Lowy began the so-called shake and bake. The machine pumped heated chemotherapy directly into the abdominal cavity for 90 minutes while nurses gently jiggled the man’s bloated belly to disperse the drug to every nook and cranny.

The treatment is formally called cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, or Hipec.

Recent converts include University Hospitals Case Medical Center in Cleveland, in the , and even Massachusetts General. The is looking at it, according to people in the field. Advocates predict that the number of procedures could grow to 10,000 a year from about 1,500 now.

The therapy has even been featured on an episode of the TV series “Grey’s Anatomy.”

But Dr. Ryan, a gastrointestinal oncologist, suggested in an interview that the procedure was being extended to because “you can’t make a living doing this procedure in appendix cancer patients.”

He debated the procedure publicly at the recent annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. While some patients did seem to live much longer than expected, he said that they had been carefully selected and might have fared well even without the therapy.

Proponents say that if cancer has spread into the abdominal cavity but not elsewhere, then lives can be prolonged by removing all the visible and killing what’s missed with Hipec.

By contrast, said Dr. Paul Sugarbaker, a surgeon at Washington Hospital Center and the leading proponent of Hipec, “there are no long-term survivors with systemic chemotherapy — zero.”

Dr. Sugarbaker, who opposed Dr. Ryan in the debate, said that it has long been known that cancerous cells are unable to withstand as much heat as healthy cells. And putting the chemotherapy on top of tumors should be more effective than systematically delivering it through the bloodstream.

One randomized trial done more than a decade ago involving 105 patients in the did show a striking benefit. The median survival of those getting surgery and Hipec, plus intravenous chemotherapy, was 22.3 months, almost double the 12.6 months for those getting only the intravenous chemotherapy. But 8 percent who got the surgery and Hipec died from the treatment itself. And critics say that since that trial was conducted, new drugs have come to market that allow patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to live two years with intravenous chemotherapy alone.

A new trial in the has been temporarily suspended so that researchers can find a way to recruit patients. After nearly a year only one patient had enrolled, because people were reluctant to chance winding up in the control group, according to one of the investigators.

While proponents contend that the risk of dying from the surgery has been reduced since the Dutch trial, the procedure still lasts eight hours or more and full recovery can take three to six months. “It’s maximally invasive,” said Dr. Sugarbaker, who often removes the “spare parts” — organs a patient can live without, like the spleen, the gall bladder, the ovaries and the uterus.

The cost of the surgery and Hipec, including hospitalization, ranges from $20,000 to more than $100,000, doctors said. While and insurers generally pay for the operation, the heated treatment may not be covered. But doctors added it may be if it is described merely as chemotherapy. Some patients, like Ms. Borges, who is a fitness devotee, recover well and say the procedure staved off a death sentence.

But Dr. Alan Venook, a colon cancer specialist at the , said that a couple of patients referred by him had “died miserable deaths. One lost much of her abdominal wall to infection and just died in misery.”

Another risk is that the surgery may be done unnecessarily. CT scans cannot pick up many of the small tumors, so it is often unclear how much cancer is inside until the patient is opened.

In June, Dr. Lowy sliced open a woman and saw, to his horror, that she had more tumors than he could remove. Taking out only some would not improve her chances of survival, so he closed the incision, and she is now starting intravenous chemotherapy.

Things with the male patient, Andy S., went better. A 41-year-old father of two from near , Mr. S. agreed to let a reporter observe the surgery, but asked that his full name not be published because he did not want his cancer history to surface through searches.

Mr. S. had eventually diagnosed as . But the appendix was found to be cancerous. Such cancers typically spew mucus containing tumor cells into the abdominal cavity. So he signed up for surgery and Hipec with Dr. Lowy.

“I’ve had to say my goodbyes to everybody,” Mr. S. said the day before the operation. “I had to talk to my priest. I had to do all these things I never thought I’d have to do at 41. I wouldn’t wish it on my worst enemy, but I have to go through with it.”

Dr. Lowy explored the entire cavity from the diaphragm to the pelvis. He found mucus in several spots that he sopped up with a cloth and also tiny tumors the size of a pencil eraser that had implanted in several spots. He snipped those out and sewed up the wounds. He removed the right side of the man’s colon and the omentum, a fatty structure.

Then two Y-shaped tubes hooked to the Hipec machine were inserted into the abdominal cavity, one to deliver the chemotherapy and the other to bring the drug back to the machine to be reheated. The incision was sewn up around the tubes so the chemotherapy would not leak.

The man’s belly was filled with three liters of saline fluid and the chemotherapy, a generic drug called mitomycin C, heated to 42 degrees Celsius, or nearly 108 degrees Fahrenheit. Any hotter could have caused injuries. Bloated with liquid, the man’s torso resembled a water bed.

After 90 minutes, the fluid was drained and the incision reopened for a final check before the patient was stitched up. The procedure took six hours.

“We got all of the visible disease, and he didn’t have a lot of visible disease,” Dr. Lowy said with satisfaction.

Mr. S. left the hospital eight days later, happy to have undergone the treatment. “I want to have the best chance I can have to never see this again,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good job on this, stating “The cost of the surgery and Hipec, including hospitalization, ranges from $20,000 to more than $100,000, doctors said. While Medicare and insurers generally pay for the operation, the heated treatment may not be covered. But doctors added it may be if it is described merely as chemotherapy.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 16, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Stimulating a specific set of nerves that are nestled along the spine may deliver relief to those who suffer from chronic back pain and cut the need for opioid painkillers, new research suggests.

The therapy, which targets the root ganglion nerves, is more effective than other spine stimulation procedures because it places tiny leads precisely at the area where pain originates, unlike other devices that provide more generalized stimulation, the researchers said.

"In certain patients who have not gotten relief from other treatments, this therapy may give sustained pain relief and may allow them to reduce opioids for at least 18 months and perhaps longer," said lead researcher Robert McCarthy. He's a professor of anesthesiology at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago.

The dorsal root ganglions are nerve cells, on both sides of each of the spine's vertebra, and are the gateway to pain between nerves in different parts of the body, spinal cord and brain. Stimulating this area interrupts pain signals between the painful area and the brain, the researchers explained.

A pacemaker-like device implanted under the skin in the lower back sends small electronic pulses through a wire placed near the specific dorsal root ganglion associated with the pain, McCarthy said.

The pulses replace pain with tingling or numbness. The strength of stimulation, programmed by a doctor, is based on the patient's level of pain, he said.

The treatment has two advantages over spinal cord stimulation, McCarthy said. In spinal cord stimulation, a wire runs along the spinal cord sending pulses along the entire spine, but the pulses don't target the specific pain source.

In addition, dorsal root ganglion stimulation requires significantly lower levels of electric current to quell pain, McCarthy said.

The goal of this study, he said, was to judge the effectiveness of the therapy over a long period. McCarthy and his colleagues implanted the device in 67 people suffering with chronic back pain and followed them for three to 18 months. Among the participants, 17 had the device for over a year.

Before receiving the device, most patients rated their pain as an 8 on a scale of one to 10, with 10 being the worst. For most patients, the device reduced pain by 33 percent, which was significant, the researchers reported.

In addition, patients said they experienced a 27 percent reduction in disability or limitations on daily activities caused by pain. In all, 94 percent of the participants said the treatment was beneficial.

The procedure was not without complications. Five patients needed to have the wires implanted again, two patients had them removed because they were infected, and one had the device removed because of a complication.

McCarthy said the therapy is not widely available, even though it was approved by the FDA in 2016. At the moment, its use is confined to more advanced medical centers where doctors have been trained in how to implant and regulate the device.

Also, the procedure isn't covered by all insurance companies, so out-of-pocket costs to patients can be very high. It is, however, covered by Medicare, he said.

For uninsured patients, the cost of having spine stimulation devices can range from $15,000 to $50,000 or more, according to a 2008 report funded by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries.

Spine stimulation is usually approved only after patients have not responded to other treatment, according to Blue Cross Blue Shield. Other insurance companies may have varying policies.

McCarthy hopes that more doctors will be trained in the procedure and that it will become more available, especially because it has the potential to allow patients to stop taking opioids to control their pain.

One pain specialist not involved with the study saw the benefits of this procedure.

"The results of this study are very significant," said Dr. Kiran Patel, director of neurosurgical pain at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

It shows long-term data that patients experienced significant pain relief and functional improvements, she said.

"In my pain practice and career, dorsal root ganglion stimulation therapy has been one of the most effective technologies available to combat chronic pain," Patel said.

"I encourage chronic pain patients to seek out physicians who are trained and experienced in the application of dorsal root ganglion stimulation therapy to determine if they are a candidate," she said.

The findings were presented Sunday at the American Society of Anesthesiologists annual meeting, in San Francisco. Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke for more on back pain.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did great on this criterion. It said the cost of spine stimulation devices “can range from $15,000 to $50,000 or more, according to a 2008 report funded by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries.” It also mentioned the procedure “isn’t covered by all insurance companies, so out-of-pocket costs to patients can be very high.” One quibble we did have is that it isn’t clear whether the device to stimulate the dorsal root ganglion is different in cost than the other types of spinal cord stimulation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (January 26, 2017): Patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, known as GERD, who undergo laparoscopic anti-reflux operations compared with traditional "open" operations suffer fewer postoperative complications, experience faster recovery, and incur lower health care costs, according to study results published online as an "article in press" on the Journal of the American College of Surgeons website, ahead of print publication.



GERD affects nearly 20 percent of American adults, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.* Heartburn, a burning sensation in the chest, is a common symptom of GERD.



"Patients with GERD have an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter, which allows gastric acid to go back up into the esophagus," said lead study author Francisco Schlottmann, MD, a surgeon at the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. "Anti-reflux surgery should be considered in patients who do not achieve complete control of their symptoms [regurgitation or cough] with medications; who do not want to take medications for the rest of their lives; or who experience complications of medical therapy."



For the study, researchers analyzed data in the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) database of more than 75,000 adults who underwent either laparoscopic or open fundoplication for GERD between 2000 and 2013. NIS represents 1,000 U.S. hospitals and contains data on more than seven million hospitalizations each year. During the study period, 58.4 percent of patients underwent laparoscopic procedures and 41.6 percent had open anti-reflux operations performed through a long abdominal incision.



The study showed that the rate of laparoscopic procedures increased from 24.8 percent in 2000 to 84.3 percent in 2013. "Surprisingly, in 2003, 12 years after the first laparoscopic anti-reflux operation was reported, only 25 percent of all the anti-reflux operations were performed laparoscopically in the U.S.," Dr. Schlottmann said. "Subsequently, the rate increased, but 15 percent of all anti-reflux operations were still being performed through an open approach in 2013. We believe this percentage is very high, and we hope that in the next year this percentage will decrease."



Along with discovering that the use of laparoscopy for the surgical treatment of GERD has increased significantly in the last decade, the researchers also found that, on average, the minimally invasive approach reduced length of hospital stay by approximately two days, and open operations were more than $9,000 more expensive than minimally invasive procedures.



The researchers also found that laparoscopic procedures were better for patients in terms of fewer complications. Laparoscopic anti-reflux operations were less likely to result in postoperative blood clots, wound complications, surgical site infection, esophageal perforation (which can be life threatening), bleeding, cardiac failure, and death.



"Our study highlights the fact that laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery is as effective as the open approach, and in 2017, with all its advantages, should be the standard of care," said senior study author Marco G. Patti, MD, FACS, a surgeon and Director of the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.



"We found that laparoscopic surgery is associated with significantly lower costs. In addition, indirect costs of the open approach, including an impaired ability to work, time off from work, and intangible costs of postoperative pain and healing, are difficult to measure but also favor the laparoscopic approach," said Dr. Patti.



"GERD is a common digestive disorder that can usually be treated with dietary changes and medications such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). However, chronic and not-controlled GERD can cause serious complications. Repeated exposure to stomach acid can damage the lining of the esophagus and lead to a precancerous condition called Barrett's esophagus," said Dr. Schlottmann.



Study results also revealed that urban academic or teaching hospitals performed laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery at a higher rate than open procedures, 54.4 percent versus 45.6 percent. "We think that it is important to make this information more available to the public. In order to achieve good outcomes, anti-reflux surgery should be performed laparoscopically in specialized centers," said Dr. Patti.



Paula D Strassle, MSPH Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC also participated in this study.



Citation: Comparative Analysis of Perioperative Outcomes and Costs Between Laparoscopic and Open Antireflux Surgery. Journal of the American College of Surgeons. DOI: http://dx.

*National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Digestive Diseases Statistics for the United States. https:/ . Published November 2014. Accessed January 20, 2017.

About the American College of Surgeons

The American College of Surgeons is a scientific and educational organization of surgeons that was founded in 1913 to raise the standards of surgical practice and improve the quality of care for surgical patients. The College is dedicated to the ethical and competent practice of surgery. Its achievements have significantly influenced the course of scientific surgery in America and have established it as an important advocate for all surgical patients. The College has more than 80,000 members and is the largest organization of surgeons in the world. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story focused on costs, including information about the relative cost comparison between what are called “open” surgeries and those done laparoscopically (with a thin flexible tube.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
U.S. prisons are experimenting with a high-priced monthly injection that could help addicted inmates stay off opioids after they are released, but skeptics question its effectiveness and say the manufacturer has aggressively marketed an unproven drug to corrections officials.

A single shot of Vivitrol, given in the buttocks, lasts for four weeks and eliminates the need for the daily doses common with alternatives such as methadone. But each shot costs as much as $1,000, and because the drug has a limited track record, experts do not agree on how well it works.

Proponents say Vivitrol could save money compared with the cost of locking up a drug offender — about $25,000 a year for each inmate at the Sheridan Correctional Center, 70 miles southwest of Chicago.

Dr. Joshua Lee, of New York University’s medical school, said more evidence is needed to determine whether the medication can help substantial numbers of people and whether it’s worth paying for, but the early results are encouraging.

“It sounds good, and for some of us, it feels like the right thing to do,” said Lee, a leading researcher on the treatment.

Vivitrol is emerging as the nation searches for ways to ease an opioid epidemic that affects more than 2 million Americans and an estimated 15 percent of the U.S. prison population. Many experts view prisons — where addiction’s human toll can be seen most clearly — as a natural place to discover what works.

Christopher Wolf had already served prison time for nonviolent crimes when he was ordered into treatment for a heroin addiction by a judge who suggested Vivitrol. Three months later, the 36-year-old from Centerville, Ohio, is clean and working full time as a cook.

He now suggests the medication to other addicts.

“I don’t have cravings,” Wolf said. “I see how much better life is. It gets better really fast.”

Vivitrol targets receptors in the brain’s reward system, blocking the high and extinguishing urges. In some programs, prisoners get an injection before release, then follow-up shots from any clinic.

For decades, researchers have recognized addiction as a relapsing brain disease with medication an important part of therapy. But most jails and prisons reject methadone and buprenorphine, the other government-approved medications for opioid addiction, because they are habit-forming and can be abused.

Just ask Joshua Meador, 28, an inmate at Sheridan who hopes to get into the Vivitrol program before his release in January. Before incarceration, he abused both older treatment drugs. When given take-home doses of methadone for the weekend, he would sell them for heroin.

“When I’m on Vivitrol, I can’t get high,” he said. The drug has no street value or abuse potential.

“You couldn’t design something better for the criminal justice system,” said David Farabee of the University of California at Los Angeles, who leads a Vivitrol study in a New Mexico jail. “There’s been pushback with other medications, people saying, ‘We’re just changing one drug for another.’ That argument goes out the window when you’re talking about a blocker” like Vivitrol.

Prison systems in Illinois, Vermont, Wyoming and Wisconsin are trying the drug on a small scale. Michigan is offering Vivitrol to parolees who commit small crimes, if addiction is the reason for their new offense. The federal Bureau of Prisons ran a field trial in Texas and plans to expand the program to the Northeast next year. The drug’s manufacturer hopes prisons will be the gateway to a larger market.

Also known as extended-release naltrexone, the medication won Food and Drug Administration approval for alcohol dependence in 2006 and in 2010 to prevent relapse in post-detox opioid users.

The evidence for giving Vivitrol to inmates is thin but promising.

In the biggest study, sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, about 300 offenders — most of them heroin users on probation or parole — were randomly assigned to receive either Vivitrol or brief counseling and referral to a treatment program.

After six months, the Vivitrol group had a lower rate of relapse, 43 percent compared with 64 percent. A year after treatment stopped, there had been no overdoses in the Vivitrol group and seven overdoses, including three deaths, in the other group. The results, published in March in the New England Journal of Medicine, have been promoted by the drugmaker, Ireland-based Alkermes, as it markets Vivitrol to U.S. correctional systems.

Yet addiction is stubborn. When the injections stopped, many in the study relapsed. A year later, relapse rates looked the same in the two groups.

“It does suggest six months wasn’t enough,” said Lee, the lead author.

T.J. Voller was a Vivitrol success story — until he wasn’t. After Vivitrol was approved by the FDA, Voller talked about getting the shot with The Associated Press and Dr. Sanjay Gupta in a CNN segment. The 30-year-old was back at work and seemed proud of his recovery. But after 10 months on Vivitrol, he died of a heroin overdose.

“He was alone for the weekend and picked up that needle one last time,” said his mother, Kathi Voller of Raynham, Massachusetts.

Advocates argue that inmates have a constitutional right to all FDA-approved addiction medications throughout their incarceration.

“Treatment should be offered from the moment they are brought into the system,” said Sally Friedman, legal director of the New York-based Legal Action Center, which is looking for a test case to bring to court.

Physicians have learned to be cautious about pharmaceutical company marketing, said Andrew Kolodny, senior scientist at the Heller School for Social Policy and Management at Brandeis University.

Not so for criminal justice officials, who may be too trusting, Kolodny said.

“When the drug company sends someone in to give them a talk and buy them pizza, they think they’re getting a scientific lecture,” he said.

Alkermes spokeswoman Jennifer Snyder said the company’s sales team helps educate corrections staff and community care providers only after they have shown interest in Vivitrol.

There’s widespread agreement that counseling, support groups and treatment for underlying problems such as depression are crucial for Vivitrol patients, said Dr. Joseph Garbely of Pennsylvania-based Caron Treatment Centers, which supports medication-assisted treatment and prefers Vivitrol.

“The disease of addiction is a cunning, baffling and powerful one,” Garbely said. “And you need all hands on deck.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The high cost of these regular injections is front and center in this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- When it comes to shedding pounds and improving or eliminating type 2 diabetes, gastric bypass surgery may be better than other surgical weight-loss procedures, two new studies find.

But obese patients should be careful to choose surgeons who have performed a high volume of these procedures before committing, said Dr. Guilherme M. Campos, lead author of one of two papers appearing in the February issue of the Archives of Surgery.

Gastric bypass and lap-banding are the two most common surgical weight-loss procedures performed in the United States. The former involves stapling the stomach so food has to bypass a section of the small intestine, meaning you get full faster and less food gets absorbed into the gut.

Lap-banding, introduced in 2001, involves separating the stomach into two sections with a band so, simply speaking, eating too much becomes more difficult. "It's a diet with a seatbelt," said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of bariatric surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City and Northern Westchester Hospital in Mt. Kisco, N.Y.

In a third type of weight-loss procedure, known as sleeve gastrectomy, surgeons remove part of the stomach.

The study led by Campos compared weight loss and diabetes outcomes in 100 patients who underwent gastric bypass surgery with 100 patients who underwent lap-banding. Gastric bypass is considered riskier and more technically demanding than the band.

All patients were morbidly obese (with a body-mass index higher than 40), and 34 in each group had type 2 diabetes.

Although Campos is now an associate professor of surgery at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison, he conducted the study while at the University of California, San Francisco.

In the bypass group, patients lost an average of 64 percent of their excess weight, vs. 36 percent for those in the lap-banding group. Three-quarters of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery saw their diabetes improve or resolve, vs. only half in the other group.

The average cost of a bariatric surgery is nearly $30,000, according to a recent study from Johns Hopkins University.

Like all surgeries, weight-loss surgery carries its own set of possible risks, including bleeding, blood clots, infection and leaks from sites where body tissues are sewn or stapled together, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Later complications may include malnutrition, hernias and a tendency in about one in 10 people to regain much of the weight they lost as a result of the procedure.

In Campos' study, roughly equal numbers of patients in each group experienced complications after one year (12 percent in the gastric bypass group compared to 15 percent in the lap-banding group); these included infection, internal bleeding and blood clots, but no deaths. More people in the bypass group had complications right after the surgery. More of those undergoing lap-banding, however, needed repeat surgeries (13 percent vs. 2 percent).

The second study, conducted in Taiwan and led by Dr. Wei-Jei Lee of the Min-Sheng General Hospital, involved randomly assigning 60 obese (but not morbidly obese) patients with type 2 diabetes to receive gastric bypass surgery or sleeve gastrectomy.

Almost all of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery (93 percent) had their diabetes resolved, vs. only half in the other group (these numbers declined to 57 percent and 0 percent after a year).

Those in the gastric bypass group also lost more weight, and there were no serious complications in either group.

There are various theories to explain why gastric bypass may be superior, including one that attributes the success to changes in hormones that control the metabolism of blood sugar.

And certain procedures may still be preferable for certain patient populations, added Roslin, such as bands for patients with lower BMI who don't have so many metabolic challenges.

"Everyone thinks that all weight-loss operations are the same, even the doctors and the surgeons. [But] they're different, and they have different resolutions of comorbidities and probably should be used for different indications," he said.

An editorial accompanying the studies noted the results should be interpreted with caution since longer-term data is not yet available.

Visit the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery for more on weight-loss procedures.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that the average cost of weight loss surgery is about $30,000. It would have been helpful to include a comparison of the different procedures discussed in the story, but this is good enough.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But the drug works best when given every four weeks, which can be inconvenient for patients and doctors. Doctors often give Lucentis less frequently, but even if that regimen produces good results, patients must still get checkups every month to make sure their vision is not deteriorating.

Regeneron’s drug, which is called VEGF Trap-Eye, “gives us the opportunity to not have to see them monthly,” said Dr. Jeffrey Heier of Boston, an investigator in one of the trials and a consultant to Regeneron. That would be “very meaningful to patients and their families,” he said.

Regeneron and its partner, Bayer, said they planned to apply for approval of the drug in the first half of 2011.

The two similar trials involved a total of 2,457 patients who were randomly chosen to receive either Lucentis every four weeks or VEGF Trap-Eye either every four weeks or every eight weeks. In the eight-week arm, the first three doses were given every four weeks.

After a year, roughly 95 percent of the patients in all the arms of the trial maintained their vision, meaning their ability to read an eye chart declined by no more than 15 letters, or three lines.

VEGF Trap-Eye was also “noninferior” to Lucentis in terms of the average change in vision after one year. Lucentis recipients had a mean gain of 8.1 letters and 9.4 letters in the two trials. Those getting Regeneron’s drug every eight weeks had gains of 7.9 letters and 8.9 letters.

Regeneron said the two drugs were equally safe.

Both VEGF Trap-Eye and Lucentis block a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor that causes blood vessels to grow and leak into the eye.

VEGF Trap-Eye could become the first big product for Regeneron, which was founded in 1988 and is based in Tarrytown, N.Y. It sells one drug for a rare disease and has garnered hundreds of millions of dollars from licensing deals with big pharmaceutical companies.

Regeneron’s drug is likely to face competition from off-label use of Genentech’s cancer drug Avastin. When used in the eye, Avastin costs about $50 a dose, compared with about $2,000 for Lucentis. Still, even with such low-priced competition, Lucentis has sales exceeding $2 billion globally.

Meanwhile, Advanced Cell Technology, of Marlborough, Mass., said it would test its stem cell therapy on 12 adults with severe vision loss caused by Stargardt’s, an inherited disease.

The company has turned human embryonic stem cells into retinal pigment epithelial cells, which will be surgically implanted into the eye. The hope is that the implanted cells will replace those injured by the disease.

Human embryonic stem cells are controversial because their creation usually entails the destruction of human embryos, although Advanced Cell Technology is working on a technique to avoid that.

Embryonic cells can also form tumors if injected into the body. Dr. Robert Lanza, chief scientist at Advanced Cell, said the company had to prove to the F.D.A. that its retinal cells contained virtually no residual embryonic stem cells. It took a year for the company to get clearance for the trial from the F.D.A.

It is likely to be several years before such a treatment can reach the market, if it works. Still, even starting the trial could be a boost to Advanced Cell, which often makes headlines but has struggled to raise money. Its shares closed at 5 cents on Friday.

Dr. Peter J. Francis, an associate professor at the Oregon Health and Science University, which will be a site for the trial, says the eye is a good place to test stem cell therapy because it is accessible. Also, he said, there is less chance of rejection of the implanted cells because the eye is shielded somewhat from the body’s immune system.

There is no treatment for Stargardt’s, which affects more than 25,000 people in the United States. The disease is usually diagnosed during childhood and it causes a loss of central vision, though not usually peripheral vision.

Ryan Rapoport of Newcastle, Wash., who has the disease, “basically went from normal vision to legally blind in seven months,” said his father, Darrin.

Ryan, now 10, cannot be in the trial because, for safety reasons, it is confined to adults. Still, Mr. Rapoport said, “It gives us some hope, because up until recently there was no hope.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention the cost per dose of two competing drugs, Lucentis and Avastin (which are actually two different formulations of the same drug that are made by the same company, Genentech). Lucentis is the version of the drug meant for the eye, whereas Avastin is approved and sold as a cancer treatment. However, doctors can use Avastin off-label in the eye with much smaller doses than cancer patients need. The result is that the cost per dose is vastly lower for Avastin than it is for Lucentis. A head-to-head trial of Avastin and Lucentis is now underway that will probably have important implications for pricing and prescribing of these drugs. (If Avastin works just as well as Lucentis, more doctors will presumably switch to it at much lower cost to patients.) Moreover, allegations have surfaced recently that Genentech is providing questionable financial inducements for doctors to use the more costly Lucentis instead of Avastin. Given the significance of these developments for anyone who needs or may need treatment for AMD, we feel the story could have and probably should have gone into a bit more detail about why these two drugs have such wildly different costs.
We also think that if the story is interviewing a company about its plans to seek marketing approval in just a few months, they certainly could get some kind of pricing estimate from them. Nevertheless, by at least mentioning costs, the story accomplishes more than most other health articles that we review and does enough to satisfy the minimum for this criterion. We’ll award a satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are We Overselling The Sunshine Vitamin?

Dr. Cliff Rosen of Portland, Maine, knows a lot about vitamin D. It's necessary for strong bones, and Rosen is a leading bone specialist. So he was surprised recently when his wife's new physician thought she might be deficient in vitamin D.

"She's a runner. She's in great shape," Rosen says. "She drinks dairy. She gets a lot of sun exposure." Sun exposure is key for vitamin D, known as the sunshine vitamin. When skin is exposed to sun, it makes vitamin D.

Still, the doctor wanted to run a blood test to see if Rebecca Rosen had adequate vitamin D.

"So my wife said, 'Well, why do I need to have a vitamin D [test]?' And the physician said, 'Well, that's part of our measurement for wellness.' "

It's not just Rebecca's doctor, and it's not just in Portland, Maine. Increasingly, doctors all over the country are convinced that checking patients' vitamin D levels is as important as monitoring their cholesterol.

Medicare payments for vitamin D testing, at $40 a pop, nearly quadrupled between 2006 and 2008, to $129 million. A decade ago, Medicare payments were only about $1 million. The figures for 2009 and this year are bound to be higher.

"There's overwhelming evidence ... that increasing your vitamin D intake can make substantial improvement in your overall health and welfare," says Dr. Michael Holick of Boston University. "And there is no downside to increasing your vitamin D intake. As a result I think that most people are now getting on the bandwagon."

Holick is leading the band. Forty years ago, he discovered the active form of the vitamin, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. He has written several popular books on the subject and has another one, The Vitamin D Solution, coming out next month. Its cover calls vitamin D deficiency "our most common health problem."

"In my opinion, everybody should be taking either a vitamin D supplement, take a prescription that the doctor recommends," Holick says. "All adults should be taking at least 1,000 to 1,500 international units a day." Dietary intake, mainly through sources such as vitamin D-fortified dairy products and juice, may add up to 200 to 400 units a day.

Holick is convinced that if people boost their vitamin D levels, they'll be substantially less likely to develop not only osteoporosis but also many types of cancer, heart attack, diabetes (both types), autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer's, autism, even tuberculosis and the flu.

Not so fast, other experts say.

Dr. JoAnn Manson, chief of preventive medicine at Harvard-affiliated Brigham and Women's Hospital, points out that nearly all of the proliferating studies involving vitamin D are what scientists call "observational." That is, they compare people with high and low levels of vitamin D and correlate those levels with whether or not the person has a disease.

But these studies, she points out, are fraught with possible error. People with higher vitamin D levels may be healthier because they exercise more, have better diets, are out in the sun more. Those who are sick may have low levels because they don't have those healthy habits.

"We don't yet have the large-scale, randomized clinical trials showing benefits in terms of prevention of cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, hypertension, cognitive decline, depression, autoimmune disease," Manson says.

Manson and her colleagues are launching such a trial. The National Institutes of Health is devoting $22 million for a five-year study. Twenty-thousand people across the country will be randomly assigned to take daily doses of vitamin D, omega-3 fatty acid — also linked in many studies to lower levels of heart disease — together or alone. Others will be assigned to take inert placebo pills. Neither study subjects nor investigators will know until the end which regimen they are on.

'Promising But Not Yet Proven'

Manson says she thinks there is promising evidence that vitamin D supplements may protect against heart disease and perhaps some cancers. The evidence is strongest for colorectal cancer, she says. The fact that the government is funding the study is an indicator that the idea has traction.

Until those results are in, Manson advises patients and doctors to view vitamin D claims as "promising but not yet proven."

"We need to keep in mind the lessons of history," she says. "It was believed that megadoses of vitamin E, beta-carotene, selenium, folic acid and the B vitamins would confer a large array of health benefits. And in fact, the trials were very disappointing for all those nutrients."

In the case of beta-carotene, scientists were surprised to find that when the results of randomized trials were in, those taking the supplement actually had a higher risk of lung cancer.

Holick and others say there is little or no downside to ingesting even high levels of vitamin D.

"I've been treating patients with 50,000 units of vitamin D once a week for eight weeks followed by 50,00 every other week for over a decade, and I've not seen any untoward toxicity," Holick says.

He says he has seen dramatic results in patients he has treated with vitamin D supplements for disorders such as fibromyalgia, involving generalized muscular aches and pains, and multiple sclerosis. He is convinced that the vitamin D supplements lower patients' risk of cancer and heart disease, although he acknowledges that's harder to show.

How Much Is Enough?

Holick himself takes 3,000 international units of vitamin D every day.

Set by the National Institute of Medicine in 1997, the current recommended intake is 400 units a day for adults ages 50 to 70, and 200 units a day for younger adults. The American Academy of Pediatrics currently recommends 400 units a day for infants.

The recommendations may change soon. An Institute of Medicine panel is working on a vitamin D update, which may come out this summer. The panel may raise the Dietary Reference Intake, which has replaced the old Recommended Dietary Allowance. But the group is not expected to embrace the newer claims being made for vitamin D supplementation.

The Institute of Medicine panel has a difficult task. "We don't know exactly where to draw the line in terms of calling someone deficient in vitamin D," says Manson, who is a member of the committee, as is Rosen, the Maine bone specialist.

Meanwhile, an increasing number of patients are getting their vitamin D levels tested, and more are being told they need to take supplements.

"I've been surprised at the number of patients who are significantly vitamin D deficient," says Dr. Elizabeth Ross, a cardiologist in Washington, D.C., who has been testing patients routinely for the past year. "Whether or not we'll affect the incidence of cardiovascular disease or other diseases remains to be seen. But it appears to be a relatively benign intervention, and we may be benefiting people."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The cost of testing for vitamin D levels was provided.  No information about the costs of vitamin D supplements, but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this one. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers report that nearly half of the cases of prostate cancer among the roughly 5,000 men in the study could be attributed to the five gene regions and a family history, with some men having one or two of the gene variants and others having all five and a family history.

Prostate cancer becomes more common as men age — autopsies of elderly men find that most had prostate cancer, whether they knew it or not. But the men in this study had an average age of about 65, when the disease is less common and more likely to kill.

William B. Isaacs, a professor of urology and oncology at Johns Hopkins University and an author of the new report, said that if research validates what has been found, men may want to get the new genetic test when they are young, 35, say. Those at high risk because of their genetics might then choose to start prostate-cancer screening earlier than the usual age of about 50, using a blood test that looks for proteins secreted by prostate tumors.

“I think that makes sense,” said Dr. Howard Sandler, a professor of radiation oncology at the University of Michigan and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

But others worry that more frequent testing could exacerbate what is already a major problem: most prostate cancers grow so slowly that they would have been harmless if left alone. But since doctors cannot tell which are dangerous, they treat nearly all that they find. And treatment has serious side effects, including, often, impotence and incontinence. Nonetheless, researchers say, the test is a harbinger of things to come.

“It’s the boutique medicine of the future,” said Dr. Peter C. Albertsen, a surgery professor and prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut. “We can know what diseases we will have to face in the rest of our lives.”

That worries him, as it does Dr. Edward P. Gelmann, deputy director of the Comprehensive Cancer Center at Columbia University. “Technology today enables us to find out a huge amount of information,” Dr. Gelmann said. “But how does the public deal with this information? How does it help them make decisions? And if they make a decision, does that lead to a day, a week, a month, of life saved?”

The study, by scientists at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, the Harvard School of Public Health, and Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, will appear in the Feb. 28 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine. It was released online on Wednesday, a journal spokeswoman said, because “it is a very active area of research with a lot of competition.”

Researchers long knew that the disease often runs in families. Though scientists spent years looking for genes, they found none that were reproducibly associated with a marked effect.

With new technology to scan the entire length of a person’s DNA, researchers tried a new approach. They began looking for small variations in tiny DNA regions that were associated with prostate cancer. That resulted in the discovery, by several groups of investigators in Iceland and the United States, of the gene variants, small alterations in gene sequences. Unlike traditional genetic links to disease, the variants are not mutations that destroy a gene’s function. In fact, no one knows what their effect is.

The next step was to ask whether those variants really could predict who had prostate cancer. So Dr. Jianfeng Xu, a professor of epidemiology and cancer biology at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and his colleagues studied a Swedish population of 2,893 men with prostate cancer and 1,781 men who did not have it. That led to their finding that each of the five variants independently predicted prostate cancer risk.

“Each confers a moderate risk,” Dr. Xu said, adding that the effect of having just one of the variants — a 10 or 20 percent increase in a man’s chance of having prostate cancer — was not enough to justify using a single variant for screening. But, he added, because each conferred an independent risk, the risks added up so that the more men had, the greater their risk. Then they found that family history of the cancer added an independent risk. “That was very, very surprising to us,” Dr. Xu said.

The next step, Dr. Isaacs said, is to look in other populations. “We think that can happen almost instantaneously,” he said, explaining how scientists have blood samples and family histories of thousands of men who were tested for prostate cancer.

But some said that if the test leads to more screening, it is not necessarily a good thing. There is already too much prostate-cancer screening, they say, resulting in too much treatment. “To me, it is a nightmare,” Dr. Albertsen said. “We are just feeding off of this cancer phobia.”

What is needed, and what the new test does not provide, is a way to decide which cancers are dangerous and which are not, Dr. Isaacs said. Still, he said the new test could help patients if it was used with caution. “We may be premature with this idea — everyone has a different way of thinking about this — but it should not take five years to know if we are on the right track. All this can happen very rapidly.”

“We have worked with enough families that have a positive family history to know that people are anxious to know their risk of prostate cancer,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story included a cost for the test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The test has the potential to help curb overtreatment in cancer care.

A new genetic test to gauge the aggressiveness of prostate cancer may help tens of thousands of men each year decide whether they need to treat their cancer right away or can safely monitor it.

The new test, which goes on sale Wednesday, joins another one that recently came on the market. Both analyze multiple genes in a biopsy sample and give a score for aggressiveness, similar to tests used now for certain breast and colon cancers.

Doctors say tests like these have the potential to curb a major problem in cancer care — overtreatment. Prostate tumors usually grow so slowly they will never threaten a man's life, but some prove fatal and there is no reliable way now to tell which ones will. Treatment with surgery, radiation or hormone blockers isn't needed in most cases and can cause impotence or incontinence, yet most men are afraid to skip it.

"We're not giving patients enough information to make their decision," said Dr. Peter Carroll, chairman of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. "You can shop for a toaster" better than for prostate treatment, he said.

A study he led of the newest test — the Oncotype DX Genomic Prostate Score — is set for discussion Wednesday at an American Urological Association meeting in San Diego.

The results suggest the test could triple the number of men thought to be at such low risk for aggressive disease that monitoring is a clearly safe option. Conversely, the test also suggested some tumors were more aggressive than doctors had believed.

Independent experts say such a test is desperately needed but that it's unclear how much information this one adds or whether it will be enough to persuade men with low-risk tumors to forgo treatment, and treat it only if it gets worse. Only 10 percent who are candidates for monitoring choose it now.

"The question is, what's the magnitude of difference that would change the patient's mind?" said Dr. Bruce Roth, a cancer specialist at Washington University in St. Louis.

One man may view a 15 percent chance that his tumor is aggressive as low risk "but someone else might say, 'Oh my God, let's set the surgery up tomorrow,'" he said. "I don't think it's a slam dunk."

Also unknown: Will insurers pay for the expensive test without evidence it leads to better care or saves lives?

The newest test was developed by Genomic Health Inc., which has sold a similar one for breast cancer since 2004. Doctors at first were leery of it until studies in more groups of women proved its value, and the same may happen with the prostate test, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, the American Cancer Society's deputy chief medical officer.

The company will charge $3,820 for the prostate test and says it can save money by avoiding costlier, unnecessary treatment. Another test for assessing prostate cancer risk that came out last summer — Prolaris by Myriad Genetics Inc. — sells for $3,400.

Both companies can sell the tests without Food and Drug Administration approval under separate rules that govern lab diagnostics. Myriad Genetics has published nine studies on Prolaris involving more than 3,000 patients. Genomic Health has not published any results on the prostate test, another thing that makes doctors wary. Yet it has a track record from its breast cancer test.

About 240,000 men in the U.S. are diagnosed with prostate cancer each year, and about half are classified as low risk using current methods. Doctors now base risk estimates on factors such as a man's age and how aggressive cells look from biopsies that give 12 to 14 tissue samples. But tumors often are spread out and vary from one spot to the other.

"Unless you can be sure your biopsy has hit the most aggressive part that's in the prostate, you can't be sure" how accurate your risk estimate is, explained Dr. Eric Klein, chief of urology at the Cleveland Clinic, who led early development of the Oncotype prostate cancer test.

For one study, researchers used prostates removed from 440 men. They measured the activity of hundreds of genes thought to be involved in whether the cancer spread beyond the prostate or proved fatal. A second study of biopsies from 167 patients narrowed it down to 81 genes, and researchers picked 17 that seemed to predict aggressiveness no matter the location in the tumor.

A third study used single needle-biopsy samples from 395 UCSF patients scheduled to have their prostates removed. The gene test accurately predicted the aggressiveness of their cancer once doctors were able to see the whole prostate after surgery.

Using one current method, 37 of the 395 men would have been called very low risk and good candidates for monitoring. Adding the gene test put 100 men into that category, said another study leader, Dr. Matthew Cooperberg of UCSF. The gene test shifted about half of the men into either a lower or a higher risk category.

"It went both ways — that was the remarkable thing. In any category of risk it added independent information compared to the standard criteria we use today," Carroll said. "More work needs to be done, but, in my opinion, this is a very good start."

However, Dr. Kevin McVary, chairman of urology at Southern Illinois University School of Medicine and a spokesman for the Urological Association, said the test must be validated in more men before it can be widely used.

"It's not there yet," he said.

UCSF just got a federal grant to see how men choose treatments and whether this test might sway them.

"We throw all these numbers at them. Are they really going to make a better decision?" Cooperberg said.

Dean Smith, 60, a retired marketing executive from Mill Valley, Calif., is following his doctor's advice to monitor the cancer he was diagnosed with in March. He said a gene test may have made him more comfortable with that decision.

At least six of his friends suffered side effects ranging from urinary leakage to inability to have sex after having their prostates removed.

"I would suspect that having cancer and having to live with it would be very difficult for them," but it doesn't bother him, Smith said. "I will die from something other than prostate cancer, I guarantee you."

Copyright 2013 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The cost of the new test – and of one that recently came on the market – were listed (> $3,000 each). And the story explained it’s not known if insurers will pay for the tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Experts have known for some time that light therapy can improve the mood of people who feel especially down when the days get shorter and gloomier. But now a study has found that light therapy also works in treating non-seasonal depression.

The research, published Wednesday in JAMA Psychiatry, is significant because major depression is one of the most common mental health disorders in the United States and one of the leading causes of disability worldwide.

Light therapy is cheap, easy to use and comes with few side effects compared to medication such as antidepressants, said lead author Raymond Lam, a professor of psychiatry at the University of British Columbia.

Previous research on light therapy for non-seasonal depression has been limited. This study "shows a new, proven-safe treatment of depression that is probably both more effective and less expensive than drug treatment or anything else," said Dan Kripke, a psychiatrist and professor emeritus at the University of California, San Diego, who has studied the topic but was not involved in the latest trial.

[It's 3 a.m. and you're depressed. How technology is transforming mental health care.]

The researchers said enough clinical evidence now supports mental health professionals recommending light therapy as a treatment for depression. Most people typically receive medication and psychotherapy — but medications don't work in all cases and there's a shortage of providers in many areas.

[Why it's so hard to find a mental health professional ]

Lam and his colleagues followed 122 patients and evaluated whether light therapy improved their mood when it was used both with and without fluoxetine, or Prozac, a commonly prescribed antidepressant. Over eight weeks, participants were exposed daily to 30 minutes from a fluorescent light box soon after waking up. Some participants were instead given placebo pills and placebo devices.

Although the light therapy helped many patients, it provided the most benefit to those who were also taking the antidepressant. About 60 percent of those using light therapy with the antidepressant reported feeling almost back to normal, Lam said.

Researchers have two main theories on why light therapy works. One is that it affects the biological clock in the brain. There's some evidence that depression, like jet lag, occurs when the biological clock is out of sync, and light helps to correct that, Lam said.

Light is also believed to affect neurotransmitters in the brain. Those are considered important for the development of depression and are the targets of most antidepressant medications.

Women more likely to have serious mental health problems than men, study says

NIH's mental health chief on why he's leaving for Google: Technology may hold key to better diagnosis

Most Americans will get a wrong diagnosis at least once in their lives
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story squeaks by on this with mention that light therapy is “cheap” and easy to use. We would have preferred some numbers giving prices for the light sources that patients typically use at home and some estimate for a therapeutic course of psychotherapy (which is often provided in combination with light therapy).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new scan to help in difficult-to-diagnose cases of Parkinson's disease or other parkinsonian syndromes is available at more than 80 U.S. hospitals, including some in the Chicago area, since receiving federal approval earlier this year.

During the DaTscan test, an imaging drug is injected into a patient's bloodstream and the patient undergoes a single-photon emission computed tomography, or SPECT, scan. Patients with Parkinson's disease or other parkinsonian syndromes have scans that show low levels of dopamine, the neurotransmitter critical in controlling movement and other muscle functions.

In cases where a diagnosis isn't necessarily clear-cut, the DaTscan offers important advances in patient care and treatment, said Dr. Michael Rezak, director of the Movement Disorders Center at Central DuPage Hospital, where the scan is offered.

"DaTscan is used in difficult-to-diagnose cases and must be used in conjunction with a clinical evaluation and a patient's response to medications," Rezak said. "The earlier we get treatment started, the better. Before DaTscan we would watch and wait because there were no other objective tests to use. Now we can get a diagnosis sooner."

The DaTscan injection was first used in Europe a decade ago, and GE Healthcare made it available to U.S. hospitals in late June. It is the first "radiopharmaceutical adjunct imaging agent" approved by the Food and Drug Administration that helps physicians better evaluate patients who are thought to have Parkinson's disease or other parkinsonian syndromes.

Approval of DaTscan followed two Phase 3 clinical trials in which 284 adult patients with tremors were studied. During an FDA advisory panel meeting, committee members were mostly positive about DaTscan, though one neurologist objected to the average $1,500 cost of a scan versus $150 for a month's supply of carbidopa or levodopa medications for a Parkinson's patient, according to Medscape Medical News.

"I was thrilled there was something that could positively tell me I had Parkinson's because everybody had guessed what I had," said Ray Ramas, 56, who in June became the first patient at Central DuPage to undergo the scan.

Before the test, Ramas, of West Chicago, experienced two years of uncertainty about his health as several specialists tried to pinpoint the cause of his joint and tendon pain, fatigue, stiffness in his legs and lack of bladder control. Eventually he developed a tremor in his right arm.

His doctor said he might have fibromyalgia and sent him to a rheumatologist. Another specialist said his symptoms suggested parkinsonian syndrome, caused by various neurodegenerative disorders that share some features of Parkinson's. "Another doctor ... wanted me to see a psychiatrist because he thought my symptoms were all in my head," Ramas recalled.

By March, Ramas could hardly walk. He visited the emergency room at Central DuPage, where he was sent to Rezak, who told him about DaTscan.

"I lay on a table, got an injection and the procedure took about 20 minutes. It was like getting my blood drawn," he said. In two days, Ramas found out he had Parkinson's disease.

"Many patients are gratified to know what they're dealing with. It allows them to accept treatment earlier," Rezak said. Since June, 25 men and women of all ages have been tested with DaTscan at Central DuPage, Rezak said.

Northwestern Memorial Hospital has used DaTscan since October 2010 as part of a multicenter trial study, said Dr. William Spies, associate director of nuclear medicine at Northwestern.

As part of the study, recently diagnosed Parkinson's patients and healthy subjects are tested with DaTscan, and clinical and behavioral assessments are done to identify biomarkers of Parkinson's disease progression.

DaTscan was first used at the University of Chicago Medical Center in August on a 75-year-old male patient who exhibited essential tremors, parkinsonian syndrome and some rigidity and slowness, said Dr. Tao Xie, assistant professor of neurology at the Medical Center's Center for Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders.

"In the past, we would have had to wait to diagnose Parkinson's or chosen different medications to test, which might have had different side effects, and this would have delayed the timely diagnosis of Parkinson's," Xie said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


Yes, the story reports that a DaTscan costs about $1500. Oddly, instead of reporting what the hospitals featured in the story charge for a scan, the story attributes the price estimate to a quote taken from an article by Medscape Medical News. But there is a much higher price listed on the web site of the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, which estimates a DaTscan costs almost $3000. Still, because the story does address cost we will give it credit on this criterion.

Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research page on DaTscan:
http://www.michaeljfox.org/newsEvents_parkinsonsInTheNews_article.cfm?ID=694
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Physicians should consider blood testing of female adolescents for iron deficiency within a few years of starting menses, according to two studies by Penn State College of Medicine researchers.

The researchers used data from more than 6,000 women 12 to 49 years old who took part in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) between 2003 and 2010. As part of the survey, female participants had blood testing for iron deficiency as well as hemoglobin testing to identify anemia.

Women are typically tested some time in their teens for anemia -- the severe form of iron deficiency -- using a quick and affordable hemoglobin test. However, iron deficiency can develop years before anemia and can be missed by hemoglobin testing alone.

"If you think about your car, you have to run your gas tank all the way down before the red light goes on, and that's similar to the way we're screening for iron deficiency," said Deepa L. Sekhar, physician and associate professor of pediatrics. "We're basically waiting until their red light goes on. You have to be really low on your iron storage before you're going to flag as anemic."

Iron deficiency without anemia has been associated with lower standardized math scores, attention deficit disorder and restless leg syndrome in children and adolescents. Among iron-deficient adolescent women there is a future risk of maternal iron deficiency and negative effects on infant health.

Blood tests for iron deficiency without anemia have been developed but they are more costly and difficult to obtain in the doctor's office compared to hemoglobin testing for anemia. Sekhar and colleagues hoped to determine risk factors for iron deficiency without anemia that could pinpoint which women could benefit most from this more costly testing.

In the first study, when the researchers analyzed the NHANES study data, 9 percent of females who were 12 to 21 years old had iron deficiency without anemia. The researchers then looked at potential iron deficiency risk factors in this group, including the age when they started menstruating, as well as their race and ethnicity, poverty status, food insecurity, tobacco or nicotine use, dietary information, body mass index (BMI) and physical activity.

All of these factors have been associated with iron deficiency anemia in women in prior studies. However, the only risk factor significantly associated with iron deficiency without anemia in young women in this study was having had a period for more than three years. The research was recently published in the journal PLOS ONE.

In a second study, the researchers next looked at whether a specially developed questionnaire could better predict iron status. Questions were included on depression, poor attention and daytime sleepiness, symptoms which all have been associated with iron deficiency or iron deficiency anemia, but were not captured in the prior NHANES analyses. This questionnaire was compared to the currently recommended four iron deficiency anemia-risk questions in the Bright Futures Adolescent Previsit Questionnaire, a survey recommended for physician use by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

Ninety-six female adolescents participated in this study, published in The Journal of Pediatrics. The Bright Futures questions alone did not predict iron deficiency or anemia. Yet, the researchers' risk assessment questionnaire was equally poor.

Taken together, the studies suggest that risk factors and assessments should not be used to determine which young women should receive testing for iron deficiency.

"The questions aren't predictive," Sekhar said. "I think we need to establish the optimal timing for an objective assessment of adolescent iron deficiency and anemia."

Sekhar believes the appropriate age may be 16 years old, when most females will have been menstruating for at least three years.

In addition to timing, further research will be needed to determine which blood test for iron deficiency without anemia is accurate, cost-efficient and practical for routine doctor's office use. This test should be given with hemoglobin testing to catch all young women on the spectrum of iron deficiency, Sekhar said.

Iron deficiency can be corrected with dietary changes and supplementation, Sekhar added.

Other researchers on the study in PLOS ONE were Laura E. Murray-Kolb, in the Department of Nutritional Sciences, Allen R. Kunselman in the Department of Public Health Sciences, Carol S. Weisman in the Departments of Public Health Sciences and Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Ian M. Paul in the Departments of Pediatrics and Public Health Sciences, all at Penn State.

This research received $62,500 of federal funding from The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health (grant number K12HD055882), which funded 100 percent of the project.

Murray-Kolb and Paul also worked on the study in The Journal of Pediatrics, along with Eric W. Schaefer, a biostatistician in the Department of Public Health Sciences. Non-government funding from Sackler Institute for Nutrition Science of the New York Academy of Sciences provided 100 percent of funding for this research project.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that existing hemoglobin tests are affordable, but that screening for iron-deficiency below the level of anemia can be costly. This squeaks by as discussing “costs” but we wish figures had been offered. Is affordable $2 or $20? Is costly $100 or $500? Numbers would help readers better understand the cost implications of screening.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She is among just a dozen patients with advanced leukemia to have received the experimental treatment, which was developed at the University of Pennsylvania. Similar approaches are also being tried at other centers, including the and in New York.

“Our goal is to have a cure, but we can’t say that word,” said Dr. Carl June, who leads the research team at the University of Pennsylvania. He hopes the new treatment will eventually replace bone-marrow transplantation, an even more arduous, risky and expensive procedure that is now the last hope when other treatments fail in leukemia and related diseases.

Three adults with chronic leukemia treated at the University of Pennsylvania have also had complete remissions, with no signs of disease; two of them have been well for more than two years, said Dr. David Porter. Four adults improved but did not have full remissions, and one was treated too recently to evaluate. A child improved and then relapsed. In two adults, the treatment did not work at all. The researchers were presenting their results on Sunday and Monday in at a meeting of the American Society of Hematology.

Despite the mixed results, cancer experts not involved with the research say it has tremendous promise, because even in this early phase of testing it has worked in seemingly hopeless cases. “I think this is a major breakthrough,” said Dr. Ivan Borrello, a cancer expert and associate professor of medicine at the School of Medicine.

Dr. John Wagner, the director of pediatric blood and marrow transplantation at the , called the Pennsylvania results “phenomenal” and said they were “what we’ve all been working and hoping for but not seeing to this extent.”

A major drug company, , is betting on the Pennsylvania team and has committed $20 million to building a research center on the university’s campus to bring the treatment to market.

Hervé Hoppenot, the president of Novartis Oncology, called the research “fantastic” and said it had the potential — if the early results held up — to revolutionize the treatment of leukemia and related blood cancers. Researchers say the same approach, reprogramming the patient’s immune system, may also eventually be used against like breast and .

To perform the treatment, doctors remove millions of the patient’s T-cells — a type of white blood cell — and insert new genes that enable the T-cells to kill cancer cells. The technique employs a disabled form of H.I.V. because it is very good at carrying genetic material into T-cells. The new genes program the T-cells to attack B-cells, a normal part of the immune system that turn malignant in leukemia.

The altered T-cells — called chimeric antigen receptor cells — are then dripped back into the patient’s veins, and if all goes well they multiply and start destroying the cancer.

The T-cells home in on a protein called CD-19 that is found on the surface of most B-cells, whether they are healthy or malignant.

A sign that the treatment is working is that the patient becomes terribly ill, with raging fevers and chills — a reaction that oncologists call “shake and bake,” Dr. June said. Its medical name is cytokine-release syndrome, or cytokine storm, referring to the natural chemicals that pour out of cells in the immune system as they are being activated, causing fevers and other symptoms. The storm can also flood the lungs and cause perilous drops in — effects that nearly killed Emma.

Steroids sometimes ease the reaction, but they did not help Emma. Her temperature hit 105. She wound up on a ventilator, unconscious and swollen almost beyond recognition, surrounded by friends and family who had come to say goodbye.

But at the 11th hour, a battery of blood tests gave the researchers a clue as to what might help save Emma: her level of one of the cytokines, interleukin-6 or IL-6, had shot up a thousandfold. Doctors had never seen such a spike before and thought it might be what was making her so sick.

Dr. June knew that a drug could lower IL-6 — his daughter takes it for . It had never been used for a crisis like Emma’s, but there was little to lose. Her oncologist, Dr. Stephan A. Grupp, ordered the drug. The response, he said, was “amazing.”

Within hours, Emma began to stabilize. She woke up a week later, on May 2, the day she turned 7; the intensive-care staff sang

Since then, the research team has used the same drug, tocilizumab, in several other patients.

In patients with lasting remissions after the treatment, the altered T-cells persist in the bloodstream, though in smaller numbers than when they were fighting the disease. Some patients have had the cells for years.

Dr. Michel Sadelain, who conducts similar studies at the Sloan-Kettering Institute, said: “These T-cells are living drugs. With a pill, you take it, it’s eliminated from your body and you have to take it again.” But T-cells, he said, “could potentially be given only once, maybe only once or twice or three times.”

The Pennsylvania researchers said they were surprised to find any big drug company interested in their work, because a new batch of T-cells must be created for each patient — a far cry from the familiar commercial strategy of developing products like or medicines, in which millions of people take the same drug.

But Mr. Hoppenot said Novartis was taking a different path with cancer drugs, looking for treatments that would have a big, unmistakable impact on a small number of patients. Such home-run drugs can be approved more quickly and efficiently, he said, with smaller studies than are needed for drugs with less obvious benefits.

But such drugs tend to be extremely expensive. A prime example is the Novartis drug Gleevec, which won rapid approval in 2001 for use against certain types of leukemia and gastrointestinal tumors. It can cost more than $5,000 a month, depending on the dosage.

Dr. June said that producing engineered T-cells costs about $20,000 per patient — far less than the cost of a bone-marrow transplant. Scaling up the procedure should make it even less expensive, he said, but he added, “Our costs do not include any profit margin, facility depreciation costs or other clinical care costs, and other research costs.”

The research is still in its early stages, and many questions remain. The researchers are not entirely sure why the treatment works, or why it sometimes fails. One patient had a remission after being treated only twice, and even then the reaction was so delayed that it took the researchers by surprise. For the patients who had no response whatsoever, the team suspects a flawed batch of T-cells. The child who had a temporary remission apparently relapsed because not all of her leukemic cells had the marker that was targeted by the altered T-cells.

It is not clear whether a patient’s body needs the altered T-cells forever. The cells do have a drawback: they destroy healthy B-cells as well as cancerous ones, leaving patients vulnerable to certain types of infections, so Emma and the other patients need regular treatments with immune globulins to prevent illness.

So far, her parents say, Emma seems to have taken it all in stride. She went back to school this year with her second-grade classmates, and though her grades are high and she reads about 50 books a month, she insists impishly that her favorite subjects are lunch and recess.

“It’s time for her to be a kid again and get her childhood back,” Mr. Whitehead said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The study addresses costs nicely, noting that any commercial treatment resulting from this research will probably be very expensive. It notes that other targeted cancer treatments cost more than $5,000 a month. And it provides the estimate of experimental cost ($20K per patient).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Restaurants, office parties, potlucks, meals while traveling -- they're a minefield for people with celiac disease and gluten sensitivity who can suffer from stomach pain and upset, swollen joints, and other debilitating health problems when they ingest even a little bit of gluten.

The maker of a new handheld gluten-detecting device hopes to help make eating outside of a gluten-sensitive individual's own kitchen safer and easier.

The company, 6SensorLabs, has started taking pre-orders for the device it calls Nima, which can test food for gluten and get rapid results, said co-founder and chief technology officer Scott Sundvor.

Nima is not FDA-approved and it's not intended for medical use, but the company intends it as a "consumer" tool to use when dining out, Sundvor said.

"One of the things that we wanted to make sure we distinguish is that we don't see ourselves as a medical device," Sundvor told CBS News. "So we do not need FDA clearance for the device because we are not using it to diagnose or manage disease. We're simply providing a product to help people know what's in their food and guide their habits."

Gluten-free diners can place a sample of food into a capsule or "test pod" and then insert the capsule into a black, triangular device that basically acts like a mini chemistry test. In about two minutes, Sundvor said Nima can tell if the food sample has 20 parts per million or more of gluten. A smiley face means it's OK; a frowning face means it doesn't pass muster.

As a point of reference, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration requires manufacturers who choose to put a "gluten free" label on food packaging to meet the same 20 parts per million of gluten standard.

Gluten is a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. People with celiac disease experience an immune reaction when they eat gluten that can lead to intestinal damage and impact the health of other organs if it's not managed well. It can cause stomach pain, a swollen belly, acid reflux, diarrhea, skin problems, and other symptoms.

The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases estimates that about 1 in 141 Americans has celiac disease, but many people don't know they have the condition. Gluten-sensitive people experience similar symptoms to those with celiac disease and improve when they eliminate gluten from their diets.

Nima is triangular and relatively dainty, about three and a half inches tall by three inches wide, and a little less than an inch thick. "Small enough to fit into your pocket along with your keys and mobile phone or a small clutch," said Sundvor.

Nima was first conceived when Sundvor and company co-founder Shireen Yates met about two years ago and realized they both had gluten intolerance and other food issues.

"We met at MIT through mutual friends. She was getting her MBA and I'd gotten my engineering degree from there. We had this shared experience; Shireen has several food allergies and I also have several food intolerances. We both just had these issues where we'd eat out and get sick or feel uncomfortable," Sundvor said. "Shireen had the idea, 'Why can't I just test my food and figure out what's in it?' So we started talking about the idea and we researched the market and realized it's something we could make happen."

It costs $179 to pre-order a tester plus three one-time-use pods, and $47.95 for a refill pack of 12 pods; prices will increase later this month, according to the company's website. The company plans to deliver the product by the middle of next year after they've tested it more thoroughly, Sundvor.

Marilyn Grunzweig Geller, chief executive officer of the Celiac Disease Foundation, said she is not familiar with the new gluten-sensing device and was unable to comment on it directly.

"Certainly an FDA-approved device that could help people determine if they were accidentally ingesting gluten could go a long way to helping people and would be useful." However, she adds, "I would never comment on a device that's not FDA-approved."

She said she's anecdotally aware of a number of "treatments" for celiac disease and has heard of gluten sensors, but is skeptical.

As for Nima, Sundvor said, "We're doing a huge amount of testing and one thing we want to be sure of before we start shipping is that we're 99.9 percent accurate."

He said they have received Nima prototypes and he and his girlfriend, who has celiac disease, are already trying it out.

The company also aims to create similar versions that could test for peanut and dairy allergens, among other problematic ingredients. A Nima app is in the works, too, that he says will let users share information about restaurants and log their results.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly states the cost of the “pre-order” version of Nima and the cost of “test pods.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hate needles? Flu patch may take sting out of your fears

In what would be a boon for needle-phobes of all ages, researchers have developed a skin patch that vaccinates against the flu and could be available in five years.

The patch, which is lined with microscopic needles that dissolve into the skin, could provide a painless alternative to hypodermic needles and make visits to the doctor's office or clinic for a traditional flu shot a thing of the past. The patch is as easy to apply as a Band-Aid.

"We've now demonstrated a technology that can enable painless, self-administered flu vaccination," said Mark Prausnitz, a professor in the Georgia Tech School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and leader in the research. "It appears to vaccinate against influenza at least as well and probably better than a traditional hypodermic needle."

Vaccination that doesn't require trained personnel holds great appeal because it would likely boost the nation's low immunization rates, a source of concern.

Although influenza kills more than 30,000 people most years and the government recommends most healthy people get vaccinated annually, fewer than 40 percent typically do.

In a mouse study reported Sunday in the online edition of Nature Medicine, Prausnitz's team found the patch improved the immune system's antibody memory and was more efficient at clearing the lungs of the flu virus, compared to a placebo and hypodermic needle-delivered vaccine.

Prausnitz attributed the better performance to the skin's abundance of the types of cells most adept at generating immune responses. The muscle into which needles deliver vaccine is not nearly as active immunologically.

Patches in the mouse study contained an array of 100 needles, each some 650 microns in length, or about the width of a few strands of human hair. Coated with inactivated flu virus, the patches are pressed manually into the skin, where the microneedles dissolve into bodily fluids.

"It's a technological approach that makes a lot of sense," said Dr. Jan Drutz, a general pediatrician at Texas Children's Hospital who calls needle-phobia common in both kids and adults. "It would be a wonderful alternative to needles if it truly works in people and is pain free."

Needle-phobia, or trypanophobia, is a recognized medical condition that causes sufferers to avoid medical care. It is estimated to affect more than 10 percent of the adult population.

In the study, one group of mice received the influenza vaccine from traditional hypodermic needles; another group received the vaccine through the dissolving microneedles; and a control group received the microneedle patches not containing any vaccine.

Infected with the influenza virus 30 days later, both groups that received the vaccine remained healthy while mice in the control group contracted the flu and died.

Three months after vaccination, researchers exposed a different group of immunized mice to the flu virus and found that those who received the microneedles did better than those injected by the hypodermic needles.

Noting that mice are much easier to vaccinate against the flu than humans, Baylor College of Medicine influenza expert Dr. Paul Glezen expressed skepticism about the patch until seeing it in human trials. But he said it will be interesting to watch.

Prausnitz said he hopes to be testing the patch in people in two years and have a product on the shelves in five. He also said that although initially there will be start-up costs, he thinks the price will be no more than traditional flu vaccines once it is mass-produced.

The microneedle technology may also be used for other vaccinations, such as polio and measles, said Prausnitz. He said his team is working on those diseases but is not as far along.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story relays a researcher’s guess that the patch technology will be no more expensive than the standard flu vaccine once it is mass-produced. That’s enough for a satisfactory given the early stage of development. At least it’s more than the competing AP story did. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When it comes to preventing blood clots after a knee replacement, good old aspirin may be just as effective as newer, more expensive drugs.

That swap could help reduce the cost of caring for the nearly 1 million Americans who have a knee fixed each year, Michigan Medicine researchers say.

After knee surgery, there's a risk of blood clots in the legs or lungs. So it's routine for patients to take clot-preventing drugs for some time afterward.

Some doctors choose powerful anti-clotting drugs like heparin (Lovenox) and rivaroxaban (Xarelto), but it hasn't been clear whether these expensive prescription drugs work any better than cheap, readily available aspirin.

"Aspirin alone may provide similar protection compared to anticoagulation treatments," says Brian R. Hallstrom, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon and associate chair for quality and safety at the University of Michigan Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Hallstrom is the lead author of a new study published in JAMA Surgery that found few patients developed a blood clot after surgery, and those patients on aspirin fared just as well as those on anticoagulants.

During the two-year study period from 2013 to 2015, aspirin use rose from 10 percent to 50 percent among the patients cared for by orthopaedic surgeons in the Michigan Arthroplasty Registry Collaborative Quality Initiative, a statewide effort to give patients the best possible recovery and outcomes after hip and knee replacements.

Since then, the shift has become even more distinct: Aspirin prescribing has risen to 70 percent among Michigan surgeons, says Hallstrom, who is co-director of the initiative and a health services researcher at U-M's Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation.

Based on the experience of 41,537 Michigan patients undergoing knee replacement, the study may further the debate about the routine use of aspirin for clot prevention.

A recent Canadian study looked at the issue, but the analysis had a caveat: Each of the more than 3,400 clinical trial patients received rivaroxaban the first five days after surgery. After that, they continued with the drug or switched to aspirin.

The new U-M study suggests patients may be adequately protected if they take aspirin alone from day one.

"This study is truly a real-world experience of what happened in Michigan when the majority of surgeons switched to aspirin," Hallstrom says. "The incidence of blood clots, pulmonary embolus and death did not increase despite this dramatic change in practice."

Over the past decade, surgeons have turned away from powerful anticoagulants and toward aspirin used in addition to nondrug improvements such as compression devices for thwarting clots.

These days, most patients have a generally low risk of blood clots after knee replacement for a number of reasons. Those reasons include shorter surgical times, less invasive procedures and use of regional anesthesia that allows early mobilization after surgery, Hallstrom says. Some patients are even going home the same day.

"The most important way to prevent blood clots is getting moving," says Hallstrom, noting that people are at risk for blood clots when they sit or lie in one position for too long, such as on an airplane or a hospital bed.

The critical care specialists who make up the American College of Chest Physicians favor heparin to reduce the risk of blood clots, while the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons guidelines state that no one drug is better than another for preventing clots.

The U-M study involved patients undergoing knee replacement surgery at any of the 29 Michigan hospitals in the surgical quality group. One-third of the patients took aspirin alone; 54 percent took only an anticoagulant; and 13 percent took an aspirin/anticoagulant combination.

Over three months, just 1.16 percent of aspirin patients developed a serious blood clot. That was true for 1.42 percent of anticoagulant patients, according to the Michigan study. This was not statistically different.

So, neither drug appeared better than the other -- but aspirin has some obvious advantages.

"Aspirin is easy to take and much less expensive," Hallstrom says. "Patients can get it over the counter for pennies, while the other anticoagulants require monitoring, injections, frequent dose adjustments and are extremely expensive."

The reported cost for a 30-day supply of rivaroxaban is approximately $379 to $450; heparin is estimated at $450 to $890. Although warfarin costs a few dollars for a 30-day supply, its cost approaches that of the other anticoagulants when doctor visits for monitoring are factored in, Hallstrom says.

The study suggests most patients can have just aspirin without increasing the risk for venous thromboembolism, but doctors need to consider factors such as a patient's history of clots, obesity and ability to mobilize after surgery when determining the best measure for clot prevention, Hallstrom adds.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The cost differences between aspirin and anticoagulant drugs are listed and the potential savings by using aspirin are highlighted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heart scan law could lead to 1,000s more cancer cases

Widespread use of a controversial heart disease test that Texas insurers will be required by law to cover by law could lead to thousands more cases of cancer in the United States, according to a new study.

The study offers the most definitive estimate yet of the cancer risk from the radiation exposure that comes with increasingly popular CT scans, which provide pictures of the heart's arteries and quantify the risk of heart attack in people without symptoms.

“This is an important reminder that there are always trade-offs when we talk about screening,” said Dr. Amit Khera, a cardiologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. “Doctors and patients need to think about the cancer risk when ordering this test.”

The study, published in the new edition of Archives of Internal Medicine, found a small but real risk from the average radiation — for every 100,000 men between 45 and 75 undergoing the test every five years, there would be 42 cancers; for every 100,000 women ages 55 to 75, there would be 62.

That translates into “about 5,600 individuals developing a radiation-induced cancer in the future,” the study said.

The study comes a month after Gov. Rick Perry signed legislation that will require Texas insurance companies to cover the test for men 45 to 75 years old, and for women between 55 and 75, at intermediate or greater risk of heart attack. The law, the first in any state, takes effect Jan. 1.

The legislation was introduced in 2007 and passed quietly this year. It eventually attracted attention in cardiology circles, where the scans' costs and benefits are the subject of much debate. The scans are sometimes criticized as an example of expensive new technologies being adopted before proof is established that they're better than cheaper existing methods — an issue at the heart of the health care reform debate.

The test, a CAT scan of the heart that measures plaque buildup in the arteries, is popular because heart disease, the nation's No. 1 killer, strikes many people without the sort of very high cholesterol that usually predicts it. Doctors say they get many patients who want to know more about their risk because their father suffered a heart attack and died young.

Critics note that no study has linked the use of CT scans with better patient outcomes. They say the test's value is limited because it doesn't identify which plaque are stable and which could rupture and cause a heart attack.

CT scanning, which costs from $100 to $500, has grown exponentially in recent years. One Houston doctor said that there was just one scanner in Houston in the mid-'90s, and now the $1 million machines are all over the city. The Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography estimates more than 200,000 Americans had the test in 2008 at a cost of about $50 million.

The American Heart Association did not endorse the legislation, which Khera estimates could result in millions of Texans being screened.

The Texas legislation was pushed by Screening for Heart Attack Prevention and Eradication, a private organization that has called for CT scans on all asymptomatic men 45 to 75 and all asymptomatic women 55 to 75 — or some 50 million Americans.

Texas Rep. Rene Oliveira, D-Brownsville, the bill's sponsor, stressed the state law won't result in such widespread testing.

“The bill was written to target those people most likely to benefit from it, not everyone,” said Oliveira, who credits the test for saving his life when it revealed blockages that led to double-bypass surgery two years ago.

But Khera, an advocate of the test in select cases, said the Texas law puts the cart before the horse. He questioned unsupported cutoffs of those covered under the law and said it would have been better to wait until more data is available on who really benefits from it.

Dr. William Zoghbi, director of Methodist Hospital's Cardiovascular Imaging Institute, said the cancer risk numbers reported in the study are actually fairly low compared to other tests that take X-rays of the chest area, such as a regular CAT scan or coronary angiography.

The Texas law will require insurance companies pay $200 of the bill for patients to get the test every five years.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


 
The story not only mentions the cost of a scan to individuals ($100 to $500), it also notes that about $50 million dollars was spent on this type of scanning nationwide in 2008. A longer story could have also reported on the costs of additional testing and treatments triggered by screening apparently healthy individuals.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The effect was so marked that the trial was stopped early for ethical reasons, so that patients in the control group could be offered the new drug. Because of that, researchers do not yet know the median survival.

“You don’t need to wait for 50 percent of 675 patients to die to conclude that one drug is much better than the other,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas of the University of California, Los Angeles, who was an investigator in the trial and has been a consultant to the developer of the drug.

The other new drug, ipilimumab (pronounced ip-ee-LIM-yoo-mab), when combined with dacarbazine, extended median survival to 11.2 months compared with 9.1 months for those who received dacarbazine alone. After three years, 20.8 percent of those who got that new drug were alive, compared with 12.2 percent of those in the control group.

The results of both trials were published online by The New England Journal of Medicine in addition to being presented here.

To be sure, more than half of patients with metastatic melanoma would not be helped all that much by either drug. Experts say more needs to be done, especially since melanoma affects more young adults than many other types of cancer.

Even if the new drugs allow patients with metastatic melanoma to live two years, “Two years is nothing when you’re 30,” said Dr. Anna C. Pavlick, head of the melanoma program at New York University.

Still, doctors and patient groups welcomed the progress because until now treatment of melanoma that had spread beyond the skin to distant organs “was terrible even by routine cancer standards,” said Dr. Vernon K. Sondak, chairman of cutaneous oncology at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Fla.

Also, the number of melanoma cases has been rising, unlike for many other types of cancer. Doctors say that is because of unprotected sun exposure years ago, the proliferation of tanning salons and perhaps more attention to detecting the disease.

There were about 68,000 new cases of melanoma and about 8,700 deaths last year in the United States, up from 48,000 cases and 7,700 deaths in 2000, according to the American Cancer Society. Particularly fast increases have occurred among people older than 65 and among women 15 to 39 years old.

Vemurafenib is the latest so-called targeted therapy, which inhibits the effects of genetic mutations that spur tumor growth and spread. In particular, the drug counters the effect of a mutation in a gene called B-RAF that was discovered in 2002 to be common in melanomas. (The drug’s name comes from V600E mutation in RAF.)

The drug, which is taken orally twice a day, would be used only by the roughly half of melanoma patients whose tumors have this mutation. The drug significantly shrinks tumors in about half of these patients — or about a quarter of all melanoma patients.

It was developed by Roche and Plexxikon, a biotechnology company in Berkeley, Calif., that was recently acquired by Daiichi Sankyo of Japan. The drug is expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration within a few months.

Ipilimumab, the other new drug, releases a brake on the body’s immune system, allowing it to more effectively attack the tumor. Developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, it was approved in March and is sold under the name Yervoy.

A series of articles in The New York Times last year followed the development of vemurafenib, then known as PLX4032, and recounted how some patients close to death seemed to make miraculous recoveries.

The effect, however, typically lasts only about seven months before the cancer starts to grow again, though some patients benefit for more than two years.

S. Taylor Chance, a 67-year-old real estate agent in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., has been taking vemurafenib in a clinical trial since March 2010. “If it weren’t for the trial I wouldn’t be here,” she said.

It has not been all good. Ms. Chance said the drug caused such extreme pain at one point that “I called in the children and said, ‘I’m done, I can’t do this any more.’ ” But she had her dose reduced and took other medications for the pain.

In the trial, sponsored by Roche and led by Dr. Paul B. Chapman of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, 38 percent of participants had to stop taking the drug or lower the dose because of side effects, including rash and joint pain. Many patients get minor skin cancers that can be removed by dermatologists.

The trial of ipilimumab, paid for by Bristol-Myers, involved 502 patients with late-stage melanoma.

Last year at this conference, researchers presented results of a trial showing a survival advantage for patients who had undergone a previous treatment. The new trial of this drug, by contrast, involved patients who were getting treated for the first time.

While the extension of median survival of two months, from about 9 months to about 11 months, was less than some experts expected, researchers said the real benefit was that a small number of patients, perhaps 10 to 20 percent, could live a long time.

Because it unleashes the immune system, ipilimumab can have serious side effects. In the latest trial, a big one was liver damage.

A course of treatment of ipilimumab costs $120,000. The price of vemurafenib has not been announced, but is expected to be at least tens of thousands of dollars per year.

Doctors are eager to try the two drugs together. Roche and Bristol-Myers said Thursday that they would conduct such tests.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately discuss the costs of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The significant costs of both drugs were mentioned.  Nice job.
<|endoftext|>
