<|startoftext|>
(PHILADELPHIA) -- When patients present with neurologic symptoms such as severe headaches or seizures, the symptoms could suggest anything from infection, cancer, or an autoimmune disease of the brain or spinal cord, leaving physicians scrambling to find the cause in a short amount of time. The differences in diagnosis can mean having mere hours to act or being able to take days or weeks to devise a treatment plan. Now, researchers at Jefferson (Philadelphia University + Thomas Jefferson University) have developed a test that could rapidly parse out infections of the brain from other diseases. The diagnostic could prove particularly useful in infants and young children.

“We have many tests for making diagnoses, but the ones that conclusively indicate infection can often take more time than we’d like, especially in cases of childhood meningitis or encephalitis,” said Mark Curtis, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, who also works as a hospital pathologist. “Once confirmed with additional research, our test could provide a first, rapid and less invasive way to look at what’s happening in the brain and guide treatment or further testing.”

The results were published in the journal PLOS ONE on October 31st.

Rather than testing for the presence of bacteria or virus, the researchers looked at the first tell-tale signs of infection: the cytokines produced by the patient’s immune system in response to pathogens and other injury processes. “Cytokines are an alarm system in the body,” said Dr. Curtis. “Infectious agents activate a multi-pronged inflammatory response, a key component of which is the release of different combinations of cytokines tailored to combat pathogens. Changes in cytokine levels of cerebrospinal fluid offer a very early measurable sign of infection.”

Dr. Curtis and colleagues decided to see if they could detect patterns within the cytokines that might differentiate infections from other brain diseases or disorders. In the retrospective analysis, the investigators looked at samples collected from 43 patients who had received spinal taps during their hospital stays. The researchers then tested the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) for the presence of 41 different cytokines and noticed that patients with confirmed infection of the central nervous system had a different cytokine fingerprint from those confirmed as having tumors or autoimmune disease. This suggested the test could be used to tell the conditions apart.

Additionally, within the patients identified with central nervous system infections, the CSF cytokine fingerprint was different in cases of viral infection compared to those with non-viral pathogens, such as bacteria or fungi.

“With only a small amount of spinal fluid needed, CSF cytokine analysis could be used as one of the first diagnostic tests to rapidly triage serious central nervous system disorders and guide immediate intervention,” said first author, Danielle Fortuna, MD, an Assistant Professor, in the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.

Worldwide, meningitis and encephalitis affect more than four million adults and children each year. “Infants and young children have an especially high risk of meningitis and encephalitis and the related, often serious sequelae,” said Dr. Curtis. “Being able to rapidly identify a central nervous system disorder as infectious can be crucial in rapid response.”

“In addition, the test could distinguish viral from non-viral infections, a distinction that could spare a child with a viral infection from an unnecessary course of antibiotics, and tailor the care toward antiviral and supportive measures as needed,” said Dr. Curtis. “Moving forward, our goal is to formally validate our findings with a larger sample size that includes both adults and children for future use in the clinical arena.”

Article reference: Danielle Fortuna, D Craig Hooper, Amity L Roberts, Larry A Harshyne, Michelle Nagurney, Mark T Curtis, “Potential role of CSF cytokine profiles in discriminating infectious from non-infectious CNS disorders,” PLOS ONE, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205501, 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefits described are put in some numerical context. The results might show the presence of an infection, or something else (like tumors or autoimmune disease). It’s seemingly innocuous, but for young children and babies, who can’t describe their symptoms, such a tissue test could be beneficial, as the release explains.
However, it would have strengthened this release to explain why some cytokine signals (and which ones) might be better indicators than others, and to what extent based on the small sample size.
Another thing that would have been helpful to explain is the fact that cytokines can also be inappropriately released (without infection, etc). This is a rare occurrence but we’d still want to know that this distinction could be made as well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings add to confusion over whether taking aspirin, ibuprofen or related painkillers reduces the risk of developing melanoma.

Animal experiments have suggested that the class of painkillers known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) could play a role in preventing melanoma, but a large 2008 study failed to find any evidence to support this possibility.

Now, a smaller study that asked people with melanoma and those without the disease to recall their use of NSAIDs has found that taking these drugs - particularly aspirin - at least once a week for more than 5 years may have offered some protection against the deadly disease.

The findings are interesting, but should not lead people to conclude that popping a few painkillers will reduce their risk of skin cancer, cautioned Dr. Maryam Asgari of Kaiser Permanente Northern California and the University of California San Francisco, who co-authored the 2008 study.

NSAIDs - which include aspirin, naproxen (marketed as Aleve), and ibuprofen (Advil) — have side effects, she noted, such as stomach bleeding. People with a family history of melanoma are better off wearing sunscreen and getting regular skin checks from a dermatologist, Asgari recommended.

“I think it’s just too early” to say NSAIDs offer any protection, she said. “I think the jury is still out.”

There’s reason to hope NSAIDs might offer some protection against this type of cancer, however - earlier this year, a review found that people who use painkillers such as ibuprofen on a regular basis may be less likely to get bladder cancer. Other research has consistently supported the benefits of NSAIDs in preventing colorectal cancer, and provided some evidence they may work for breast, esophagus, and stomach cancers, as well.

Melanoma is the most lethal form of skin cancer, killing almost 9,000 people in the U.S. last year, according to the National Cancer Institute.

To investigate whether NSAIDs offer any protection, Dr. Clara Curiel-Lewandrowski of Harvard Medical School and the University of Arizona asked 400 people diagnosed with melanoma and 600 similar people without the disease to recall their use of the painkillers.

The researchers found that people without cancer had a longer history of taking NSAIDs than people who eventually developed melanoma. Specifically, more than 40 percent of people who were cancer-free said they’d been taking NSAIDs at least once per week for more than 5 years, versus only 28 percent of those who developed melanoma. Overall, regular use of NSAIDs for more than 5 years appeared to reduce the risk of developing cancer by more than 40 percent, the authors report in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.

Unfortunately, the technique — comparing people with melanoma to those without - is fraught with potential problems, said Asgari. For one, you have to get the comparison right, she noted; there’s always a concern that people without cancer who agree to participate in the study may be more health conscious to begin with, and it’s this that protects them from cancer, not their use of NSAIDs. “Did you somehow get a biased sample of people, and is that why you’re seeing this difference?”

Her 2008 study analyzed data from nearly 64,000 people who were melanoma-free at the beginning of the investigation, then followed them for a few years to see who developed the disease. She and her colleagues found no evidence that taking NSAIDs had any effect on risk of developing the deadly skin cancer.

As a result, “I wouldn’t recommend (taking NSAIDs to reduce melanoma) just based on this” new study, Asgari noted.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately explained: “..more than 40 percent of people who were cancer-free said they’d been taking NSAIDs at least once per week for more than 5 years, versus only 28 percent of those who developed melanoma.”
More importantly, it quoted one expert, “I wouldn’t recommend (taking NSAIDs to reduce melanoma) just based on this” new study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration took a fresh step on Thursday towards setting a maximum nicotine level for tobacco products in a bid to lower tobacco-related deaths across the country, saying it would collect public comment and scientific research over the next three months.

The move was part of a comprehensive plan the agency announced last summer to regulate tobacco and nicotine, FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said on a call with reporters. That plan marked a major shift designed to give adult smokers a wider range of alternatives, including potentially less harmful e-cigarettes.

The agency is seeking to determine a level of nicotine in cigarettes and other tobacco products that would be minimally addictive or nonaddictive, according to a draft proposal.

It hopes setting such a standard would also help prevent teenagers who experiment with tobacco from becoming addicted.

The FDA estimates that setting such a standard would help 5 million smokers quit within a year and prevent more than 33 million teens and young adults from becoming regular smokers by the year 2100.

“There is no other single action our country can take that would prevent more young people from smoking or save more lives,” said Matthew L. Myers, president of Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids.

Major tobacco players such as Altria Group and British American Tobacco are grappling with sales declines in the U.S. market and hoping to recoup revenue through novel tobacco and nicotine products such as e-cigarettes.

Altria Group has partnered with Philip Morris International to sell a novel device called iQOS, which heats but does not burn tobacco. The FDA is currently reviewing the iQOS application.

The FDA is seeking additional research and data for public review, Gottlieb said, as it tries to develop a nicotine product standard. Gottlieb said the FDA was also seeking public opinion on whether a product standard should be implemented all at once or gradually.

The comment period will be open through mid-June, said Mitch Zeller, director of FDA’s Center for Tobacco Products.

The FDA will continue to take enforcement actions against companies that inappropriately target children, including through the promotion of e-cigarettes, Gottlieb said.

James Figlar, executive vice president of research and development for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, part of British American Tobacco, said the company would work with the agency to create a path for alternative, less harmful tobacco products to reach the market.

The FDA will seek public input and scientific research on the role that flavors such as menthol play in tobacco addiction, and for the regulation of premium cigars, Gottlieb said.

“We’ll also advance key parts of our tobacco plan very soon,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story informed readers that the FDA’s own analysis predicts “would help 5 million smokers quit within a year and prevent more than 33 million teens and young adults from becoming regular smokers by the year 2100.” We think more could have said about the data this was based, but we address that below, in evidence quality.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Cardiac arrest patients who get cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) from a bystander at the scene may have better survival odds even when an ambulance takes a long time to arrive, a Danish study suggests.

Researchers examined data on 7,623 cardiac arrest patients and found when an ambulance arrived within five minutes of a 911 call, patients were 2.3 times more likely to survive at least 30 days if they received bystander CPR than if they didn’t get this aid at the scene.

When ambulances took up to 10 minutes to arrive, bystander CPR was associated with tripled survival odds, the study also found. After 13 minutes, patients who got CPR at the scene continued to have better survival odds but the difference was no longer statistically meaningful.

“Early CPR saves lives, and the lack of CPR efforts from bystanders could result in significantly decreased chances of survival,” said lead study author Dr. Shahzleen Rajan of Copenhagen University Hospital in Denmark.

Cardiac arrest involves the abrupt loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness. Unlike a heart attack, which happens when blood flow to a portion of the heart is blocked, cardiac arrest occurs when the heart’s electrical system malfunctions, often due to irregular heart rhythms. Cardiac arrest may occur with no warning and is often fatal.

Chest compressions or CPR can help restore circulation, increasing the odds of survival. Bystander CPR generally won’t restore a normal heart rhythm but it can buy time by maintaining blood flow to vital organs.

“We know from previous research that 1 in 8 people survive after a cardiac arrest if a bystander initiates CPR before the arrival of the emergency medical services,” Rajan said by email. “In contrast, if CPR is not initiated before the arrival of the emergency medical services, only 1 in 30 people survive a cardiac arrest.”

For the current study, researchers looked at 30-day survival for patients who had cardiac arrests outside of a hospital between 2005 and 2011.

When the ambulance arrived within five minutes, 14.5 percent of patients in the bystander CPR group survived at least 30 days, compared with 6.3 percent in the group that didn’t get this help.

For ambulance arrival times up to ten minutes, 6.7 percent in the CPR group and 2.2 percent of the other patients survived. If the ambulance took more than 13 minutes, the survival rate was 3.7 percent in the CPR group and 1.5 percent for the others - a difference that wasn’t statistically meaningful.

The study is observational and doesn’t prove bystander CPR increases survival odds, the authors note in Circulation. Researchers also lacked data on how quickly bystanders intervened after the start of cardiac arrest, which could influence outcomes, the authors note.

“Once a victim has sustained a cardiac arrest with little or no blood supply going to the heart or brain, the time to reestablishing blood flow with oxygenated blood is critical,” said Dr. Lenworth Jacobs, director of trauma and emergency medicine at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut.

“It is generally thought that the sooner this is implemented the better,” Jacobs, who wasn’t involved in the study, added by email.

The biggest obstacle to bystander CPR remains that too few people know how to do it, said Dr. Peter Pons, an emergency physician in Denver and professor emeritus at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.

“Clearly, if someone has been motivated to learn and has been taught CPR, they will often assist,” Pons, who wasn’t involved in the study, said by email. “When someone does not have that knowledge, they tend to be more reluctant to act and may fear making things worse.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of giving exact numbers of survivors who did and didn’t receive CPR in the study. It provides exact survival times for ambulance arrivals at 5, 10, and 13 minutes. These statistics are provided both in terms of percentages and ratios.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO --- A phase II clinical trial led by Northwestern Medicine investigators shows that a new psoriasis drug called guselkumab has greater efficacy than the current standard of care for the chronic skin condition.

In the study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, investigators compared guselkumab to adalimumab, the most common medication currently used to treat psoriasis.

"Research like this study is leading to a series of new medications that promise high levels of response for an increasing number of patients," said first author Kenneth Gordon, MD, professor in Dermatology. "The possibility of getting almost all patients nearly clear and able to live their lives without the burden of this disease impacting them every day is getting close to reality."

Psoriasis is an immune-mediated disease that causes itchy, dry and red skin. It also increases a patient's risk for depression, heart disease and diabetes, among other conditions. The disease affects nearly 3 percent of the world's population, according to the World Psoriasis Day consortium, but about half of all patients with psoriasis do not get any treatment, Dr. Gordon said.

"For patients, the concept that psoriasis is 'just something you live with' is no longer appropriate," he said.

In the multi-center trial, 293 adult patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis (defined as covering 10 percent or more of the body) were randomly assigned to receive varying doses of one of the two drugs or a placebo over 52 weeks.

At weeks 16 and 40, efficacy of the drugs was measured on a scale of 0 to 5. A significantly higher proportion of patients in the guselkumab group had a score of 0 (cleared psoriasis) or 1 (minimal psoriasis) in both the short and long term periods compared to the adalimumab and placebo groups. At week 40, for example, 81 percent of patients taking a 200-mg dose of guselkumab had a score of 0 or 1, compared to 49 percent of patients taking adalimumab.

The new drug works by blocking a protein specifically implicated in psoriasis, called interluekin 23; older drugs affect the immune process more generally.

"Building on multiple layers of clinical and basic research, we are changing our understanding of how psoriasis works," Dr. Gordon said. "By doing so, we are able to build new treatments that specifically target the immunological processes of psoriasis while leaving even more of the normal immune system intact."

An ongoing phase III trial is continuing to test the safety and efficacy of guselkumab as a psoriasis treatment.

This study was supported by Janssen Research and Development, the manufacturer of guselkumab. Dr. Gordon is a former paid consultant for Janssen Research and Development.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release is fairly clear in this regard, reporting that 81 percent of patients taking a 200-milligram dose of guselkumab reported “minimal” or no psoriasis symptoms after 40 weeks of treatment, compared to 49 percent of patients taking adalimumab. The release doesn’t note that patients taking 200-mg doses of guselkumab did only slightly better than patients taking a 100-mg dose, and that the 100-mg dose fared slightly better at various points during the first 40 weeks of treatment. But that’s a level of detail that perhaps we can’t expect.
The release would have been better if it specifically noted that further study will be needed in order to find out if the observed benefits last longer than a year. The release also could have noted that the patients in this study were overwhelmingly white (91%) and male (71%), so it remains to be seen if a more diverse patient population would get similar benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When doctors saw the report on Bill Ludwig’s bone-marrow biopsy, they thought it was a mistake and ordered the test repeated. But the results came back the same: His lethal leukemia had been wiped out by an experimental treatment never before used in humans.

“We were hoping for a little improvement,” remembered the 72-year-old retired New Jersey corrections officer, who had battled the disease for a decade. He and his oncologist both broke down when she delivered the good news in 2010. “Nobody was hoping for zero cancer.”

The pioneering therapy administered to Ludwig and a few other adults at the University of Pennsylvania hospital paved the way for clinical trials with children. Six-year-old Emily Whitehead, who was near death, became the first pediatric recipient in 2012. Like Ludwig, she remains cancer-free.

Such results are why the treatment is on track to become the first gene therapy approved by the Food and Drug Administration. An FDA advisory committee will decide Wednesday whether to recommend approval of the approach, which uses patients’ own genetically altered immune cells to fight blood cancers.

If the panel gives the nod, the agency probably will follow suit by the end of September. That would open the latest chapter in immunotherapy — “a true living drug,” said Penn scientist Carl June, who led its development.

The CAR T-cell treatment, manufactured by the drug company Novartis, initially would be available only for the small number of children and young adults whose leukemia does not respond to standard care. Those patients typically have a grim prognosis, but in the pivotal trial testing the therapy in almost a dozen countries, 83 percent of patients went into remission. A year later, two-thirds remained so.

And childhood leukemia is just the start for a field that has attracted intense interest in academia and industry. Kite Pharma of Santa Monica, Calif., has applied for FDA approval to treat aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and a similar Novartis application is close behind. Researchers also are exploring CAR T-cell therapy’s use for multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, the disease that afflicted Ludwig. They are also tackling a far more difficult challenge — using the therapy for solid tumors in the lungs or brain, for example.

The excitement among doctors and researchers is palpable. “We’re saving patients who three or four years ago we were at our wit’s end trying to keep alive,” said Stephen Schuster, the Penn oncologist who is leading a Novartis lymphoma study. That study and a Kite trial have shown that the treatment can put about one-third of adults with advanced disease — those who have exhausted all options — into remission.

Yet along with the enthusiasm come pressing questions about safety, cost and the complexity of the procedure.

It involves extracting white blood cells called T cells — the foot soldiers of the immune system — from a patient’s blood, freezing them and sending them to Novartis’s sprawling manufacturing plant in Morris Plains, N.J. There, a crippled HIV fragment is used to genetically modify the T cells so they can find and attack the cancer. The cells then are refrozen and sent back to be infused into the patient.

Once inside the person’s body, the T-cell army multiplies astronomically.

Novartis has not disclosed the price for its therapy, but analysts are predicting $300,000 to $600,000 for a one-time infusion. Brad Loncar, whose investment fund focuses on companies that develop immunotherapy treatments, hopes the cost does not prompt a backlash. “CAR-T is not the EpiPen,” he said. “This is truly pushing the envelope and at the cutting edge of science.”

The biggest concerns, however, center on safety. The revved-up immune system becomes a potent cancer-fighting agent but also a dangerous threat to the patient. Serious side effects abound, raising concerns about broad use.

“Treating patients safely is the heart of the rollout,” said Stephan Grupp of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, who as director of the hospital’s cancer immunotherapy program led early pediatric studies as well as Novartis’s global trial. “The efficacy takes care of itself, but safety takes a lot of attention.”

One of the most common side effects is called cytokine release syndrome, which causes high fever and flulike symptoms that in some cases can be so dangerous that the patient ends up in intensive care. The other major worry is neurotoxicity, which can result in temporary confusion or potentially fatal brain swelling. Juno Therapeutics, a biotech firm in Seattle, shut down one of its CAR T-cell programs after five patients died of brain swelling. Novartis has not seen brain swelling in its trials, company officials said.

To try to ensure patient safety, Novartis is not planning a typical product rollout, with a drug pushed as widely and aggressively as possible. The company instead will designate 30 to 35 medical centers to administer the treatment. Many of them took part in the clinical trial, and all have gotten extensive training by Grupp and others.

Grupp said he and his staff learned about the side effects of CAR T-cell therapy — and what to do about them — through terrifying experiences that began five years ago with Emily Whitehead.

The young girl, who had relapsed twice on conventional treatments for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, was in grave condition. Grupp suggested to her parents that she be the first child to get the experimental therapy.

“I said, ‘Surely, this has been tried on kids somewhere else in the world,’ ” recalled her father, Thomas Whitehead of Philipsburg, Pa. “But Steve said, ‘Nope, some adults got it, but that was a different kind of leukemia.’ ”

After she received the therapy, Emily’s fever soared, her blood pressure plummeted, and she ended up in a coma and on a ventilator for two weeks in the hospital’s intensive care unit. Convinced his patient would not survive another day, a frantic Grupp got rushed lab results that suggested a surge of the protein Interleukin 6 was causing her immune system to relentlessly hammer her body. Doctors decided to give Emily an immunosuppressant drug called tocilizumab.

She was dramatically better within hours. She woke up the next day, her seventh birthday. Tests showed her cancer was gone.

The approval of CAR T-cell therapy would represent the second big immunotherapy advance in less than a decade. In 2011, the FDA cleared the first agent in a new class of drugs called checkpoint inhibitors. It has approved five more since then.

There are big differences between the two approaches. The checkpoint inhibitors are targeted at solid tumors, such as advanced melanoma and lung and bladder cancer, while CAR T-cell therapy has been aimed at blood disorders. And although checkpoint inhibitors are off the shelf, with every patient getting the same drug, CAR T-cell therapy is customized to an individual. Many immunotherapy experts think the greatest progress against cancer will be achieved when researchers figure out how to combine the approaches.

For the Penn team, the CAR T-cell story goes back decades, starting at the then-National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., where June and a postdoctorate fellow named Bruce Levine worked on new HIV treatments. In the process, they figured out a way to turbocharge T cells to make them more powerful and plentiful.

The pair moved to Philadelphia in 1999 and dove into cancer research. Two years later, June’s wife died of ovarian cancer, something he has credited as spurring him to work even harder in the field. In the years that followed, researchers across the country, including at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, racked up an array of tantalizing discoveries involving T cells.

Fast-forward to 2010, when Ludwig, who lives in Bridgeton, N.J., became Penn’s first patient to receive CAR T-cell therapy. Two other men got the treatment not long after. One is still in remission; the other relapsed and died.

But after those three patients, the Penn researchers ran out of money for more treatments. To try to raise interest and funding, they decided to publish the results of their work. The article that appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine in August 2011 created a “firestorm,” June said — one that brought them new resources. David Porter, a Penn oncologist working with June, was on vacation in western Maryland and had to stop at a Kohl’s to buy a dress shirt for the immediate TV interviews.

The pediatric trial opened the following spring with Emily. Six months later, Penn licensed its technology to Novartis in exchange for financial support, which included a new on-campus cell-manufacturing facility.

With FDA approval seeming imminent, the researchers who were so instrumental in the therapy’s development and testing are almost giddy. Grupp is especially pleased that the advance will be available first to children. “Usually everything is developed first for adults,” he noted recently, “and children are an afterthought.”

‘This is not the end’: Using immunotherapy and a genetic glitch to give cancer patients hope

This 8-year-old is free of cancer — for now — after a ‘breakthrough’ treatment

For a 6-year-old with cancer, a future staked on medicine’s hottest field
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This is satisfactory, but barely. Here’s how the story addresses benefits for the CAR T-cell treatment: “In the pivotal trial testing the therapy in almost a dozen countries, 83 percent of patients went into remission. A year later, two-thirds remained so.”
That information would be much more useful if it placed those numbers in context. For example, how many patients were enrolled in the study? 83 percent could be 13 out of 16 patients, or it could be 1,328 patients out of 1,600. And how does 83 percent compare to standard treatment?
Similarly, is the story telling us that two-thirds of all patients were still in remission a year later? Or did it mean that two-thirds of the 83 percent were still in remission a year later? Contextual information would have provided some much-needed clarity here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She could continue taking the 13 pills a day she needed to control her Parkinson's disease, along with dealing with the side effects. Or she could allow doctors to implant two long, thin electrodes deep into her brain, along with an electrical generator about the size of an iPod in her chest.

In August 2007, Wolter, 63, underwent the surgery at Froedtert Hospital in Wauwatosa, and her life has improved dramatically.

A study released online Tuesday concluded that so-called deep brain stimulation was substantially more effective in treating Parkinson's than the best drug therapy, but it also carried a much greater risk of serious adverse side effects.

The results come at time when a growing number of people are reaching their late 50s and early 60s, when they are most likely to be diagnosed with the disease, which affects between 500,000 and 1.5 million Americans.

"We are on the verge of an epidemic," said Erwin Montgomery, a professor of neurology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The six-month study, which involved 255 people, found that those who underwent surgery had 4.6 more hours each day of good control of their symptoms than those who got the best drug therapy.

"That's huge," said lead author Fran Weaver, a researcher with the Hines VA Hospital in Hines, Ill.

She said the best drugs provide only one to two hours of added improvement, or "on time."

Those who got the therapy also had significantly more improvement in other measures of symptoms, according to the study that will appear today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

However, they were 3.8 times more likely to experience a serious adverse event, such as an infection, falls, nervous system or psychiatric disorders, or a problem with the device. Forty-nine of the deep brain stimulation patients, or 40%, had 82 serious adverse events, compared with 11% of the drug patients, who had 19 serious adverse events.

Weaver said 99% of the adverse events were resolved within six months, including some cases in which an infection required the removal of the generator from the chest.

There also was one death related to the surgery involving a patient who had bleeding in the brain, went into a coma and died several days later, she said.

Deep brain stimulation also is expensive. At Froedtert Hospital the procedure costs about $120,000, an amount that generally is covered by Medicare and private insurance.

The hospital has done about 300 of the procedures since 2005, said Brad Hiner, an associate professor of neurology at the Medical College of Wisconsin and neurologic director of the hospital's deep brain stimulation program.

"This (the JAMA study) is the largest, most complete and thorough analysis of deep brain stimulation to date," Hiner said.

Some neurologists remain unconvinced about the benefits of the therapy.

"You are doing something pretty invasive," said Paul Nausieda, director of the Regional Parkinson's Center at Aurora Sinai Medical Center in Milwaukee. "It's got too many downside issues."

Nausieda said much of the benefit found in the study could be due to a placebo effect.

Beyond that, doctors need to do a better job of optimizing drug therapy, he said, noting that there are thousands of potential combinations of drugs that can be used to control symptoms.

Nausieda said that of the more than 5,000 Parkinson's patients he has seen, only about 100 were candidates for deep brain stimulation.

"It's certainly not a breakthrough," he said.

Still, deep brain stimulation and several other potential therapies in the growing field of neurostimulation have created a buzz in the medical community.

Clinical trials involving different forms of neurostimulation are looking into its effectiveness in treating a range of disorders, including epilepsy, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and tinnitus, although doctors acknowledge they don't know how the treatments actually work.

In a sense it's a field of science that works backward: Stimulation is applied to the brain, some people get better, and doctors try to figure out why.

"We haven't the foggiest notion," said UW's Montgomery. "(But) we used aspirin long before we knew how it worked. God watches out for fools and little children. We are blessed that we have this therapy."

The problem with deep brain stimulation is that many doctors are not aware of its benefits or don't know how to determine the appropriate patients based on risks vs. potential benefits, he said.

Up to 15% of Parkinson's patients are good candidates for the therapy, but only 2% get it, he said.

Deep brain stimulation is not an option for the 20% to 30% of Parkinson's patients who also have dementia, said Hiner, of Froedtert Hospital.

He said the best candidates are those whose medications are not working well or are causing too many side effects.

Wolter, who lives in Oconomowoc, fit that profile well. She was diagnosed with the disease in 1997 after she developed a slight limp.

She was put on an increasing number of medications, which eventually caused side effects.

At times, she said, she felt incredibly fidgety.

"I'd take my pills and feel good for a while, but I never knew when they would wear off," she said. "I don't know what was worse: the medications or the disease."

She said she worried about having the surgery, but it got to the point where she felt as though she had run out of options.

In the nearly year and a half since having the surgery, her condition has improved substantially, she said.

Her medication use has dropped dramatically and "my body has calmed down," she said. "I can do what everybody does."

In April she went to Disney World with her two daughters and grandchildren and was able to walk around the park.

The study was paid for by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and Medtronic, the company that makes the device used in the study.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does an adequate job of quantifying the benefits, using hard data to indicate the duration of the study, the number of patients involved and the most signficant outcome. 
The reporter also does a good job of quantifying the side effects, which it does with even more specificity. 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At issue are controversial spiral CT scans, where a rotating scanner views the lungs at various angles to spot growths when they are about half the size that a standard chest X-ray can detect. Some previous studies have suggested that the earlier detection helps, while other research concluded it may do more harm than good by spotting too many benign growths.

The massive National Lung Screening Trial enrolled 53,000 current or former smokers to try to settle the debate. It found 20 percent fewer deaths from lung cancer among those screened with spiral CTs than among those given chest X-rays, the NCI said Thursday, a difference significant enough that it ended the study early.

The actual number of deaths averted was fairly modest - 354 died in the spiral CT group over the eight-year study period compared with 442 deaths among those who got chest X-rays.

The NCI said it is not clear that all smokers should get the scans, which are not risk-free.

The best advice for avoiding lung cancer remains to quit smoking, said NCI Director Dr. Harold Varmus.

Still, "a validated approach that can reduce lung cancer mortality by even 20 percent has the potential to spare very significant numbers of people from the ravages of this disease," he said.

About 200,000 new lung cancers are diagnosed in the U.S. each year, and the disease kills about 159,000 people annually. It is most often diagnosed at advanced stages, and the average five-year survival rate is just 15 percent.

Many smokers already had sought out spiral CTs, even though the American Cancer Society hasn't recommended the test - citing a lack of clear evidence that they work - and most insurance doesn't cover the $300 to $400 cost.

The scans aren't risk-free: They frequently mistake scar tissue from an old infection or some other benign lump for cancer, leading to unnecessary biopsies or surgery that in turn can cause a collapsed lung, infection or other problems.

The NCI still is compiling rates of false alarms and other risks from the study.

Nor is it clear if the study results are applicable to all smokers. The trial enrolled people ages 55 to 74 who were or had been very heavy smokers and gave them one scan a year for three years.

While the spiral CTs emit less radiation than standard CT scans used to diagnose disease, researchers also will analyze whether the radiation exposures from three scans changes a smoker's lifetime risk of other radiation-related cancers. Letters being mailed to study participants advise them to discuss with their doctors whether they should have additional scans or not.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 



This story does a better job than some others in how it portrays the potential benefits of CT screening for lung cancer. The headline and lead report that deaths were reduced somewhat. The third paragraph of the story notes that among the 53,000 participants there were 20 percent fewer deaths among those offered CT scans compared to those offered chest x-rays, but that the “actual number of deaths averted was fairly modest” (354 in the CT group vs. 442 in the x-ray group). This way of presenting the results helps readers put the results in perspective. The story also notes that the National Cancer Institute said “it’s not clear that all smokers should get the scans.” However, the story could have made it more clear that the reduction in lung cancer death rates was seen after five years of folllow-up, which leaves open the question about whether that difference will persist over a longer time frame.
It would have been helpful for this story to tell readers that 300 smokers had to be screened in this trial in order to extend the life of one of them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 2, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- An implanted device that monitors brain activity may offer a way to predict seizures in people with uncontrolled epilepsy, a small pilot study suggests.

The findings, reported online May 2 in the journal Lancet Neurology, are based on only 15 patients, and the device worked far better in some than others. But experts said the results are promising, and should prompt further studies.

"We just wanted to see if this is feasible, and this study shows that it is," said lead researcher Dr. Mark Cook, of the University of Melbourne and St. Vincent's Hospital in Australia.

The prospect of being able to predict seizures is "very exciting," he said, in part because it's the uncertainty of the disorder that can dim people's quality of life.

If people know a seizure is coming, Cook said, they can avoid driving or swimming that day, for example. They might also be able to adjust their medication use.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder in which the brain's normal electrical activity is temporarily disrupted, leading to a seizure. Seizures can be obvious, causing unconsciousness or convulsions, but often they trigger subtler changes in a person's perceptions or behavior -- like a short staring spell, confusion or an altered sense of taste or smell.

Epilepsy is usually managed with medication, but for 30 percent to 40 percent of people with the condition, drugs don't keep seizures at bay. The new study included 15 people who were having at least two to 12 "disabling" seizures a month that were resistant to drug therapy.

Cook's team implanted each patient with the experimental device, which consists of electrodes placed between the skull and the brain, plus wires that run to a unit implanted under the skin of the chest.

That unit wirelessly sends data to a hand-held device that flashes a red warning light if there is a "high likelihood" of an impending seizure. (A white light signals a "moderate" likelihood, while a blue light means the odds are low.)

For the first four months, the devices collected data on patients' seizures without actually flashing warnings. For 11 of the 15 patients, the implants seemed capable of correctly predicting a high risk of seizure at least 65 percent of the time. Those patients went on to the next four-month phase, where the devices were activated to give warnings.

Over those four months, the implants worked fairly well for eight patients -- correctly giving the high-risk warning anywhere from 56 percent to 100 percent of the time.

There are plenty of questions left, said Dr. Ashesh Mehta, director of epilepsy surgery at the North Shore-LIJ Comprehensive Epilepsy Care Center in Great Neck, N.Y.

"This study is an important first step," said Mehta, who was not involved in the research. "The next step would be to implant these in a larger sample of patients. And you need to see which groups of patients might be good candidates for this."

Mehta said someone who has seizures only once in a while might not get enough benefit to outweigh the downsides of false alarms, for example. And someone who has many seizures each month might get little added information from the warning system, he said.

It may be the people who fall in the middle -- who have disabling seizures at unpredictable intervals -- who would stand to benefit the most, he said.

But any benefits need to be weighed against the risks. Besides false alarms and unnecessary anxiety, the implant itself can cause problems. In this study, three patients had serious complications, including one with an infection and one whose chest device moved and caused her pain. Two patients ultimately had the implants removed.

Still, Mehta agreed that the technology could prove helpful to some people with epilepsy. If they know a seizure is coming, they might take an extra dose of their medication, for example.

An implanted device like this could also give patients and their doctors more information about their epilepsy, he added. In this study, the implants revealed that most patients were suffering more seizures than they thought; one patient who reported 11 a month was actually having more than 100.

In real life, Mehta said, it can be hard to know if you're feeling bad because of side effects from epilepsy medication or because you're having a lot of seizures. A device like this could help sort that out.

But what's still needed is evidence that this device does improve the quality of patients' lives, Mehta said.

The study was funded by NeuroVista, the Seattle-based company developing the technology. Several of Cook's co-researchers work for the company.

Learn more about epilepsy from the Epilepsy Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story was appropriately cautious in describing the potential benefits based on what was observed in only 15 patients.  The limitations were clearly presented.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters) - Johnson & Johnson’s Stelara helped a significantly higher percentage of Crohn’s disease sufferers than those who received a placebo, according to a study of patients who had not been helped by other commonly used drugs.

In addition, nearly 70 percent of patients who stayed on Stelara beyond the initial six weeks of the mid-stage study continued to respond to the drug and there was a significantly higher rate of remission at 22 weeks than in a placebo group.

Stelara, known chemically as ustekinumab, is already approved to treat the skin condition plaque psoriasis and is in late-stage testing for psoriatic arthritis. An approval for Crohn’s would give the drug entry into an estimated $1.3 billion U.S. market and $2.7 billion market worldwide.

The intravenous biotech drug met the primary goal of the study as almost 40 percent of patients who received the 6 milligrams per kilogram of weight dose of Stelara achieved a clinical response — defined as a 100-point reduction in the Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) — after six weeks of treatment.

That compared with a response rate of 23.5 percent of patients who received a placebo.

Two lower doses of Stelara were also tested in the study of 526 patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease who were not helped by, or could not tolerate, treatment with a widely used class of drugs known as TNF antagonists, such as Abbott Laboratories’ Humira.

Those who received 1 mg/kg had a 36.6 percent response rate and the 3 mg/kg dose led to a 34.1 percent response rate.

“To see these kind of outcomes, where you have high response rates in the short term and then good remission rates out toward five or six months of therapy, it shows unequivocally that the drug is effective for treating Crohn’s disease,” said Dr. William Sandborn, the study’s lead investigator, who presented the data at the Digestive Disease Week meeting in Chicago on Sunday.

“It’s effective in the patient population that has the greatest unmet need at this point in time,” Sandborn said of patients who do not respond to anti-TNF drugs.

He said a 100-point drop in the CDAI was clinically meaningful to patients. “They’ll feel measurably better.”

“The patient population was really quite ill and had very high disease activity, and despite that we saw nice response rates,” Sandborn said.

In a second phase of the study, those who responded to Stelara after six weeks of treatment were given either a 90-mg injection of Stelara at week eight and week 16 or a placebo.

After 22 weeks, 69.4 percent of the Stelara patients maintained a clinical response and 41.7 percent were deemed to be in clinical remission. That compared with 42.5 percent who maintained a clinical response and a 27.4 percent remission rate in the placebo group.

Clinical remission was defined as a CDAI score down to 150. Patients in the study on average started at 320 or 325 on the CDAI scale, researchers said.

Crohn’s is a chronic autoimmune disorder of the gastrointestinal tract that affects an estimated 700,000 Americans. Common symptoms are abdominal pain and diarrhea, and it can lead to bowel perforations. Many Crohn’s patients require surgery when medicines no longer control symptoms.

The rate of infections and other serious side effects was similar in the Stelara and placebo groups, researchers said.

“We’ll need more patients and longer-term data to really fully characterize the safety profile in Crohn’s disease, but so far so good,” Sandborn said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The study presented lots of numbers and defined the scales. We appreciated the Crohn’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI) thresholds for clinical response and remission, the subjects’ baseline CDAI scores, and the explanation of what a 100-point drop feels like to patients. Bravo for including these points and for mentioning that the study met its ‘primary goal.’ Great facts for readers to consider that are often left out of news coverage.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NIH scientists adapt new brain disease test for Parkinson’s, dementia with Lewy bodies

National Institutes of Health scientists developing a rapid, practical test for the early diagnosis of prion diseases have modified the assay to offer the possibility of improving early diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. The group, led by NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), tested 60 cerebral spinal fluid samples, including 12 from people with Parkinson’s disease, 17 from people with dementia with Lewy bodies, and 31 controls, including 16 of whom had Alzheimer’s disease. The test correctly excluded all the 31 controls and diagnosed both Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies with 93 percent accuracy.

Importantly, test results were available within two days, compared to related assays that require up to 13 days. The group conducted the tests using Real-Time Quaking-Induced Conversion (RT-QuIC), an assay developed and refined over the past decade at NIAID’s Rocky Mountain Laboratories. Scientists from the University of California San Diego, University of Verona in Italy, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, and the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, collaborated on the project. The research findings were published in Acta Neuropathologica Communications.

Multiple neurological disorders, including Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, involve the abnormal clumping of a protein called alpha-synuclein into brain deposits called Lewy bodies. The pathological processes in these diseases resembles prion diseases in mammal brains. Like prion diseases, Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies result in progressive deterioration of brain functions and, ultimately, death. Parkinson’s disease is about 1,000 times more common than prion diseases, affecting up to 1 million people in the United States, with 60,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Lewy body dementia affects an estimated 1.4 million people in the United States, according to the Lewy Body Dementia Association.

Early and accurate diagnoses of these brain disorders is essential for developing treatments and identifying patients eligible for clinical trials. The diseases typically progress for years before symptoms appear, and once they do, distinguishing one disease from another can be difficult.

The NIAID group continues to adapt the RT-QuIC assay to detect additional types of neurological diseases with greater accuracy using the least invasive patient sample possible — whether that is blood, skin, nasal brushings, or other samples. The group also has trained many international colleagues to use and advance the test.

B Groveman et al. Rapid and ultra-sensitive quantitation of disease-associated α-synuclein seeds in brain and cerebrospinal fluid by αSyn RT-QuIC. Acta Neuropathologica Communications DOI: 10.1186/s40478-018-0508-2 (2018).

Byron Caughey, Ph.D., a senior investigator in NIAID’s Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, is available to comment on this study.

This research was supported in part by NIH funding awards ZIA AI001086-08, AGO5131, and PHS P30-AG010133.

NIAID conducts and supports research—at NIH, throughout the United States, and worldwide—to study the causes of infectious and immune-mediated diseases, and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing and treating these illnesses. News releases, fact sheets and other NIAID-related materials are available on the NIAID website.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release says the test “correctly excluded all the 31 controls and diagnosed both Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies with 93 percent accuracy.” The author also noted the number of people tested.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The paper was published last week in The Cochrane Library, a journal devoted to systematic reviews of health care interventions. In all, the researchers examined eight trials involving 3,417 men and women ages 18 and older.

None of the studies compared A.A. with no treatment at all, and the researchers said that made it more difficult to draw conclusions about effectiveness. About one-fifth of alcoholics achieve long-term sobriety without treatment.

There is no single known cause of alcoholism, but the researchers wrote that about two-thirds of alcohol dependence could be attributed to genetic factors and one-third to environmental causes like stress or emotional problems. Men and women are equally affected, and age does not appear to affect prognosis.

A member of the staff of the general service office of Alcoholics Anonymous said the organization did not comment on published studies of the program, but some experts objected to the methods and conclusions of the review.

“Although the randomized controlled trial is the gold-standard methodology in comparing between conditions,” said Thomas G. Brown, an assistant professor of psychiatry at McGill University, “it washes out a factor that may be important in potentiating A.A.’s benefits, namely patient choice and preference.” In other words, having a patient choose the form of treatment, rather than being assigned to it as in most studies, could be an important factor.

Despite the largely negative findings, John F. Kelly, a clinical psychologist at Harvard, said he still believed that A.A. and other 12-step programs were effective.

A.A. and other 12-step programs “are not cure-alls,” Dr. Kelly said, “but I would say at a minimum, they help.”

Dr. Edward V. Nunes, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia, said research had demonstrated that certain elements of A.A. were effective. “Some of the wisdom embodied in A.A., such as the notion of persons, places and things that trigger drinking, are very much a part of cognitive-behavioral therapy, which is a scientifically driven, empirically validated treatment,” Dr. Nunes said.

The review covered only carefully controlled trials. But Sarah Zemore, of the Alcohol Research Group of the National Alcohol Research Center, said studies that observed the results of a treatment without setting up randomized control groups could also be informative.

“Does A.A. or some other mutual-help group work for people who seek it voluntarily?” she said. “Obviously, a randomized trial cannot address that question. But observational data can.”

It is unlikely that substance abuse experts will widely reject A.A. on the basis of these findings.

“A.A. has helped a lot of people,” Dr. Nunes said. “There are a lot of satisfied customers. On the basis of that, we have to take it seriously.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provides no quantification of benefit of A.A. and 12-step groups as treatments, however, the story discusses a metaanalysis comparing 12-step programs to other psychological forms of treatment for alcohol dependence. The story notes that 12-step programs were not superior to other interventions to reduce alcohol dependence, and in genereal, about one-fifth of alcoholics remain sober without any treatment. A.A. and 12-step self-help groups may not be an improvement over other psychological interventions for reducing alcohol consumption, but they are an option for people who prefer mutual-help groups. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 5, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Taking fish oil supplements during pregnancy might translate into healthier growth in children during their first six years of life, a new study suggests.

"This study highlights the fact that in utero exposure can have a profound effect on the fetus that lasts through childhood," said Dr. Jennifer Wu, an obstetrician-gynecologist from Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"For the past decade, the importance of fish oil and the omega-3 fatty acids have been stressed to patients," explained Wu, who was not involved in the study.

"The use of fish oil in the latter part of the pregnancy has an impact on bone and muscle mass. Though these children are larger, they do not have increased rates of obesity," Wu added.

In the study, the researchers followed 736 pregnant women in Denmark who took either fish oil or olive oil supplements daily from week 24 of their pregnancy until one week after they gave birth.

The children were assessed 11 times between birth and the age of 6 years. Those whose mothers took the fish oil supplements during pregnancy sustained a higher body mass index (BMI) from the age of 1 to 6 years.

However, the higher BMI was not due to a higher percentage of fat, but rather to higher percentages of lean muscle and bone mass, the researchers found.

At age 6, children whose mothers took fish oil supplements while pregnant had a 395 grams higher total mass, 281 grams higher lean mass and 10 grams higher bone mineral content than children whose mothers who took olive oil during pregnancy, the findings showed.

"The body composition at age 6 years in children given fish oil supplementation was characterized by a proportional increase in lean, bone and fat mass, suggesting a general growth-stimulating effect," the researchers, who were led by Hans Bisgaard, from the University of Copenhagen, wrote in the report.

However, the findings only showed an association and did not prove that fish oil pills caused healthier growth in children.

According to Dr. Jill Rabin, co-chief of the division of ambulatory care, Women's Health Programs-PCAP Services at Northwell Health, in New Hyde Park, N.Y., "In pregnancy and beyond, adequate intake of fish is important for normal human development, and this paper certainly adds to the literature."

But Rabin, who was not involved in the study, did add a few caveats about the findings.

The population studied was relatively homogenous, and "the [body mass] findings were not the object of the study (wheezing or asthma in children was the primary objective), growth was a secondary finding," Rabin explained. "Certainly, however, this solid paper adds to the literature and paves the way for additional research on this interesting topic."

The report by Bisgaard and colleagues was published online Sept. 4 in the BMJ.

The American Academy of Pediatrics has more on healthy growth.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story explains the benefit this way:  “At age 6, children whose mothers took fish oil supplements while pregnant had a 395 grams higher total mass, 281 grams higher lean mass and 10 grams higher bone mineral content than children whose mothers who took olive oil during pregnancy, the findings showed.”
This is sufficient, but the story could have provided some context on whether these numbers are clinically meaningful. Is 395 grams (less than a pound) a big deal? What about 10 grams more bone mineral content? Is that change big enough to reduce fractures, for example?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dermatologists will soon get some high-tech help deciding which suspicious-looking moles should be removed and checked for melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a first-of-its-kind device, called MelaFind, that makes detailed, digital images of skin growths and uses a computer to analyze them for signs of cancer, offering a sort of second opinion to doctors. The device is approved only for dermatologists and only for use on growths that don't have obvious signs of cancer but still have one or two worrisome traits.

The hope is to find more melanomas sooner. Nearly all patients diagnosed with early-stage melanoma can be treated and cured, but 85 percent of patients with late-stage melanoma die from it within five years.

More than 70,000 people in the U.S. will be diagnosed with melanoma this year, and 16 percent are diagnosed only after the disease has spread to other parts of the body, according to estimates from the National Institutes of Health.

To diagnose the disease, doctors decide which moles to remove and biopsy using an entirely visual set of guidelines involving size, shape and color. Most dermatologists easily spot late-stage lesions that have obvious signs of cancer, including irregular edges, uneven color and a width greater than 6 millimeters. But many others are tough calls.

"Every day patients come in with 20 moles on their back and the dilemma is, which ones are suspicious and need to be biopsied?" said Dr. David Pariser, former president of the American Academy of Dermatology. "The diagnosis of melanoma is the most serious one a dermatologist makes, and we have sleepless nights worrying about it," said Pariser, who consulted for the device's maker, Mela Sciences Inc. of Irvington, N.Y., on its presentation to FDA.

The device's handheld attachment, about the size of a blow dryer, emits light that penetrates below the surface of the skin, taking multicolored images that reflect the depth and shape of skin growths. A computer compares these to a database of 10,000 archived images and recommends whether a biopsy should be done.

In a company-sponsored study published last year involving around 1,300 patients, some with multiple growths, doctors reported that MelaFind correctly suggested biopsies on 125 of 127 melanomas that doctors had removed. MelaFind correctly identified about 10 percent of non-cancerous growths, which was better than doctors in the study who were correct less than 4 percent of the time, on average. The study was published in the Archives of Dermatology.

The company's study was not intended to show that screening with the device saves lives, only that it can help improve a doctor's ability to spot melanoma.

For now, experts say MelaFind will help dermatologists make better decisions on which moles to remove.

"There is no such thing as 100 percent certainty in medicine," said Dr. George Elias, a melanoma expert at Georgetown's Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center who had no ties to the company or the device.

"Ultimately it's the responsibility of the dermatologist to use his clinical judgment to make the best decision. This machine is there to help him, not replace him."

Elias voted with the majority of an FDA panel that narrowly endorsed the device last year.

Dermatologists say it's too early to tell whether MelaFind will lead to fewer unnecessary biopsies.

"A biopsy takes a few minutes in my hands, so if there's an issue with any lesion we will always biopsy, whether we have a MelaFind picture or not," said Dr. Leonard Goldberg, a dermatologist at the Texas Medical Center and vice president of the Skin Cancer Foundation, a disease awareness group that accepts donations from makers of sunscreen.

MelaFind underwent a contentious, years-long review by the Food and Drug Administration, which initially rejected the device and concluded it could "potentially cause more harm than good."

Regulators worried that the device could give physicians a false sense of certainty, leading to fewer biopsies. Another concern was that doctors could misinterpret the device's feedback, particularly error messages when a mole cannot be scanned. About 8 percent of growths scanned in the company study came back as "unevaluable."

At a meeting last fall, FDA scientists said Mela Sciences had not shown how its device would influence day-to-day decisions by doctors. The agency also worried about its use by general doctors not accustomed to identifying suspicious skin moles. Despite these concerns, the panel of advisers narrowly backed the overall safety and efficacy of the device in a 8-7 vote.

Regulators said this week that they ultimately approved the device after Mela Sciences agreed to limit its use to board-certified dermatologists who undergo a specialized training course.

"The device is only good for certain lesions, and that's why you have to be a dermatologist to be able to classify and categorize those lesions appropriately," said Christy Foreman, director of FDA's Office of Device Evaluation.

Foreman said an FDA-required follow-up study would help determine how much of a benefit MelaFind represents for patients.

"This device represents new technology. At the end of the day I don't know that this will be the best technology out there, but it is a step forward to allow continued innovation in this area," Foreman said.

Don't expect to see a MelaFind machine at your next doctor's appointment. The company plans to bring them next year to just 200 dermatologists on the East coast, all of whom must undergo company training before they can begin using the device.

Doctors will pay a one-time fee of $7,500 to lease and receive training on the device. Patients will pay $150 out of pocket for a MelaFind scan, which analysts say may limit use to more affluent patients who are willing to pay extra for the latest medical care. Mela Sciences does not plan to ask insurers to cover the device until several years from now, after it is more widely used.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story shows that the device is fairly effective at finding cancerous lesions. “In a company-sponsored study published last year involving around 1,300 patients, some with multiple growths, doctors reported that MelaFind correctly suggested biopsies on 125 of 127 melanomas that doctors had removed.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBUS, Ohio - Results from an international, randomized study show that an implanted nerve stimulator significantly improves symptoms in those with central sleep apnea, without causing serious side effects.

Dr. William Abraham, co-lead author and director of the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, presented findings from the study at the recent European Society of

Cardiology Congress in Rome. The study is published today by The Lancet. Unlike the more common obstructive sleep apnea, in which the airway partially collapses and causes pauses in breathing, central sleep apnea (CSA) occurs when the brain fails to control breathing during sleep.

"CSA is a serious concern because it affects about a third of people with heart failure and it's known to make the condition worse," Abraham said. "Currently, we don't have good treatments available. Positive airway pressure devices have been used, but many patients don't tolerate them well and a recent study showed them to be harmful."

Abraham, along with lead author Dr. Maria Rosa Costanzo at Advocate Heart Institute in Naperville, IL, led the study at 31 hospitals in the United States, Germany and Poland. The research team tested the safety and effectiveness of a transvenous phrenic nerve stimulator made by Respicardia Inc. Much like a pacemaker, it sends a regular signal telling the diaphragm to breathe during sleep.

In the randomized study, 151 patients were implanted with the device. Ten were excluded due to non-study related medical issues or deaths, exiting the study or missing visits. During the first six months of evaluation, 68 devices were activated for treatment, while 73 were left inactive as the control group. Between six and 12 months of follow-up, all patients received the neurostimulation treatment.

At the six month evaluation, the device reduced CSA events per hour by half or more for 35 of the 68 members (51 percent) of the treatment group. Only eight (11 percent) of those in the control group achieved the same reduction. Other important sleep measures, such as the amount of time spent with a low blood oxygen level, were also significantly improved. About a third of patients in the treatment group reported therapy-related discomfort that was resolved with some reprogramming of the device.

"Not only did we see this reduction in events per hour, the patients also rated themselves better on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (meaning they were less sleepy during the day) and on a global assessment of their overall quality of life," Abraham said. "This tells us the effects of neurostimulation are clinically relevant and this could be a promising therapy for those with central sleep apnea."

In addition to Abraham, Ohio State's Dr. Rami Khayat and Dr. Ralph Augostini participated in this research, making Ohio State one of the high enrolling centers participating in the study worldwide.

The study was funded by Respicardia. Abraham is a consultant for the company.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We were glad to see absolute numbers and not just percentages used to quantify the benefits of the study.
“At the six month evaluation, the device reduced CSA events per hour by half or more for 35 of the 68 members (51 percent) of the treatment group. Only eight (11 percent) of those in the control group achieved the same reduction.”
A bit more discussion on how the device might impact future quality of life or how long the benefit might be sustained — provided the data was available — would have been useful context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Is a drug really needed for what seems like a trivial use? Novalar and some dentists who advise the company said it might be useful for children, who can injure themselves by biting their lip or tongue without knowing it.

“Kids tend to chew on their tongue when it’s numb,” said Dr. Athena Papas, a professor at the Tufts University School of Dental Medicine. The drug, however, is not approved for children younger than 6 or weighing less than 33 pounds.

Dr. Papas, an adviser to Novalar and an investigator in its clinical trials, said she thought the drug would appeal especially to those receiving cosmetic dentistry “who like to look good when they leave the dentist’s office.”

Novalar said its surveys showed great interest in the product among consumers and among dentists, some of whom said they would mark up the price of the drug as a source of profit.

With about 300 million anesthesia injections given by dentists each year, company executives say the drug could easily achieve sales of hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

OraVerse is a formulation of a decades-old drug, phentolamine mesylate, which is used to treat severe episodes of hypertension.

When dentists administer lidocaine or another local anesthetic, they usually combine it with another drug called epinephrine, which acts to constrict the blood vessels. That keeps the blood from carrying away the anesthetic from the mouth too quickly.

OraVerse does the opposite, dilating the blood vessels and speeding up blood flow so the anesthetic can be carried away.

“We aren’t reversing the local anesthesia,” said Dr. Paul A. Moore, chairman of anesthesiology at the University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, who is an adviser to Novalar. “It is reversing the epinephrine.”

The label for the hypertension drug phentolamine contains warnings about heart attacks and occlusion of blood flow to the brain. Novalar said the label of OraVerse would also contain the warnings, but note that OraVerse is given in a different manner. In the clinical trials there were no serious side effects, Novalar said.

Novalar also said patients did not have pain because the anesthesia wore off more quickly, except for a little extra pain at the injection site. But the trials excluded people who got root canals or tooth extractions. Those patients would be expected to have lingering pain, and should not get Oraverse, Dr. Moore said.

In two trials of 484 patients in total, people were given either OraVerse or a sham injection. (Patients were blindfolded so they could not see the needle and, being numb, supposedly could not tell if the needle penetrated.)

People then tapped their lips every five minutes for five hours, feeling for sensation. Observers measured the symmetry of their smiles, checked for drool and listened to them read sentences.

About 41 percent of patients who got OraVerse reported normal lower lip sensation one hour after getting the drug, compared with 7 percent of those getting the sham injection. About 59 percent of those who got OraVerse had normal sensation in the upper lip after one hour, compared to 12 percent in the control group.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article does a good job describing the clinical trials and the results.  Kudos for including both relative and absolute differences. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Still, the findings could help smooth the way for regulatory approval, wider use of the drugs by doctors and possibly reimbursement by insurers.

The drugs, evolocumab from Amgen and alirocumab from Sanofi and Regeneron, inhibit a protein in the body called PCSK9 that helps regulate cholesterol. In the studies detailed on Sunday, both drugs reduced the bad cholesterol by about 60 percent, to about 50 milligrams per deciliter from about 120 at the start of the studies. In many cases such big reductions were achieved even though the patients were already taking statins.

Both drugs could win approval from the Food and Drug Administration by this summer. Analysts say the drugs will have billions of dollars in annual sales and will be taken by millions of people who cannot lower their cholesterol enough using statins alone or cannot tolerate statins. (However, the PCSK9 drugs are taken by injection every two weeks or four weeks, which could deter some users.)

Statins reduce cardiovascular risk and scientists believe it is because they decrease low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, the so-called bad cholesterol. But merely looking at cholesterol levels can be misleading. The drug niacin did not protect against heart attacks and strokes even though it raised so-called good cholesterol and modestly lowered bad cholesterol.

Insurers in particular might demand proof that the PCSK9 drugs stave off heart attacks, strokes, deaths from coronary disease and procedures to open arteries before agreeing to pay for them for many patients. Executives at CVS Health, a leading pharmacy benefits manager, recently said that PCSK9 inhibitors might cost $7,000 to $12,000 a year and would strain health care budgets because so many people might use them.

“Managed care pharmacy, indeed the health care system, has never seen a challenge like this to our resilience in absorbing costs,” they wrote in the Health Affairs blog.

Whether the results from these two small studies will be persuasive enough remains to be seen.

The study of Amgen’s evolocumab involved 4,465 patients with various degrees of risk, two-thirds of whom were randomly chosen to get the drug in addition to the medication they were already taking. After one year, 0.95 percent of those in the group that received the drug had suffered a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular problem, compared with 2.18 percent in the group that did not take the drug. By a measure known as the hazard ratio, the risk of cardiovascular events was reduced by 53 percent.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job of clarifying the risk of cardiovascular events in each study. For evolocumab, the article said, “After one year, 0.95 percent of those in the group that received the drug had suffered a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular problem, compared with 2.18 percent in the group that did not take the drug.” The article went into the same nitty gritty for alirocumab: “After one and a half years, the rate of cardiovascular events was 1.7 percent in those who received the drug, versus 3.3 percent in those who received a placebo.”
We applaud that the piece reported the raw percentages, since it puts the benefits into perspective. But high up in the story, it cites the figures in terms of relative risk reduction, making the benefits sound more impressive: “Both drugs reduced the rate of such cardiovascular problems by about half.”
We encourage stories to report benefits in absolute terms so that readers have a clearer idea of what “risk reduction” really means. And since many readers will not read a long story in its entirety, we encourage journalists to put that information somewhere that readers are likely to see it. If an eye-popping relative risk figure is mentioned high up in the story, it should be accompanied by immediate discussion of what that means in absolute terms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- There's too little evidence to say definitively whether treating early, localized prostate cancer with radiation is a better option than "watchful waiting," new research finds.

In a study funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), researchers from Tufts University reviewed the available literature on radiation and prostate cancer, including 10 randomized controlled trials and 65 observational studies.

They concluded there was "insufficient evidence" to say with certainty whether radiation treatment compared to watchful waiting is more likely to save lives.

"We just don't have sufficient information to say much of anything," said Dr. Stanley Ip, an assistant professor of medicine at Tufts University Medical Center.

In part, that's because researchers found no randomized controlled trials -- considered the gold standard of research -- that compared radiation therapy with watching waiting, Ip said. Though there were observational studies, those may be biased because men who opt to hold off on treatment may be those whose tumors are lower risk to begin with, he said.

The study is published in the June 6 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Watchful waiting -- which does not involve cancer treatment -- means having regular exams while keeping an eye on the tumor to see if it grows or spreads. It is usually recommended when doctors feel someone's advanced age will allow them to outlive the generally slow-moving cancer or when someone has other conditions that are more likely to prove lethal.

Men who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer -- meaning it's confined to the prostate gland and has not spread -- are confronted with a bewildering array of options for treating it: surgery; radiation; drugs to deprive the tumor of the hormone androgen that may drive its growth; or watchful waiting.

In 2008, AHRQ also commissioned a review of studies on other prostate cancer treatment options, but that report could not draw conclusions on the best approach either.

"What all of these analyses have found is there is very limited data that allows us to determine which of these approaches in the best approach," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate cancer for the American Cancer Society.

Brooks said more comparative effectiveness research, which compares different kinds of treatments, is needed.

In the meantime, what are men diagnosed with early prostate cancer to do?

Men and their doctors need to consider what the tumor looks like under the microscope, which can help gauge how aggressive it may be. They should also consider age and overall health status, including whether or not the patient has other conditions more likely to cause death than the prostate cancer.

Finally, patients and their doctors should weight the potential debilitating side effects of the treatments, such as incontinence and erectile dysfunction, against how comfortable the man is with holding off on treatment, experts say.

"Men need to learn as much as they can about the possible outcomes and benefits of the various treatments and the potential side effects, and choose which direction they are most comfortable with," Brooks said.

In the current review, researchers found several trials that compared different doses of radiation and different types of radiation therapy, including external beam radiation therapy, in which a radiation is delivered through a beam through the skin, or brachytherapy, in which radioactive isotopes are delivered via injection into the prostate.

For those methods, too, there was too little research to say with confidence which method was superior in preventing deaths from prostate cancer, the researchers said. Retrospective studies, however, found that radiation treatments were associated with increased urinary or bowel problems, compared with no treatment or no initial treatment.

There was also "moderate strength evidence" that a higher external beam radiation was more effective than a lower dose.

Taken together, the review "does point out that based on current evidence, doctors should not be telling their patients that this form of radiation is better than that form," Brooks said. "Some of the distinctions being made are not really supported by the evidence."

Proton beam therapy in particular is expensive, but according to this report, there isn't enough evidence to show it's any better than other option.

Radiation, he noted, may be the best option for men whose tumors have spread outside the gland, since simply removing the prostate gland surgically is not likely to be as effective, he said.

The American Cancer Society estimates that in 2009, approximately 192,000 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer and approximately 27,000 men died of the disease.

The National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The lack of evidence of benefit was clear in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 14, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A weight-loss pill called lorcaserin not only helps people drop pounds but does so with few side effects, new industry-funded research reports.

A potential player in fighting the obesity epidemic, lorcaserin is a new type of weight-loss drug that works by acting on serotonin, a chemical associated with feelings of well-being and feeling full, and does not appear to increase blood pressure or cause any other heart problems, according to the researchers, whose work was sponsored by the drug manufacturer.

"In this long-term study of lorcaserin for treating patients for obesity, there was good weight loss, outstanding safety profile and the drug was extremely well-tolerated," said lead researcher Dr. Steven Smith from the Translational Research Institute for Metabolism and Diabetes in Winter Park, Fla.

"As patients are looking for additional options and physicians are looking for new tools, [lorcaserin] provides us with a look into the future for what's going to be available for helping patients lose weight," he added.

The report is published in the July 15 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, and was sponsored by Arena Pharmaceuticals, of San Diego, Calif., which used its own doctors as part of the study group.

The drug is one of three new anti-obesity drugs being considered for approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. On Thursday, an FDA advisory panel is expected to review Qnexa, made by Vivus, from a combination of phentermine and topiramate. It helped patients in clinical trials lose as much as 13 percent to 15 percent of body weight.

FDA briefing documents posted online Tuesday acknowledged Qnexa's effectiveness in helping patients lose weight, but said the review panel should take into account a number of potential nervous system and psychiatric side effects, the Associated Press reported.

The third new drug is Orexigen Therapeutic's Contrave, which is a combination of the antidepressant Wellbutrin and the addiction drug naltrexone.

For the lorcaserin study, Smith's team randomly assigned 3,182 obese or overweight people to lorcaserin or placebo. Patients took lorcaserin twice a day for a year and also took part in diet and exercise counseling.

After one year, 47.5 percent of those taking lorcaserin had lost 5 percent or more of their body weight. "That's about 20 pounds," Smith said.

Among those taking the placebo, only 20.3 percent had achieved that amount of weight loss, the researchers found.

After the first year, people taking lorcaserin were randomized to lorcaserin or placebo for an additional year. Among people who stayed on lorcaserin, 67.9 percent were able to maintain the weight loss they had seen in the first year. Among those who were switched to a placebo, 50.3 percent were able to maintain their weight loss, Smith's group reported.

Smith's team noted that for those taking lorcaserin, there was no increase in heart valve problems as had been seen with the discredited diet drug Fen-Phen. However, common side effects included headache, dizziness and nausea.

Dr. Arne Astrup, from the department of human nutrition at the University of Copenhagen in Denmark and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that "the trial on lorcaserin provides evidence of a safe weight-loss medication, that seems to provide benefits in terms of reducing risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease."

Also, it does not have the same problems as the previous weight-loss drugs, Fen-Phen (Phentermine), Acomplia (rimonabant) or Meridia (sibutramine), which had been associated with heart problems, he said.

"If weight-loss drugs are tailor-made to hit only the right receptor, based on physiological knowledge, it seems to be possible to develop weight-loss medications that do not possess any serious adverse effects," Astrup added.

However, one expert was not sold on this new drug.

"What's most impressive about this two-year clinical trial is how unimpressive it is," said Dr. David L. Katz, director of the Prevention Research Center at Yale University School of Medicine.

Nearly half of the people dropped out in the first year, he pointed out, and by year two, more than half the remainder had also dropped out.

"Among those who remained, lorcaserin produced relatively modest weight loss when combined with diet and exercise counseling, and that weight loss was maintained in over half of the participants only so long as they kept taking the drug. And the paper made no mention of the costs attached to long-term pharmacotherapy," Katz added.

"This close look at lorcaserin reaffirms that better daily use of feet and forks holds far greater promise for meaningful, sustainable and affordable weight control than pharmacotherapy," Katz said.

According to the Associated Press, lorcaserin will be reviewed by an FDA panel in September, and Contrave will be reviewed in December.

For more on losing weight, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did give weight loss amounts for people in the study.  We wish they had calculated the number needed to treat – how many people would have to take the drug for how long in order to have one benefit.  The one truly independent voice in this story, Dr. David L. Katz, says "What’s most impressive about this two-year clinical trial is how unimpressive it is." Instead of going on to attribute all of the analysis of what that is to Katz, the story could have gone the extra step of seeing if others shared that view and really bearing down on the numbers to see how strong the results really are. By our rough count, by the second year, they were dealing with a trial consisting of fewer than 500 people.
Nonetheless, because the story met the minimum standard for this criterion, we’ll judge it to be satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - - People were less likely to go to the hospital with heart attacks or strokes after several counties in New York State restricted the use of trans fats, according to a new study.

Trans fats raise bad cholesterol, lower good cholesterol and ultimately increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes. They’re found naturally in some foods but are often manufactured and added to processed foods to improve taste and texture.

“New York City was progressive and they enacted restrictions on trans fats, but no one looked to see if this made measurable changes to outcomes,” said study lead author Dr. Eric Brandt, of Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut.

New York City limited the use of trans fats starting in July 2007. The restrictions applied to food purchased outside of stores, such as at restaurants, street vendors and bakeries, in the city’s five counties. Other New York counties took similar actions after New York City’s measure was enacted.

Previous research found that death from cardiovascular disease declined 4.5 percent within a year after counties enacted trans fat restrictions, the researchers write in JAMA Cardiology. No study looked at non-fatal cardiovascular issues like hospitalizations due to heart attacks and strokes, however.

For the new study, the researchers compared data on people hospitalized between 2002 and 2013 for heart attacks or strokes in counties that did or didn’t restrict trans fats.

Altogether they had data on 3.3 million people in 25 counties without trans fat restrictions and 8.4 million people in 11 counties with restrictions.

In 2006, there were 753 hospital admissions for heart attack or stroke per 100,000 people in counties that never enacted restrictions compared to 726 per 100,000 people in counties that put restrictions in place.

While admissions for heart attacks and strokes fell after 2002 in all the counties, the drop was more substantial in those that enacted trans fat restrictions, the authors found.

After three years or more, the combined rate of hospitalizations for heart attacks or strokes was about 6 percent lower in the counties with trans fat regulations.

Admissions for heart attacks were nearly 8 percent lower in counties with restrictions. Similarly, admissions for strokes were about 4 percent lower in counties with restrictions, but that finding could be due to chance.

Brandt told Reuters Health that New York City was also pushing other public health initiatives around the same time. Those included clean air initiatives and showing calorie counts on restaurant menus.

When they removed New York City data to make sure those other factors weren’t driving the findings, the pattern didn’t change.

“We still found the same thing,” Brandt said.

Still, the study can’t say the trans fat restrictions caused fewer admissions in those counties.

Brandt and colleagues write that in 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) removed manufactured trans fats from its list of safe food additives. By 2018, those fats will be nearly eliminated from American diets, they add.

“There has been a lot of looking into whether trans fats are harmful,” said Brandt. “Here we find on a population level when we restrict them, it benefits society by reducing heart attacks and strokes.”

The findings suggest the FDA’s action will lead to health benefits across the country, he added.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The reader is offered both percentage and absolute numbers to describe the decreases in hospitalization for heart problems. The story also makes clear what differences are or are not statistically significant. Lastly and importantly, the story makes clear that the study established an association, not a causal link.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: For adults coming to the emergency department for arm or leg pain due to sprain, strain, or fracture, there was no difference in pain reduction after 2 hours with ibuprofen-acetaminophen vs three comparison opioid-acetaminophen (paracetamol) combinations.

Why The Research Is Interesting: The United States is facing an opioid epidemic with almost 500,000 individuals dying from opioid overdoses since 2000. Despite the epidemic, opioid analgesics remain a first-line treatment for moderate to severe acute pain in the emergency department. The combination of ibuprofen and acetaminophen may represent an effective non-opioid alternative.

Who: 416 patients (ages 21 to 64 years) with moderate to severe acute extremity pain in two urban emergency departments were randomly assigned to receive

What (Study Measures): The between-group difference in decline in pain two hours after taking the study drugs.

How (Study Design): This was a randomized clinical trial (RCT). Randomized trials allow for the strongest inferences to be made about the true effect of an intervention such as a medication or a procedure. However, not all RCT results can be replicated because patient characteristics or other variables in real-world settings may differ from those that were studied in the RCT.

Authors: Andrew K. Chang, M.D., M.S., of Albany Medical College, Albany, New York, and coauthors

Results: After 2 hours pain was less in all participants, without any important difference in effect between the four groups.

Study Limitations: The results apply only to pain after two hours. About 1 in 5 patients required additional medication to control their pain.

Study Conclusions: There were no important differences in pain reduction after 2 hours with ibuprofen-acetaminophen or opioid-acetaminophen combination pills in emergency department patients with acute extremity pain. The findings suggest that ibuprofen-acetaminophen is a reasonable alternative to opioid management of acute extremity pain due to sprain, strain, or fracture, but further research to assess longer-term effect, adverse events and dosing is warranted.

The following related elements also are available on the For The Media website:

The editorial, "Opioid vs Nonopioid Acute Pain Management in the Emergency Department," by Demetrios N. Kyriacou, M.D., Ph.D., Senior Editor, JAMA, Chicago; Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago.

For more details and to read the full study, please visit the For The Media website.

Editor's Note: Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Want to embed a link to this study in your story?: Link will be live at the embargo time http://jamanetwork.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This is a tough one, since the release does not quantify the extent of the pain reduction. The release notes only that “After 2 hours pain was less in all participants, without any important difference in effect between the four groups.” There were differences between the groups, but those differences were not statistically significant. However, given that we often call out news releases that make a big deal out of statistically insignificant differences, we approve of the way that issue is handled here — thus the satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
So should U.S. women continue to get routine mammograms? It's a "close call," says H. Gilbert Welch, MD, MPH, of the Dartmouth Institute in Lebanon, N.H.

"This is a test that women who want it should be able to have," Welch tells WebMD. "But it should not be jammed down people's throats. ... The system we are working in leads doctors to coax, scare, and coerce women into having this test."

Why would a woman at normal risk of breast cancer want to get routine mammograms? The obvious answer is that these tests save lives.

How many lives? If the full 10% drop in breast cancer deaths among screened women in the Norwegian study is totally due to mammograms themselves -- Welch calls this an optimistic assumption -- one life is saved for every 2,500 women who get regular mammograms.

But what's the harm of routine mammograms?

"The biggest harm is you are treated for breast cancer unnecessarily, for a cancer that was never going to cause problems," Welch says. "Because we don't know which cancers these are, all cancers are treated. This means some women will undergo needless surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy. On balance, this is about five to 15 of those 2,500 women screened."

Moreover, a large number of screened women will have worrisome mammogram results.

"Among the 2,500 women screened, at least 1,000 will be told something looks wrong on their mammogram, and they will have to worry that they have cancer," Welch says. "The vast majority will turn out not to have cancer, but all of them will worry."

Welch notes that many women may find that the benefits of routine mammograms outweigh these risks.

"Every woman has to make her own decision about how to weigh these very dissimilar things," Welch says. "Some will benefit in a very large way. But to achieve that benefit, a lot of others will have to go through something with very negative effects. It is not wrong to want a routine mammogram, and it is not wrong not to want one."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Although effective for the treatment of diabetes, exercise is sometimes difficult for overweight or elderly people. A new wearable medical device developed by Kumamoto University has been found to effect visceral fat loss and improve blood glucose (sugar). The current study reports clinical trial results for optimal use frequency.

Type 2 diabetes is a disease of systemic organ failure due to chronic hyperglycemia and inflammation from the accumulation of excess visceral fat. Metabolic disorders such as hyperglycemia attenuate stress resistance in the human body and exacerbate insulin resistance. The ability of insulin to lower blood sugar levels is reduced and insulin secretion is decreased.

The heat shock response (HSR) is activated as a response to stress in the human body, but its function decreased in those with type 2 diabetes. A research team from Kumamoto University, Japan has found that by restoring the function of HSP72, the main protein of HSR, improved glucose-related abnormalities. The team found that a suitable combination of mild electrical stimulation (MES) with heat shock (HS) activated HSP72 more efficiently.

The researchers developed a belt-type medical device that uses a special type of rubber to transmit MES and HS at the same time. They then performed a clinical trial of MES + HS on 40 obese men suffering from type 2 diabetes. Results showed a decrease fasting glucose levels, a loss of visceral fat, improve insulin resistance, and a significant (-0.43%) improvement in glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) values. About half of all subjects (52.5%) achieved less than 7.0% HbA1c, which is a treatment goal for diabetes. The first trial showed that activation of the HSR produced a large therapeutic effect.

In the researcher's next clinical trial, 60 obese patients with type 2 diabetes from both genders were given a 12-week treatment with the belt-shaped MES+HS medical device. Trial subjects received treatments for 60 minutes each time, and were separated into three groups of 2, 4, and 7 treatments per week. This determined the most effective treatment frequency.

The reduction in the visceral fat area was 5.37 sq. cm in the 2 treatment per week group, 14.24 sq. cm in the 4 per week group and 16.45 sq. cm in the 7 per week group. Declines in HbA1c were 0.10%, 0.36%, and 0.65% in the 2, 4, and 7 treatment-per-week groups respectively. Improvements in chronic inflammation, fatty liver markers, renal function and lipid profile were also shown. Furthermore, adding the MES+HS treatment to a DPP-4 inhibitor, which is the most often used therapeutic drug for diabetes in Japan, showed an even stronger blood glucose improvement.

"This device is very easy to use since it simply attaches to the abdomen, and it has a low-impact on the patient. One can expect the effects to be similar to exercise therapy," said Dr. Tatsuya Kondo, who lead the research. "Even in patients who have difficulty exercising, such as those who are overweight, elderly, or have some form of disability, this device can be expected to provide acceptable treatment in addition to conventional diabetic medical care."

This research was posted online in the nature.com journal Scientific Reports on October 19th, 2016.

T. Kondo, R. Goto, K. Ono, S. Kitano, M. A. Suico, M. Sato, M. Igata, J. Kawashima, H. Motoshima, T. Matsumura, H. Kai, and E. Araki, "Activation of heat shock response to treat obese subjects with type 2 diabetes: a prospective, frequency-escalating, randomized, open-label, triple-arm trial," Scientific Reports, vol. 6, p. 35690, 2016. 

DOI: 10.1038/srep35690
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release provides quantification of the benefits of the device but would have been a lot stronger with a better description of what some of the numbers mean. It states:
“The reduction in the visceral fat area was 5.37 sq. cm in the 2 treatment per week group, 14.24 sq. cm in the 4 per week group and 16.45 sq. cm in the 7 per week group. Declines in HbA1c were 0.10%, 0.36%, and 0.65% in the 2, 4, and 7 treatment-per-week groups respectively.”
It also stated, “About half of all subjects (52.5%) achieved less than 7.0% HbA1c, which is a treatment goal for diabetes” in reference to the first study. (HbA1c refers to glycated haemoglobin (A1c), which identifies average plasma glucose concentration.) But the release doesn’t explain the relationship between lowering of HbA1c and improvements in heat shock protein, an important underpinning of the research. The information detailed in the graphic, while related to the basic research, is confusing since it relates to the animal and not the human research described in the release.
A statement from the lead investigator appears premature. Dr. Kondo commented: “Even in patients who have difficulty exercising, such as those who are overweight, elderly, or have some form of disability, this device can be expected to provide acceptable treatment in addition to conventional diabetic medical care.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Jan. 25, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Just how successful is the procedure called catheter ablation at fixing irregular heartbeats that can be potentially fatal?

Pretty successful, a new study found, but there are caveats.

Burning or freezing specific areas of the heart can alleviate the common irregular heart beat called atrial fibrillation in 74 percent of patients. However, the procedure doesn't work for everyone and there are risks of complications, researchers report.

Atrial fibrillation increases the risk of early death by two times in women and 1.5 times in men. It causes 20 to 30 percent of all strokes and can decrease quality of life due to palpitations, shortness of breath, tiredness, weakness and psychological distress, the study authors explained.

About 2.7 million Americans suffer from atrial fibrillation, according to the American Heart Association.

For those whose atrial fibrillation can't be controlled with medications, catheter ablation may be recommended.

"Catheter ablation is a valid alternative for the management of atrial fibrillation with a satisfactory success rate," said study lead researcher Dr. Elena Arbelo.

But the procedure can have complications, which should be considered carefully by doctors and patients, said Arbelo, a senior specialist in the Cardiovascular Institute at the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona in Spain.

Complications can include fluid buildup around the heart, called cardiac tamponade, which makes it difficult for the heart to pump blood. Other complications include stroke or mini-stroke, Arbelo said.

In addition, many patients need to continue blood thinners and medications that control irregular heartbeats after the procedure, she explained.

During the procedure, a wire is threaded through the blood vessels into the heart and used to burn or freeze small areas of the upper chamber, called the atrium.

The burning or freezing creates a scar and stops abnormal electrical signals that cause the irregular heart rhythm, Arbelo said.

According to Dr. Hugh Calkins, "Atrial fibrillation ablation is a well-established procedure that has imperfect results." Calkins is a professor of medicine and director of the cardiac arrhythmia service at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

The complication rate is higher than hoped, and the success rate is lower than hoped, he said.

"Patients don't get a lifetime certificate saying you're cured," Calkins said. "For one in four patients, atrial fibrillation comes back five years after the procedure. Patients should not be going into this thinking they will have a 99 percent cure rate with no risk," he added.

The new study included information from more than 3,600 patients in Europe, the Middle East and North Africa. Their average age was 59, and all had undergone catheter ablation.

Ablation was successful in 74 percent of patients, Arbelo said. These patients had no atrial arrhythmias -- irregular heart beats -- for three to 12 months after the procedure.

According to Arbelo, 91 percent of patients choose to have ablation to relieve symptoms, while 66 percent do so to improve their quality of life.

Atrial arrhythmias in the first three months after ablation were classified as early recurrences and not considered as failures, Arbelo said. In addition, 45 percent of patients who had a successful procedure were still taking antiarrhythmia drugs 12 months later.

About 11 percent suffered complications during the year after the ablation, she said.

After the procedure, patients with two or more risk factors for stroke should be prescribed oral blood thinners, while those with no risk factors don't need them, Arbelo suggested.

The study investigators found that 27 percent of patients with two or more risk factors for stroke were not on blood thinners, but one-third of low-risk patients were taking them.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow is a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles. He said, "Relief of symptoms in patients with atrial fibrillation can be challenging."

In certain patients, catheter ablation may reduce symptoms, improve quality of life and increase exercise capacity, though the impact on death and hospitalization risk is still being evaluated, he noted.

"Of concern is that complication rates are still higher than desirable for this procedure, and there was suboptimal use of stroke-preventing anticoagulation [anti-clotting] therapy after the procedure," added Fonarow, who was not involved with the study.

"Further trials are needed to evaluate the benefits and risks of catheter ablation and its potential role as first-line therapy," he suggested.

Catheter ablation is covered by most insurance, including Medicare, the researchers said.

The report was published online recently in the European Heart Journal.

For more about atrial fibrillation, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This story does provide a numerical picture of the data analysis. It states: “Ablation was successful in 74 percent of patients, Arbelo said. These patients had no atrial arrhythmias–irregular heart beats–for three to 12 months after the procedure.” This means that nearly three out of four patients benefited in some way by having the surgery, although it was not a permanent solution.
However, the story didn’t mention that the success rate fell to 66% when you considered the entire 12 month period, including the first 3 months.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For those plagued with peanut allergies, protection may eventually come in the form of a patch worn on the skin, a new study suggests.

In the second phase of a drug trial, half of participants wearing the highest dose “peanut patches” for a year were able to consume the equivalent of four peanuts without reacting, researchers reported Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology.

It means that “they are not going to have to worry about traces of peanut in a package that came from a plant where peanuts were used or minor contamination of food in a restaurant,” said the study’s lead author, Dr. Hugh Sampson, a professor of pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine and director of the Jaffe Food Allergy Institute at Mount Sinai.

That's a potentially life-saving development. Consuming even trace amounts of a food allergen can cause a reaction. About 15 million Americans have food allergies, including 1 in 13 children, according to the Food Allergy Research and Education (FARE) group. Eight foods account for 90 percent of all reactions: milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, wheat, fish and shellfish.

Unlabeled allergens are a leading cause of food recalls in the U.S. and the number of food allergy-related visits to hospitals are on the rise, according to the Food and Drug Administration.

The FDA recently warned people with peanut allergies to avoid foods containing ground cumin, after traces of peanut powder were found in the ground spice.

In the skin patch trial, the international team of researchers randomly assigned 221 volunteers, ages 6 to 55, to wear a placebo patch or a patch containing peanut protein at one of three doses: 50 micrograms, 100 micrograms or 250 micrograms.

At the end of a year, 50 percent of those wearing the high-dose 250 microgram patch were able to tolerate consuming at least one gram of peanut protein. The same dose worked for nearly 54 percent of kids, 6 to 11.

The skin patch — intended to desensitize patients to peanuts by exposing them to tiny amounts of the allergen — may be particularly appealing to children who are too frightened to try oral or under-the-tongue therapy.

“Many have been told all their lives that if they ingest peanuts they will have a severe reaction and die," he said. "So it’s tough to get them to take it. With this you just slap a little patch on their backs.”

Although some volunteers experienced redness and itchiness at the site of the patch, there were no serious side effects. Just two dropped out because of flare-ups of eczema.

“The goal for most practicing allergists and for most parents is to get a child to the point where if there is an accidental ingestion of peanut it would not be as risky or life-threatening,” said Dr. Amy Stallings, an assistant professor of pediatrics in the division of allergy and immunology at the Duke University Medical Center who is not affiliated with the new study. “And the patch may be a way of doing this that is safer.”

The patch study's results are promising, although researchers need to continue following the participants for another year, Sampson said. It could be several more years before the patch will be available for consumers.

Researchers are trying to discover why food allergies have increased among children — the number of kids living with peanut or tree nut allergies tripled between 1997 and 2008, studies show — but there’s no clear answer. Allergies to peanuts and tree nuts tend to begin in childhood and are usually lifelong.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The level of specificity in the description of benefits in this story is laudable. The text makes it clear that the highest dose intervention desensitized half of the allergic participants by a relatively modest amount, enabling these individuals to be exposed to a gram of peanut protein without reacting. The story also goes on to explain the value of this modest change: this desensitization level may permit allergic individuals to manage “chance” encounters with bits of peanut that can contaminate food products.
Since this was a placebo-controlled trial, however, we wish that the story had provided details about the placebo response rate, as that would have made it clear that the patch was more effective than the placebo. In addition, the take-home message from the headline and first sentence seems less careful than the clearly stated benefit in the story body. As a result, readers may infer a greater benefit than the study actually describes. One could easily conclude that the patch can provide complete protection from an allergic reaction, and that simply is not the case.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Introducing healthy lifestyle behaviors to children in preschool improves their knowledge, attitude and habits toward healthy diet and exercise and can lead to reduced levels of body fat, according to a study published today in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Researchers predict early intervention in children will not only translate to a lifelong understanding of healthy habits but will also serve to encourage their parents to adopt healthier lifestyles.

Research has shown that unhealthy diets at a young age can contribute to cardiovascular disease later in life and that certain heart disease conditions can set in as early as 3 years old. Through the SI! Program, researchers in Madrid implemented a three-year healthy lifestyle intervention for 3 to 5 year olds that used their school, teachers and families to promote cardiovascular health through healthy diet, increased physical activity, understanding of the human body and managing emotions.

Over 2,000 children in 24 Madrid public schools were followed during the program and exposed to the lifestyle intervention for three years, two years or one year depending on their age when the program began. Intervention materials included classrooms materials, take-home activities to do with their families and activities organized within the school's annual health fair. Students were assessed by pediatric psychologists at the start of the program and again annually for three years with a questionnaire to determine their knowledge, attitude and habits toward diet, physical activity and the human body.

"There is a need for a complete change in the timing of when we deliver care," said Valentin Fuster, M.D., Ph.D., senior author of the paper. "Until now, the clinical community has focused on cardiovascular disease, which typically manifests in the later stages of life. Now, we need to focus our care in the opposite stage of life--we need start promoting health at the earliest years, as early as 3 to 5 years old, in order to prevent cardiovascular disease."

Children in the intervention group scored 5.5 percent higher on their knowledge, attitude and habits score than students not receiving intervention after the first year, 7.7 percent higher after the second year and 4.9 percent higher after the third year. Overall scores were influenced by the level of parental education and income, with the highest impact seen in families with at least a high school education and higher income. There was no difference in score based on parental age, but a higher impact in score was seen for children whose parents were of European origin.

Body weight, height, waist circumference, skinfold thickness and BMI were also measured. The prevalence of obesity among children at the end of three years was 1.1 percent in the group receiving intervention compared to 1.3 percent in the control group. The total of overweight children was 7 percent in the intervention group and 7.4 percent in the control group. The largest positive changes in body fat were seen in the 3-year-old group that received three years of interventions. Interventions less than two years were not successful at reducing body fat.

In an accompanying editorial, Deepak L. Bhatt, M.D., M.P.H., executive director of interventional cardiovascular programs at Brigham and Women's Hospital Heart and Vascular Center and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said the program is groundbreaking, and follow-up studies to further pinpoint the exact mechanisms by which the program achieved positive effects on young children's health will be vital for implementing the program in other areas and informing the design of future global programs.

"It may not only be the cardiovascular health information from the program that is helpful but also the cognitive stimulation from and exposure to positive adult role models, which in turn influence personality traits critical for health behavior and habits," Bhatt said. "This pioneering study represents a very important step in exploring the intersection of child development, cardiovascular health promotion and primordial prevention. We eagerly await longitudinal follow-up, data from other age-groups, and outcomes related to families and schools from the SI! Program."

The study and editorial are part of a comprehensive Population Health Promotion issue of the Journal of the American College of Cardiology focusing on issues that broadly impact public health and the prevention of cardiovascular disease and related conditions. Population health is a strategic priority of the American College of Cardiology, which recently brought together experts from around the world to address issues such as smoking and nutrition in the context of developing public health strategies for improving population health.

The Journal of the American College of Cardiology, which publishes peer-reviewed research on all aspects of cardiovascular disease, is the most widely read cardiovascular journal worldwide. JACC is ranked No. 1 among cardiovascular journals worldwide for its scientific impact.

The American College of Cardiology is a 49,000-member medical society that is the professional home for the entire cardiovascular care team. The mission of the College is to transform cardiovascular care and to improve heart health. The ACC leads in the formation of health policy, standards and guidelines. The College operates national registries to measure and improve care, provides professional medical education, disseminates cardiovascular research and bestows credentials upon cardiovascular specialists who meet stringent qualifications. For more information, visit acc.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does quantify benefits – but it leaves readers a bit underwhelmed. The numerical differences shown are rather small for the conclusion that the release trumpets. We would have liked some context to justify the excitement about this study.
Children who received intervention scored 5.5 percent higher in “knowledge, attitude and habits” than the controls, after the first year. However, that difference lowered to just 4.9 percent after the third year of intervention. We suspect that quantifying the “knowledge” of a 4-year-old is tricky and perhaps a bit more subjective than a blood test or other study data.
Children who received the intervention had obesity rates of 1.1 percent in the group compared to 1.3 percent in the control group. The release should have explained why the authors believe the difference of only 2/10 of a percent qualified as “groundbreaking.”
In addition, we’d note that the release touts reductions in body fat, measured through skinfold measurements, as a positive outcome. But skinfold measurements are a questionable marker of body fat given not only risk of inter-, but intra-operator error in terms of landmarking the exact same skinfold location for repeated measurements.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among the less convinced is Dr. John H. Glick, director of the Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Glick tells his patients about the new data but does not suggest they skip chemotherapy. After all, he notes, the national guidelines were based on results from large randomized clinical trials. And the recent data indicating that some women can skip chemotherapy are based on an after-the-fact analysis of selected clinical trials.

"We're in an era where evidence-based medicine should govern practice," Dr. Glick said.

For women with breast cancer, of course, the uncertainty is excruciating. Faced with a disease that already causes indecision and anxiety, they are now confronted with incomplete data, differing opinions from different doctors and a choice that can seem almost impossible: Should they give up a taxing treatment when all the answers are not in and they have what may be a fatal disease?

"If the medical profession is not even close to being of one mind, how is the woman to know?" said Donald A. Berry, a statistician at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, the lead author of a recent paper questioning chemotherapy's benefits in many women.

Barbara Brenner, who has had breast cancer and is executive director of the advocacy group Breast Cancer Action, said, "There's a real problem," and added, "We finally tell people at the end of the day: 'You're going to get a lot of information. Trust your gut. Nobody has the answers.' "

"I'm really glad I was diagnosed 13 years ago," Ms. Brenner said, "when there were fewer choices."

Doctors worry, too. It took two years before the National Cancer Institute and its researchers could even agree on a design for the large new American study that will test the idea that many women might safely forgo chemotherapy.

The study, which starts enrolling patients at the end of this month, will involve women whose cancers are fueled by estrogen and have not spread beyond the breast. They will be randomly assigned to have the standard treatment — chemotherapy followed by a drug like tamoxifen that starves tumors of estrogen — or to skip chemotherapy and have treatment only with a drug like tamoxifen.

Unlike the American study, the one now planned in Europe will also include women whose cancer has spread beyond their breasts into nearby lymph nodes. The American study may eventually add such women, said Sheila E. Taube, who directs the cancer diagnosis program at the National Cancer Institute.

Dr. Taube said the debate reminded her of one a few decades ago, when the question was whether all women with cancer needed mastectomies or whether many could have a lumpectomy instead. "To me, the situations are analogous," she said.

The chemotherapy question starts with American and European guidelines that say almost every woman with breast cancer that has gone beyond its earliest stages, when it is confined to the milk duct, should have the treatment. And for good reason, many cancer researchers say: a series of large studies has shown that chemotherapy saves lives and that newer and more aggressive regimens are improvements over older ones.

That has led doctors to feel most at ease giving very aggressive treatments to almost everyone.

"Part of it is that this area of medicine we're practicing in is kind of a high wire act," said Dr. Michael Lee, an oncologist in private practice in Norfolk, Va. "It is more comfortable to adopt things that are aggressive."

But most of those studies were done at a time when doctors did not distinguish between the 70 percent of women with breast cancers fueled by estrogen and the 30 percent whose cancers were not.

Now Dr. Berry, the M. D. Anderson statistician, and a group of leading cancer researchers have found that the chemotherapy benefits in those clinical trials were concentrated almost exclusively in women whose cancers were impervious to estrogen. For the others, with estrogen-sensitive tumors, the lifesaving benefit came from hormonal therapy. The results of the analysis, published recently in The Journal of the American Medical Association, were the same even if the cancer had spread to the lymph nodes.

The drawback of that study, Dr. Glick notes, is that it was not a large prospective randomized clinical trial, the gold standard in medicine.

There is also another issue. What if some women with estrogen-fed tumors do benefit from chemotherapy? How can they be identified?

One possibility is new genetic tests, which are part of the two studies that are about to begin. The cancer institute is using the Oncotype DX test, which includes genes associated with response to chemotherapy, among them genes involved with a cell's response to estrogen.

The study is ethical, said Dr. Larry Norton of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, because the only women whose treatment will be decided at random are those in a kind of gray area, not women for whom chemotherapy would be a clear benefit or clearly unnecessary.

"I think the clinical trial is really a superb one," Dr. Norton said. "I would like to see it go so we have definitive data."

In the meantime, some physicians, like Dr. Winer, are taking their own best shot at figuring out who really benefits from chemotherapy. He asks how sensitive the tumor is to estrogen, how aggressive a pathologist believes it is, how big it is, how much has spread to the lymph nodes and whether its surface has a type of protein, HER2, that is associated with a better response to chemotherapy. After talking through the decision with his patients, he says, he is comfortable omitting chemotherapy in some who would have had it not long ago.

Others, like Dr. Francisco J. Esteva of M. D. Anderson, use a computer program to calculate a woman's risks of recurrence and give the option of no chemotherapy only to women with low-risk cancers confined to their breasts.

Still others, like Dr. Glick, are starting to tell women with estrogen-fed cancers that although they still need chemotherapy, they may not need the most intense treatment.

And while some, including Dr. Winer, predict that the use of chemotherapy will almost certainly decline in the years ahead, for now most doctors are sticking with the current guidelines, waiting for expert advice from national panels on what to do.

"I don't know that many doctors who are comfortable giving women an option about chemotherapy," said Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, an advocacy group. "A lot of physicians talk about the data, but then they say, 'But, to be on the safe side. ...' "

Still, doctors say it is not simply that they are urging more and more chemotherapy on patients. In many cases, it is patients who want the most aggressive treatment.

"A cancer diagnosis is earth-shattering," said Dr. Lee, who has had cancer himself. "You stay up at night. You wonder. Even when you're doing well, you don't know whether to trust it."

And so, he said, "a lot of people will take a treatment even if there is a very low statistical chance that they will benefit."

That was what happened a few months ago, when Dr. Esteva told Janice Baty of Sulphur, La., a 40-year-old mother of two, that she might not need chemotherapy. After a long discussion with Ms. Baty and her husband, Dr. Esteva left them so they could decide what to do.

"My husband said, 'Look, we have two little kids,' " Ms. Baty recalled. "I called the doctor back in and said, 'We're doing the chemo.' "

Women who say they want the most aggressive treatment may not fully realize what they are asking for, said Mary Peelen, 45, of San Francisco. Ms. Peelen learned in January 2005 that she had cancer. It was small, was fed by estrogen and had spread to just two of her lymph nodes. Her oncologist was adamant: chemotherapy was her only option.

"I felt frightened and very coerced," she said. She had an aggressive regimen, suffered terribly and was left with painful nerve damage in her arms and hands that prevents movements like opening jars or using scissors and frequently makes her drop things.

Ms. Peelen feels that in a way, she just missed the revolution, perhaps one of the last women with her type of cancer who will have to suffer so much.

For now, the answers as to who should have chemotherapy are far from clear.

"I think practice should change, but it's very dicey," said Dr. Berry, of M. D. Anderson.

His colleague Dr. Esteva says it is one thing for a statistician like Dr. Berry to look at retrospective data, and another for a physician, like himself, to sit down with a patient who has to make what may be a life-or-death decision.

"It's not a perfect science," Dr. Esteva said. "A statistically small reduction in risk may be very important to some women, while for others chemotherapy is not worth it."

And so, Dr. Esteva said, he is left asking many women with early-stage breast cancer to decide what can seem like the undecidable: whether they want "to take something potentially toxic when you have a 90 percent chance of being cured without it."

"My experience ," he said, "is that more want to get chemo than not."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Again, Dr. Berry’s subgroup analysis of several large chemotherapy trials, published in The Journal of the American Medical Association, was mentioned but the story didn’t give quantified details. The combined absolute benefit of chemotherapy for disease free survival at 5 years was 22.8% for estrogen-receptor-(ER) negative women compared with 7.0 % for estrogen receptor positive women treated with tamoxifen. The 5-year absolute survival benefit of chemotherapy for women with ER-negative tumors was 16.7 % vs. 4.0% for ER-positive women treated with tamoxifen. Nonetheless, the overall quality of the discussion warrants a satisfactory score. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - A urine test can help doctors better spot prostate cancer than either the current blood test or a rectal exam alone, U.S. researchers reported on Tuesday.

They said Gen-Probe’s Progensa PCA3 test caught about half the actual cases of prostate cancer in men who had abnormal PSA levels or digital rectal exams, and had about a 20 percent “false positive” rate.

“That’s pretty good, actually,” said Dr. David Crawford of the University of Colorado School of Medicine, who helped lead the study.

Trying to diagnose prostate cancer is one of the most maddening tasks a doctor has. The prostate is a walnut-shaped gland that produces semen and it is hard to get to.

Digital rectal exams can tell a specialist that the prostate is getting bigger, but that happens with normal aging as well as with cancer. A blood test for prostate specific antigen or PSA shows when PSA rises, but PSA goes up with either cancer or just normal enlargement of the prostate — or even if the gland is inflamed, such as from an infection.

Biopsies are difficult and painful to do and may take a portion of healthy prostate, missing any tumors entirely.

And prostate tumors can grow slowly. A study last year estimated that more than 1 million men in the United States alone had been needlessly treated for prostate tumors that likely would never have killed them.

The Progensa test looks for a genetic material called PCA3. It is a string of RNA that does not appear to have any function but that is overexpressed, or overactive, in prostate cancer.

Lightly touching the prostate can cause its release and it can then be detected in the urine using the test.

Crawford and colleagues tested Progensa in about 1,900 men who had high PSA readings, an abnormal digital rectal exam or both and who were scheduled to have biopsies.

“It reflects on the aggressiveness of the cancer,” Crawford said. “If you had no cancer your PCA3 was at 25 or 20. If you had precursors such as high grade PIN (prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia) your score was about 38 to 40 and men who had cancer scored about 50 to 55.”

The test had a specificity of 78 percent, meaning that 78 percent of the men who had cancer indicated by the test actually did. This compares to just 21 percent for PSA alone, the researchers told a meeting of the American Urological Association in San Francisco.

“If the PCA3 is abnormal, above about 35, you have got an 80 percent chance of having cancer,” Crawford said.

The test had a sensitivity of 49 percent, meaning it correctly identified 49 percent of cancers. This is far less sensitive than PSA, which catches 87 percent of tumors, but if the two tests are used together they can help rule out the need for unnecessary surgery or radiation.

Among the 1,946 men studied, 42 percent turned out to have prostate cancer.

The test was approved for use in Europe in 2006 but is not yet approved in the United States.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION:  The story reported on the specificity of this test as compared with test most commonly in use in the US.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Folsom, Calif., (May 11, 2015) -- A new animal study from Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, led by Dr. Christos Mantzoros, indicates that a diet containing walnuts may slow colorectal tumor growth by causing beneficial changes in cancer genes.

This is the first study that evaluates whether walnut consumption can cause changes to micro-ribonucleic acids (miRNA), the nucleotides that are involved in altering gene expression. miRNA are the focus of much research in the growing field of epigenetics, or the study of how genes may be changed by environmental factors.

"Our research demonstrates that a walnut diet causes significant changes in the expression profile of miRNAs in localized colorectal cancer tissue, and that a walnut diet incorporates protective fatty acids in the colonic tumor either through its direct effects or through additive or synergistic effects of multiple other compounds present in walnuts," said Dr. Mantzoros. "While future studies are needed, we're optimistic of the role of miRNAs as biomarkers of disease and prognosis, and may demonstrate a potential therapeutic target for colorectal cancer treatment."

Researchers conducted the randomized study with two groups of mice. One group was fed the equivalent of two servings (2 ounces) per day of walnuts for humans, while the second group received a similar control diet with no walnuts. After 25 days, researchers found that in walnut-fed mice, key miRNA that may affect cancer cell inflammation, vascularization (blood supply) and proliferation were positively engaged.

The tumors of mice fed the walnut-containing diet were found to have 10 times the amount of total omega-3 fatty acids, including plant-based alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), in the tissue compared to the mice fed the control diet. The study results found that a smaller tumor size was associated with greater percentage of omega-3s in tumor tissues, suggesting that ALA may provide a protective benefit. Tumor growth rate was also significantly slower in the walnut group compared to the control group. As this study was conducted on animals, results cannot yet be implied for humans.

ALA is an essential fatty acid critical to various body processes and is known to reduce inflammation. Walnuts are the only nut that contain a significant source of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) (2.5 grams per ounce). Walnuts also contain a variety of antioxidants, (3.7 mmol/ounce), and numerous vitamins and minerals.

Colorectal cancer is the third most common type of cancer worldwide and is second to only lung cancer as the leading cause of death in Western Countries.1 Diet has been shown to be a modifiable risk factor in preventing many types of cancer, including colorectal cancer. It is estimated that 30-50 percent of colorectal cancer in men and 20 percent in women can be prevented by diet and other lifestyle changes.2

An article detailing these findings, "Dietary Walnut Suppression of Colorectal Cancer in mice: mediation by miRNA patterns and fatty acid incorporation" has been published in the Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry.3

This study was supported from a grant by the American Institute for Cancer Research and the California Walnut Commission.

The California Walnut Commission, established in 1987, is funded by mandatory assessments of the growers. The Commission is an agency of the State of California that works in concurrence with the Secretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA). The CWC is mainly involved in health research and export market development activities. For more industry information, health research and recipe ideas, visit =.

The California Walnut Commission (CWC) prohibits discrimination in all programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance programs. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact the CWC offices at (916) 922-5888. To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). CWC is an equal opportunity employer and provider. The California Walnut Commission offices are located at 101 Parkshore Dr., Ste. #250, Folsom, CA 95630

1. World cancer research fund/american institute for cancer research. Food, nutrition, physical activity, and the prevention of cancer: A globalperspective. AICR 2007.

2. Platz EA, Willett WC, Colditz GA, et al. Proportion of colon cancer risk that might be preventable in a cohort of middle-aged us men. Cancer Causes Control. 2000;11(7): 579-88.

3. Tsoukas MA, Ko BJ, Witte TR, Dincer F, Hardman WE, Mantzoros CS. Dietary walnut suppression of colorectal cancer in mice: Mediation by miRNA patterns and fatty acid incorporation. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Apr 1. [Epub ahead of print
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The research on a small group of mice showed slowing of the growth of colon cancer tumors. The research proved that tumors in mice fed walnuts had “10 times the amount of total omega-3 fatty acids, including plant-based alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), in the tissue compared to the mice fed the control diet.” Although the quantification here is limited, we’ll give the story credit for accurately reporting the outcomes in broad strokes. The detailed results of what happened in a mouse study have limited use for the average human reader anyway.
But while the release does not state that the mouse study could lead to prevention for humans, we’re worried that a normal reader may see the suggested effects of an enhanced walnut diet — increased anti-inflammatory activity, reduced angiogenesis, increased protective lipid content — and assume that these affect actual cancer outcomes. Set aside the major caveat that it is an animal study for a moment — the release says that walnuts “may” slow the growth of colon cancer.  It also equally may not.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 16, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Stimulating a specific set of nerves that are nestled along the spine may deliver relief to those who suffer from chronic back pain and cut the need for opioid painkillers, new research suggests.

The therapy, which targets the root ganglion nerves, is more effective than other spine stimulation procedures because it places tiny leads precisely at the area where pain originates, unlike other devices that provide more generalized stimulation, the researchers said.

"In certain patients who have not gotten relief from other treatments, this therapy may give sustained pain relief and may allow them to reduce opioids for at least 18 months and perhaps longer," said lead researcher Robert McCarthy. He's a professor of anesthesiology at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago.

The dorsal root ganglions are nerve cells, on both sides of each of the spine's vertebra, and are the gateway to pain between nerves in different parts of the body, spinal cord and brain. Stimulating this area interrupts pain signals between the painful area and the brain, the researchers explained.

A pacemaker-like device implanted under the skin in the lower back sends small electronic pulses through a wire placed near the specific dorsal root ganglion associated with the pain, McCarthy said.

The pulses replace pain with tingling or numbness. The strength of stimulation, programmed by a doctor, is based on the patient's level of pain, he said.

The treatment has two advantages over spinal cord stimulation, McCarthy said. In spinal cord stimulation, a wire runs along the spinal cord sending pulses along the entire spine, but the pulses don't target the specific pain source.

In addition, dorsal root ganglion stimulation requires significantly lower levels of electric current to quell pain, McCarthy said.

The goal of this study, he said, was to judge the effectiveness of the therapy over a long period. McCarthy and his colleagues implanted the device in 67 people suffering with chronic back pain and followed them for three to 18 months. Among the participants, 17 had the device for over a year.

Before receiving the device, most patients rated their pain as an 8 on a scale of one to 10, with 10 being the worst. For most patients, the device reduced pain by 33 percent, which was significant, the researchers reported.

In addition, patients said they experienced a 27 percent reduction in disability or limitations on daily activities caused by pain. In all, 94 percent of the participants said the treatment was beneficial.

The procedure was not without complications. Five patients needed to have the wires implanted again, two patients had them removed because they were infected, and one had the device removed because of a complication.

McCarthy said the therapy is not widely available, even though it was approved by the FDA in 2016. At the moment, its use is confined to more advanced medical centers where doctors have been trained in how to implant and regulate the device.

Also, the procedure isn't covered by all insurance companies, so out-of-pocket costs to patients can be very high. It is, however, covered by Medicare, he said.

For uninsured patients, the cost of having spine stimulation devices can range from $15,000 to $50,000 or more, according to a 2008 report funded by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries.

Spine stimulation is usually approved only after patients have not responded to other treatment, according to Blue Cross Blue Shield. Other insurance companies may have varying policies.

McCarthy hopes that more doctors will be trained in the procedure and that it will become more available, especially because it has the potential to allow patients to stop taking opioids to control their pain.

One pain specialist not involved with the study saw the benefits of this procedure.

"The results of this study are very significant," said Dr. Kiran Patel, director of neurosurgical pain at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

It shows long-term data that patients experienced significant pain relief and functional improvements, she said.

"In my pain practice and career, dorsal root ganglion stimulation therapy has been one of the most effective technologies available to combat chronic pain," Patel said.

"I encourage chronic pain patients to seek out physicians who are trained and experienced in the application of dorsal root ganglion stimulation therapy to determine if they are a candidate," she said.

The findings were presented Sunday at the American Society of Anesthesiologists annual meeting, in San Francisco. Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke for more on back pain.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story makes this claim high up:
The [DRG] therapy, which targets the root ganglion nerves, is more effective than other spine stimulation procedures because it places tiny leads precisely at the area where pain originates, unlike other devices that provide more generalized stimulation, the researchers said.
While there are theoretical reasons why DRG stimulation may be better than spinal cord stimulation, only studies directly comparing these treatments can determine this, and there is no mention of such studies in this piece.
Based on the study findings that are discussed, it may have helped some patients, but the story needed to make it clear that we can’t know from this one study if it’s better than alternatives. It’s also unfounded to speculate that it may reduce the use of opioid drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - The experimental orphan drug teprotumumab significantly reduces the eye bulging associated with Graves’ disease, according to results of a small trial.

Among the 88 participants with moderate-to-severe disease who were given intravenous infusions of either teprotumumab or a dummy drug every three weeks for eight treatments, 43 percent who got the real drug had a reduction of at least 2 millimeters in eye protrusion by the sixth week compared to 4 percent in the placebo group.

“In virtually all the responders, the changes are frequently what anyone would call dramatic,” said lead study author Dr. Terry Smith of the University of Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor.

The eyes don’t have that bulging appearance, he said, and many of them return to the degree of bulging they had before they got the disease.

“That’s something that we almost never see in someone who’s manifested the degree of disease one needed to have in order to get into the study,” Smith said.

The marked reduction in bulging is similar to that reported after decompression surgery, Smith and his colleagues write in the New England Journal of medicine.

Graves’ disease is the most common cause of overactive thyroid in the United States, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). It is an autoimmune disorder, in which the immune system attacks the thyroid gland.

Certain immune-system signaling molecules also target other tissues in the body, including in the eyes, which causes their bulging appearance, sometimes known as Graves’ eyes. About 30 percent of people with Graves’ disease develop mildly bulging eyes, and 2 to 5 percent develop severe bulge. This eye condition usually lasts one to two years and often improves on its own, according to NIDDK.

Teprotumumab blocks one of these immune signaling molecules, so researchers wanted to see what effect it might have on the eyes of Graves’ patients with moderate to severe bulge.

The study “included some of the worst cases imaginable and we’re now wondering whether the drug might find expanded utility in much-less-severe disease,” Smith told Reuters Health in a telephone interview.

By week 24, the response rate was 69 percent with the drug and 20 percent with placebo. Among those who completed therapy, the rates were 79 percent and 22 percent, respectively.

More people who received the drug had sizeable reductions in disease activity and reductions of 3 mm or more in eye bulge compared to the placebo group, the researchers note.

However, while only 10 percent of patients who received the drug had double vision before the study, that rose to 50 percent by 24 weeks.

High blood sugar was also a key side effect in participants who already had diabetes, the study team notes, but adjusting diabetes medications solved that problem.

The typical treatment for Graves’ eyes is glucocorticoids, which are not always effective and also have side effects, the study team notes.

The drug, also known as RV001 or R1507, has been developed by Genmab and Roche. River Vision Development Corporation licensed the drug from Roche. On Monday, Horizon Pharma announced that it was acquiring River Vision, which paid for the new study.

Smith said FDA approval could come sometime in 2018. Enrollment in a follow-up trial is expected to begin within six weeks.

The duration of response to the autoimmune inflammatory disease, along with the quick response to initial therapy, suggests fewer infusions may be just as effective, “but future studies will sort that out,” Smith said.

The researchers also cautioned that the study only included volunteers with active disease of recent onset so “the potential of teprotumumab in benefiting patients with milder, less active, or stable disease was not assessed.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/2qSTjSn New England Journal of Medicine, online May 3, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly states that 43 percent of the patients who were given teprotumumab in this trial experienced a reduction of “at least 2 millimeters in eye protrusion by the sixth week compared to 4 percent in the placebo group.”  One of the researchers is quoted as saying, “That’s something that we almost never see in someone who’s manifested the degree of disease one needed to have in order to get into the study.”  The story also points out that this level of reduction “is similar to that reported after decompression surgery.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Christine Curtis of Sterling says she is a “happy mom” again, crediting her recovery from debilitating depression to an expensive treatment that sends magnetic pulses into the brain.

“I can’t put a price on it,” said Curtis, 36, who said she feels better than she has in a decade after completing 30 days of the procedure, called repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, or rTMS.

An increasing number of psychiatrists and hospitals — as well as entrepreneurs opening rTMS centers around the country — are betting that there are millions of people like Curtis, discouraged by depression treatments that have proved unsuccessful and willing to pony up thousands of dollars for the possibility of relief. The treatment, which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, is covered by Medicare in five states, but few private insurers pay for it routinely.

While rTMS has ardent supporters, its effectiveness is still debated, and there is little evidence showing how long the results last. The technique has been shown to work better than a placebo, but the proportion of patients who show complete relief ranges widely, from as few as 10 percent to as many as 57 percent, according to various studies.

The debate has huge implications, not just for many of the 14 million Americans who suffer from major depression every year but also for businesses eyeing a potentially lucrative market and insurers weighing whether to cover it.

About half of those 14 million Americans seek relief through psychotherapy and prescription drug treatment, according to an evaluation by the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. But studies show that antidepressants provide complete cessation of symptoms only about a third of the time. Magnetic stimulation is aimed at patients with such “treatment-resistant depression.”

Supporters say rTMS is worth the cost — between $6,000 and $12,000 for the four-to-six-week treatment — because it enables people such as Curtis to resume productive lives.

Skeptics question the price tag in light of uncertain benefits.

“The majority of studies that evaluated rTMS failed to find evidence of an enduring treatment effect after the initial response . . . and some . . . failed to find any significant treatment effect,” concluded Health Plan of Nevada, a UnitedHealthcare insurer, which rejected coverage in March.

With the nation’s health-care spending expected to top $2.7 trillion this year, the battle over paying for rTMS demonstrates why it is so difficult to rein in health-care costs. New technology is generally allowed into the market after studies show it is reasonably safe and more effective than placebos. But that’s not the same as showing it works better than current approaches.

Experts differ over whether it’s smart to cover new techniques if they haven’t proved superior to established methods. And they can also disagree over the medical research itself: Was a study done well? Were there enough patients enrolled? Did it ask the right questions? Insurers often call for more research, while doctors and patients — many desperate for help — warn against delay. And costs are rarely discussed publicly.

‘What did I have to lose?’

In December, when Curtis first had a magnetic coil placed on her scalp while a $70,000 machine sent pulses into part of her brain, she had already spent a decade trying seven different prescription medications in her battle with depression.

Getting no relief but gaining weight and feeling sluggish and “out of it” because of the drugs’ side effects, she eagerly agreed to the month-long series of five-day-a-week treatments. Most patients have between four and six weeks of near daily sessions.

Curtis’s psychiatrist, Niku Singh, who is also the medical director at TMS NeuroHealth, suggested that she try the procedure. “I was all for it,” said Curtis, whose insurance did not cover the treatment. “It’s a matter of nothing else had worked, so what did I have to lose?”

As the very first patient treated at the Tysons Corner facility, which opened in December, Curtis paid only $3,000 because the center needed a test patient to meet the requirements of the device manufacturer. The fee is generally about $10,000, but officials say they work with patients who can't afford that. Founders of the center compare rTMS’s potential to that of the now-ubiquitous laser eye clinics; they aim to open a chain of centers nationally that will take walk-ins and accept referrals from physicians. Walk-in patients without a doctor referral would be screened by the center’s medical director to determine if they are in fact appropriate candidates for rTMS treatment.

“We looked at the Lasik model and said, ‘Can we do this with depression? Can we do this with TMS?’” said Bill Leonard, president of the company.

During a treatment, a patient sits in a chair like one in a dentist’s office while an electromagnetic coil is placed against her head. The machine sends four seconds of magnetic pulses into the brain in 26-second intervals, making a woodpecker-like tapping noise. The whole procedure takes about 40 minutes and is monitored by a technician. Patients say it does not hurt. Studies have shown that side effects are few and generally minor, such as headaches and scalp irritations.

Singh said rTMS works by having the pulses stimulate a region of the brain that helps control mood; researchers say the pulses help depression by activating the release of neurotransmitters such as serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine. (Singh, who owns two psychiatry practices in the region, says he does not have an investment interest in TMS NeuroHealth.)

The use of rTMS for altering mood or affecting the brain has been studied since at least the early 1990s. After reviewing data from a study of 301 patients, the FDA cleared the device in 2008 for the treatment of major depression in adults who had failed to improve after at least one round of drug therapy.

That study was funded by the device’s manufacturer, Neuronetics, a company based in Malvern, Pa. It found that up to 17 percent of patients treated with the device for six weeks became symptom-free, about twice as many as those treated with a sham rTMS machine.

Subsequent studies have shown a range of results, with about a third of patients reporting complete relief. One 2010 study of 199 “moderately treatment resistent” patients funded by the National Institute of Mental Health found that rTMS was four times as likely to get patients symptom-free as was a sham procedure. Patients in that study were treated five times a week for three to five weeks. One key measure — known as the “number needed to treat” — found that one patient became symptom-free for every 12 who were treated. Five percent of the patients in the sham group became symptom-free.

Supporters such as those at TMS NeuroHealth say they are seeing better results than that among their patients, who can continue taking antidepressants along with their treatment. Curtis, for example, still takes a daily antidepressant four months after completing her treatment, but she has been able to sharply reduce the dosage.

Curtis said she noticed no change in her depression at the very start of her rTMS treatment, but she began feeling better after about two weeks of treatment. “I’m not up and down anymore,” she said.

For patients who don’t respond to prescription drugs and talk therapy, the other major option is electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, in which an electrical current is sent through the brain to deliberately cause a seizure. The procedure, which is more widely used than rTMS, requires two to three treatments a week for three to four weeks and is effective for many patients. But it requires anesthesia and sometimes causes memory loss or confusion. rTMS does not require anesthesia, and its side effects are generally mild. A few small studies have looked at its effects on cognitive function and found either no effect or slight improvement, according to the AHRQ analysis. The costs of ECT — typically about $3,300 for four weeks of thrice-weekly treatments, according to AHRQ data — are covered by most private insurers as well as by Medicare and Medicaid. The cost is higher, however, if a patient must be admitted to the hospital.

Linda Carpenter, an associate professor of psychiatry and human behavior at Brown University, who has conducted medical studies using rTMS for depressed patients, says the treatment is effective for some patients, possibly even better than simply trying another medication. But she says questions remain about how long the effects last and how often a patient should return for additional sessions.

“What’s the range of booster treatments people need?” she asks. “Is it once a week, or every couple of years? There’s a huge range in my clinical experience.” Carpenter, a physician, says research has not found any safety issues for patients returning for additional treatments, but cost is a factor.

Uncertainty about its long-term effectiveness is why most insurers do not routinely cover rTMS. Medicare also has mainly rejected coverage, though in January, the administrator of the program’s New England region became the first to approve it, citing the AHRQ report and an assessment from an independent regional advisory board.

That 19-member panel voted 10 to 5 last year that studies of the treatment showed it to be as good as or better than usual care for depression. Six of the 10 said it represented a “reasonable” value for its cost; four saw it as a low value. (The same panel voted 9 to 6 that rTMS’s health benefit was equal to that of ECT.) A similar coverage decision proposal is being considered by the Medicare office serving the Washington region.

Even with limited insurance coverage, about 8,000 patients have had the treatment, and the number of treatment centers has doubled to a total of about 400 nationwise since 2010, according to reports by the device’s maker. Centers include some big names, such as Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

Still, some are not convinced. “The initial treatment with rTMS is $12,000: That’s a lot of generic Prozac or Effexor,” which are cost-effective antidepressants with long track records, said Joel Rubinstein, associate medical director of Harvard Pilgrim HealthCare, an insurer that does not cover rTMS. “Managed care has an obligation to a population. You’re shepherding a fixed amount of resources across a large population and trying to do it according to some sort of evidence-based system.”

Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent program of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit, nonpartisan health policy research and communication organization not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The use of statistics in this piece was generally appropriate, and we were pleased to see reference to the Number Needed to Treat — an intuitive measure of a treatment’s real world effectiveness. If there’s one area in which we think the story could have done a better job, it’s explaining that the benefits reported with rTMS, though larger than those associated with a placebo/sham treatment, are small in absolute terms. This could have been accomplished with less optimistic framing of certain study results. For example, the story notes that “up to 17 percent of patients” were symptom free after treatment in one study — “about twice as many as those treated with a sham rTMS machine.” The story could have qualified this by adding that the vast majority of even rTMS-treated patients (83%) were not symptom-free. In another study, rTMS was “four times as likely to get patients symptom-free as was a sham procedure,” according to the story. But again, the absolute number of patients who benefited was very small —   14.1% for active rTMS vs. 5.1% for the sham group. The authors of that study concluded that “…the overall number of remitters and responders was less than one would like with a treatment that requires daily intervention for 3 weeks or more, even with a benign adverse effect profile.”
Note: the AHRQ review referenced in the story concludes that the evidence in insufficient to determine the effects of ECT vs rTMS but the limited evidence suggest no difference.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 7, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Dialysis patients waiting for kidney transplants might safely accept an organ from a donor infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV), a new study finds.

Using hepatitis C-infected kidneys would expand the organ pool and save lives, said lead researcher Dr. Peter Reese. He's an associate professor of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia.

"There is a tremendous lack of kidneys for transplant," he explained. "Because of the opioid crisis, there are many people who die from a drug overdose and have HCV and want to donate their organs."

But these infected kidneys are discarded, even though they are otherwise healthy. And many are from younger people, Reese said.

Of roughly a half-million patients in the United States who were on dialysis for late-stage kidney disease in 2016, only 19,000 received kidney transplants. This is partly due to organ shortages, researchers have reported. And the average wait time for a non-infected kidney is more than two years, compared to eight months for an HCV-infected kidney.

New, less toxic treatments for hepatitis C opened the door for transplanting infected kidneys and then successfully treating the infection, Reese said.

In a study of 20 uninfected patients, researchers found that transplanting infected kidneys and then treating recipients for HCV resulted in a 100 percent cure rate. Half were evaluated six months after their transplant and the others a year after.

"And we found that these kidney transplants were working as well as kidney transplants from uninfected patients," Reese said.

The potential cost savings could be significant, he added. Dialysis can cost more than $88,000 a year, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

Though some patients might not want to take the risk associated with an infected kidney, others might consider it a good option, given the high death rates for dialysis patients awaiting transplants, the researchers suggested.

The report was published online Aug. 6 in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Dr. Adnan Sharif, a consultant transplant nephrologist at Queen Elizabeth Hospital and University of Birmingham in the United Kingdom, wrote an accompanying editorial.

Sharif said the excellent short-term outcomes and 100 percent cure rate of HCV in organ recipients should prompt transplant centers to rethink use of HCV-infected kidneys.

"We must be bold in our approach to utilizing HCV kidneys," he said.

Sharif acknowledged, however, that using HCV-infected kidneys would represent "a significant shift in our attitude to risk, procurement of organs and counseling potential recipients appropriately about the risks -- albeit minimal."

But the cost effectiveness of using these kidneys versus remaining on dialysis would be significant, he noted.

Another study, published in the same journal in July, reported similar success in transplants of HCV-infected kidneys into HCV-infected patients. About 15 percent of dialysis patients have HCV, the researchers said.

Sharif said other organs from HCV-infected donors, such as hearts and lungs, might also be safely transplanted, expanding those organs' supply, as well.

"Using such donors could lead to many life-saving or enhancing transplants," he said.

To learn more about kidney transplants, visit the National Kidney Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story reported the main benefit of using infected kidneys, which is shorter wait time for a transplant. It said that the average wait time for a non-infected kidney is more than two years, compared to eight months for an HCV-infected kidney.
The story also said transplanting infected kidneys and then treating recipients for HCV resulted in a “100 percent cure rate. Half were evaluated six months after their transplant and the others a year after.”
It quoted the lead researcher, Peter Reese, M.D.: “And we found that these kidney transplants were working as well as kidney transplants from uninfected patients.”
We’ll rate this as satisfactory. However, we’d note that the story didn’t point out that we don’t know much about long-term benefits or overall survival at this point. Do these patients live as long? Are their rates of liver problems the same as those who receive uninfected kidneys? It will take much more than one year of follow-up to learn the answers to these questions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There’s another type of prescription drugs, besides opioid painkillers, that’s involved in thousands of drug overdose deaths in the US every year.

The drugs are benzodiazepines, which are widely known by their brand names Xanax and Valium and commonly prescribed to help treat anxiety. These drugs were involved in nearly 9,000 overdose deaths in 2015, according to federal data. But there’s a catch: Such overdoses seem to be very closely tied to the opioid epidemic, with the majority of benzodiazepine overdose deaths involving both benzodiazepines and opioids.

A new study published in BMJ looked at just how much the concurrent use of these two drugs increases the risk of overdose versus the risk of only using opioids. Drawing on a huge sample of nearly 320,000 patients who were continuously enrolled in private health insurance plans from 2001 and 2013, researchers compared those who were prescribed just opioids versus those who were prescribed both, and what their additional risk of an emergency room visit or inpatient admission was in the period they were prescribed both.

The study found that among all opioid users, concurrent use of benzodiazepines more than doubled the risk of an emergency room or inpatient visit for a drug overdose.

The study also found that eliminating concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid use could reduce the risk for an opioid overdose–related emergency room or inpatient visit by 15 percent. If that reduced risk applies to overdose deaths as well, eliminating concurrent opioid and benzodiazepine use could have prevented up to 2,630 opioid painkiller–related overdose deaths in 2015.

Keith Humphreys, a drug policy expert at Stanford University and one of the authors of the study, said this reveals an underappreciated policy lever for reducing drug overdoses: making sure patients prescribed to opioids aren’t also prescribed to benzodiazepines, and vice versa. “Even if we didn’t change opioid prescribing at all, the data here suggest that we could cut overdoses dramatically just [by] getting prescribers to not put people on a benzodiazepine at the same time,” Humphreys said.

Yet the study suggests the opposite has happened. From 2001 to 2013, co-prescriptions to opioids and benzodiazepines among the studied pool of patients increased from 9 percent to 17 percent — a nearly 89 percent jump.

For some patients, eliminating these co-prescriptions could involve some tough trade-offs. If someone genuinely suffers from pain and anxiety, doctors and patients will need to work out which condition is more important to treat and which one can be treated with alternatives — to avoid a potentially deadly overdose. (Hopefully while keeping in mind that there’s no good scientific evidence that opioids can treat chronic pain, so opioids aren’t the right treatment for chronic pain in the first place.)

There are some caveats to the study. For one, emergency room visits and inpatient admissions for opioid overdoses likely aren’t a perfect one-to-one proxy for overdoses that didn’t involve a trip to a doctor. The study also only looked at legally prescribed opioid painkillers and benzodiazepines, missing the effects of concurrent use of illegally obtained pills or drugs. And since the research relied on patients who were continuously insured throughout the study period, it’s possible the findings don’t exactly apply to people with spottier coverage. (Although sensitivity analyses in the study for people who had lapses in insurance produced similar results.)

Finally, since the study looked at correlation (not causation), it’s possible that it missed some other factor driving up overdose deaths among concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid users — perhaps, for whatever reason, these users may be more likely to misuse their drugs.

Still, it’s well established that benzodiazepine and opioids compound each other’s overdose risk. So it’s not really controversial to conclude that simultaneously using opioids and benzodiazepines dramatically increases the risk of drug overdose — or, conversely, that stopping the concurrent use of these two drugs could reduce the risk of overdose.

Given that the opioid epidemic has quickly turned into the deadliest drug crisis in US history, it’s important — and potentially lifesaving — for doctors and policymakers to at least consider the study’s findings.

For more on the opioid epidemic, read Vox’s in-depth explainer, the abridged explainer, or the maps and charts explainer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job conveying the risk increase of combining drugs versus using opioids alone, and we especially like its use of a bar graph to give a visual representation of the added danger. The story states that eliminating concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid use could reduce the risk for an opioid overdose–related emergency room or inpatient visit by 15 percent. Further, it says the study found that among all opioid users, concurrent use of benzodiazepines more than doubled the risk of an ER or inpatient visit for a drug overdose.
One quibble: It wanders into sketchy territory by extrapolating deaths: “If that reduced risk applies to overdose deaths as well, eliminating concurrent opioid and benzodiazepine use could have prevented up to 2,630 opioid painkiller–related overdose deaths in 2015.” This is an interesting perspective, but we’re wondering if it’s valid to assume that deaths would decline proportionally to hospital visits. An independent expert source would have been helpful here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For the millions of Americans with chronic low back pain, a silver bullet to alleviate the condition has yet to be identified, a new study suggests.

Reviewing 26 studies comparing spinal manipulative therapy (SMT) to other treatments such as medication, exercise or physical therapy, researchers from the Netherlands found that SMT appears to be no better or worse than other options at relieving back pain long-term.

The analyses indicated that SMT -- which involves manual manipulation of the spine and surrounding muscles -- has only a short-term impact on pain relief, although it eases pain faster than other treatments.

"In short, no single therapy is better than another, although some individuals are likely to have more success with one therapy than another," said study author Sidney Rubinstein, a research fellow at VU University Medical Center in Amsterdam.

"Current studies are focusing on which subjects are more likely to benefit from spinal manipulation, exercise, or other therapies," he added. "Spinal manipulation should be considered a viable treatment option for those with non-specific, chronic low back pain."

The study was recently published in the journal Spine.

More than 6,000 patients were included in the compilation of results, which the study authors said were sparse in data indicating participants' overall recovery, quality of life and ability to return to work. The studies also varied in quality, with only nine of 26 considered "low [in] bias," according to background information accompanying the study.

In all evaluations, patients were randomly assigned to SMT or another comparison treatment, including active treatments such as exercise or inactive placebo treatments.

About two-thirds of the studies were not included in a previous review published in 2004, and all patients had suffered from lower back pain for 12 weeks or longer.

While chiropractors often perform SMT on patients, it is also administered by physical therapists and osteopaths. But which treatment is right for any patient depends not only on their specific pain, but their doctor's recommendations and their own comfort level with various options, said Stephen Perle, a spokesman for the American Chiropractic Association.

The cost of SMT sessions varies widely depending on the region, Perle said.

"Nobody has the answer at this time," Perle said. "I guess people in almost every profession like to say, 'We have a compelling treatment and it will work almost every time,' but that's just not the case."

"With low back pain, there are many reasons people don't get better," added Perle, also a professor of clinical sciences in the College of Chiropractic at the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut. "So the finding was not unexpected."

An unrelated study of 401 patients with low back pain, published July 5 in Annals of Internal Medicine, suggested that massage may be better than medication or exercise for short-term pain relief.

Seattle researchers found that those who received either relaxation massage or structural massage, which involved manipulation of muscles and ligaments, had less pain and better functioning for up to a year compared to those getting "usual medical care," which included medication and physical therapy.

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more information about low back pain.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
The article offered only broad characterizations about the treatment effects of spinal manipulation for chronic low back pain. It did not attempt to quantify the treatment effects in terms of pain relief or functional improvement.
However, the systematic review that served as the focus of the article is complex and somewhat difficult to decipher, with outcomes including pain and function at different time points.
And the story did provide the reader with a reasonable summary. Manipulation appears as good or bad as other treatment options—and it may lead to more rapid pain relief.
 
 
 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dieters who go vegetarian not only lose weight more effectively than those on conventional low-calorie diets but also improve their metabolism by reducing muscle fat, a new study published in the Journal of the American College of Nutrition has found.

Losing muscle fat improves glucose and lipid metabolism so this finding is particularly important for people with metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes, says lead author, Dr. Hana Kahleová, Director of Clinical Research at the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine in Washington DC.

Seventy-four subjects with type 2 diabetes were randomly assigned to follow either a vegetarian diet or a conventional anti-diabetic diet. The vegetarian diet consisted of vegetables, grains, legumes, fruits and nuts, with animal products limited to a maximum of one portion of low-fat yoghurt per day; the conventional diabetic diet followed the official recommendations of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Both diets were restricted by 500 kilocalories per day compared to an isocaloric intake for each individual.

The vegetarian diet was found to be almost twice as effective in reducing body weight, resulting in an average loss of 6.2kg compared to 3.2kg for the conventional diet.

Using magnetic resonance imaging, Dr. Kahleová and colleagues then studied adipose (fat-storage) tissue in the subjects' thighs to see how the two different diets had affected subcutaneous, subfascial and intramuscular fat (that is, fat under the skin, on the surface of muscles and inside muscles).

They found that both diets caused a similar reduction in subcutaneous fat. However, subfascial fat was only reduced in response to the vegetarian diet, and intramuscular fat was more greatly reduced by the vegetarian diet.

This is important as increased subfascial fat in patients with type 2 diabetes has been associated with insulin resistance, so reducing it could have a beneficial effect on glucose metabolism. In addition, reducing intramuscular fat could help improve muscular strength and mobility, particularly in older people with diabetes.

Dr. Kahleová said: "Vegetarian diets proved to be the most effective diets for weight loss. However, we also showed that a vegetarian diet is much more effective at reducing muscle fat, thus improving metabolism. This finding is important for people who are trying to lose weight, including those suffering from metabolic syndrome and/or type 2 diabetes. But it is also relevant to anyone who takes their weight management seriously and wants to stay lean and healthy."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This release describes the weight loss benefits of a vegetarian diet in terms of average weight lost. It states that participants in the vegetarian diet group lost an average of 6.2 kilograms in comparison to participants in the conventional diet group who lost an average of 3.2 kilograms. It also claims those on the vegetarian diet lost more subfascial and intramuscular fat than those on a conventional diet.
The release never tells us how long the study lasted, you have to go to the published report for that. When we did, it wasn’t clear whether the weight loss was maintained at 6 months and beyond. It is very common for weight-loss studies to show that initial weight loss is greater than later weight loss, especially when there is no blinding involved. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 10, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental Alzheimer's disease drug, gantenerumab, may help lower levels of amyloid plaque in the brains of people with the disease, an early clinical trial indicates.

The new study, which appears online Oct. 10 in the Archives of Neurology, is among the first to show the effects of an anti-amyloid drug in humans with Alzheimer's disease, but experts caution that while promising, more research is needed before this drug can be deemed safe or effective.

And, in what may turn out to be an equally important caveat, experts also say that it's by no means certain that reducing levels of amyloid plaque would stave off memory loss and the other mental declines associated with the disease because the role of the plaque in Alzheimer's isn't fully understood.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia. Symptoms including serious memory loss, confusion and mood changes develop gradually and worsen with time. Recently, many strides have been made in diagnosing Alzheimer's disease earlier, but doctors have been stymied by a lack of effective treatments to stop or slow the course of the disease.

It's long been known that a protein fragment called beta-amyloid builds up in the spaces between nerve cells in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. The new drug, gantenerumab, targets these amyloid proteins by priming the body's immune system to recognize them as invaders.

Of 16 people with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease, those who received two to seven infusions of the experimental drug every four weeks showed marked reductions in the amount of plaque in their brains via imaging tests that were conducted several months after their treatments.

By contrast, amyloid load increased among people who were randomized to receive the placebo. The new drug was given at either 60 or 200 milligrams (mg) doses. The higher dose yielded greater reductions in amyloid levels, the study showed. People who were given the 60 mg doses saw a nearly 16 percent reduction in the amount of amyloid, and those given the 200 mg doses saw a 36 percent reduction. The new study was conducted and funded by the drug's manufacturer, F. Hoffmann-LaRoche Ltd., in Basel, Switzerland.

The big question is whether or not reducing amyloid levels has any effect on the symptoms or progression of Alzheimer's disease, said Dr. Patrick Lyden, chief of neurology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. "There is a growing concern that amyloid is a guilty bystander, but not the actual culprit in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease, and taking away the bystander may not help the patient," he said.

There are approximately one dozen therapies, including vaccines, for Alzheimer's disease that are currently in the pipeline, Lyden noted. "They are all extremely exciting and promising in animals," he said. "This is the first one to show a preliminary result in people, but we have a huge way to go to make sure it is safe and improves symptoms."

Many in the Alzheimer's research community are awaiting these drugs with bated breath, but "none are ready for prime time," he said.

The leading theory of Alzheimer's disease is that an imbalance in the production or clearance of the amyloid plaque in the brain initiates a cascade of events that lead to dementia, explained Dr. Neelum Aggarwal, an associate professor of neurological sciences at Rush Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago.

"Accumulation of the plaques cause a variety of cellular responses: inflammation, neuronal death, and thus any potential treatment that can alter these processes would be beneficial," she said. The hope is that gantenerumab or other drugs like it will not only prevent amyloid from accumulating in the brain, but also slow down the cognitive impairment that occurs in people with Alzheimer's disease, she added.

That said, these experimental drugs carry the potential for serious side effects, including causing the immune system to go haywire. "The main issue that remains for this type of drug development is managing the immune response," Aggarwal said. Other side effects include a potentially fatal fluid build-up in certain areas of the brain. "This is problematic in that use of these treatments may carry a very high risk for neurologic complications, thus necessitating heightened monitoring, and diminishing its applicability as a treatment for a larger patient population such as the Alzheimer's disease population," she said.

If any of these drugs make it through the pipeline, it also needs to be determined who will get them, including whether the drugs will be given to prevent Alzheimer's in patients at high-risk of the disease or to treat it once it's started.

The need for a drug to delay the onset or slow progression of Alzheimer's disease can't be underestimated, Aggrawal said. In the United States alone, there are 5.4 million people with Alzheimer's disease, and the numbers are expected to increase to 13 million by 2050, when approximately three of every five people over the age of 85 will have Alzheimer's disease, she said.

For more information about Alzheimer's disease signs, symptoms and treatments, visit the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately described the responses of study participants at different dose levels. And it clearly established that “it’s by no means certain that reducing levels of amyloid plaque would stave off memory loss and other mental declines.”
Other important caveats included:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can carry serious health risks, but a new study adds to evidence that menopausal women who use the hormones may have lower odds of developing colon cancer.

The study, which followed nearly 57,000 California teachers, found that women who were using HRT at the outset were 36 percent less likely to develop colon cancer over the next decade than those who had never used HRT.

Of the 34,433 HRT users, 193 were diagnosed with colon cancer during the study period; that compared with 151 cases among the 13,778 women who had never used hormone replacement.

HRT — with either estrogen alone or a combination of estrogen and progestin — was linked to a lower colon cancer risk even when the researchers accounted for the women’s age, weight, exercise levels and race.

Older age and African-American race are risk factors for colon cancer, and there is evidence linking obesity and a sedentary lifestyle to the disease as well.

The findings, reported in the American Journal of Epidemiology, support the theory that estrogen offers some protection against colon cancer.

Some past studies have linked not only HRT, but also use of birth control pills, to a lower colon cancer risk. And lab experiments have shown that estrogen may inhibit tumor development in the colon by affecting cell growth, or by lowering levels of a cancer-linked hormone called IGF-1.

However, no one is recommending that women take HRT to ward off colon cancer. Millions of women stopped using the hormones after a large U.S. government study in 2002 found that postmenopausal women given HRT had higher risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots than women given an inactive placebo.

As a result, experts now advise that while HRT is effective at relieving menopausal symptoms — like hot flashes and vaginal dryness — women should take it at the lowest dose and for the shortest time possible.

These latest findings do not alter that advice. But they point to a need for further study into the different effects of HRT on specific organs, write the researchers, led by Dr. Katherine DeLellis Henderson of the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, California.

The findings are based on 56,864 menopausal women who took part in the California Teachers Study, a health study begun in 1995. Most of the women were past menopause at the outset, and 61 percent were currently using HRT.

Over the next decade, 442 women were diagnosed with colon cancer.

While women who were current HRT users at the start of the study showed a lower risk of the disease, the same was not true of those who were former users.

Henderson’s team also found that the beneficial effect of HRT was stronger among women who had had a first-degree relative diagnosed with colon cancer. Among these women, HRT use was linked to a 55 percent lower risk of the disease versus non-use.

The implications of that finding, if any, are not yet clear.

Family history of colon cancer is an established risk factor for the disease, but only one study, according to Henderson’s team, has looked at whether family history affects the link between HRT and colon cancer risk — and it found no evidence that it did.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
Of the 34,433 HRT users, 193 were diagnosed with colon cancer during the study period; that compared with 151 cases among the 13,778 women who had never used hormone replacement.
HRT — with either estrogen alone or a combination of estrogen and progestin — was linked to a lower colon cancer risk even when the researchers accounted for the women’s age, weight, exercise levels and race.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — NEW ORLEANS – NOV. 4, 2016 – Patients with obesity who swallowed gas-filled balloon capsules designed to help them eat less, lost 1.9 times more weight than patients who relied on diet, exercise and lifestyle therapy alone, according to new research* presented today at ObesityWeek 2016, the largest international event focused on the basic science, clinical application and prevention and treatment of obesity. The annual conference is hosted by the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS) and The Obesity Society (TOS).

“The significant weight loss achieved with the Obalon 6-Month Balloon System is maintained at 12 months,” said Aurora Pryor, MD, study co-author and Chief Bariatric, Foregut and Advanced GI Surgery, Stony Brook University. “This combination of lifestyle modification and balloon therapy provides a new low risk option for patients struggling with obesity.”

The Obalon 6-Month Balloon System, a swallowable, gas-filled intragastric balloon for weight loss in adults with obesity for whom diet and exercise has failed, was approved in September by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It involves a balloon contained within a capsule that, once it reaches the stomach, is inflated with gas via a microcatheter. Up to three balloons may be placed over the first three months, but the entire treatment period lasts six months. The inflated balloons make patients feel full. Treatment is accompanied by a moderate intensity diet and behavior modification program. The device is manufactured by Obalon Therapeutics, Inc., based in San Diego, CA.

Results of the study were based on a double-blinded randomized, sham-controlled trial of 387 patients, about half of whom received treatment with the Obalon balloon and the other half with a sugar-filled sham capsule designed to look like the device. Patients, who had a body mass index (BMI) of between 30 and 40, swallowed three capsules over a 12-week period (one every three weeks). All patients at the 15 study sites also underwent 25 minutes of lifestyle therapy administered by a blinded registered dietitian every three weeks. After six months, patients were informed which capsule they received and those with the Obalon balloons had them removed endoscopically.

Average percent total weight loss after six months for Obalon balloon patients was 6.81 percent, while those in the sham control group had 3.59 percent total average weight loss. Balloon-treated patients had nearly 25 percent excess weight loss. Six months after the balloons were removed, 89.5 percent of the average total weight lost during the treatment period was maintained. Researchers say a single adverse event, a bleeding gastric ulcer, occurred in one balloon patient on high dose NSAIDs who had an outpatient knee replacement procedure. Non-serious adverse device events, mostly abdominal cramping and nausea, occurred in 90.8 percent of patients (99.6% were rated mild or moderate).

“There is no magic pill for obesity, but this swallowable balloon and other intragastric balloons may offer new hope to people who otherwise would not seek treatment or not have as good a result with diet and exercise alone,” said Raul J. Rosenthal, MD, ASMBS President and Chairman, Department of General Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Florida, who was not involved in the study. “The balloon and other technologies may help to fill the therapeutic gaps between diet and exercise and medical therapy, and medical therapy and surgery, where the gaps are quite large.”

People with obesity and severe obesity have higher rates of heart disease, diabetes, some cancers, arthritis, sleep apnea, high blood pressure and dozens of other diseases and conditions. Studies have shown individuals with a BMI greater than 30 have a 50 to 100 percent greater risk of premature death compared to healthy weight individuals.[1][2]

Metabolic/bariatric surgery has been shown to be the most effective and long lasting treatment for severe obesity and many related conditions and results in significant weight loss. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) reported significant improvements in the safety of metabolic/bariatric surgery due in large part to improved laparoscopic techniques.[3] The risk of death is about 0.1 percent[4] and the overall likelihood of major complications is about 4 percent.[5]

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in 2011–2014, the prevalence of obesity was just over 36 percent in adults, with a higher prevalence among women than men (38.3% vs. 34.3%) and older than younger adults (37% vs. 32.3%). Obese is medically defined as having a body mass index (BMI), a measure of height to weight, that's more than 30. The ASMBS estimates about 24 million Americans have severe obesity, which would mean a BMI of 35 or more with an obesity-related condition like diabetes or a BMI of 40.

About the ASMBSThe ASMBS is the largest organization for bariatric surgeons in the nation. It is a non-profit organization that works to advance the art and science of bariatric surgery and is committed to educating medical professionals and the lay public about bariatric surgery as an option for the treatment of morbid obesity, as well as the associated risks and benefits. It encourages its members to investigate and discover new advances in bariatric surgery, while maintaining a steady exchange of experiences and ideas that may lead to improved surgical outcomes for morbidly obese patients. For more information, visit www.asmbs.org.

*A 6-month Swallowable Balloon System results in sustainable weight loss at 1 year: results from a prospective, randomized sham-controlled trial Aurora Pryor Stony Brook NY1, James Swain Scottsdale Arizona2, George Woodman Memphis Tennessee3, Steven Edmundowicz Aurora Colorado4, Tarek Hassanein Coronado California5, Vafa Shayani Hinsdale IL6, John Fang Salt Lake City UT7, mark noar towson md8, George EidPittsburgh PA9, Wayne English Nashville TN10, Nabil Tariq Houston TX11, Michael Larsen Seattle WA12, Sreenivasa Jonnalagadda Kansas City MO13, Dennis Riff Anaheim Ca14, Jaime Ponce Chattanooga TN15, Shelby Sullivan St. Louis Missouri16Stony Brook University1 Honor Health2 Mid South Bariatrics3 University of Colorado, Denver4 University of California, San Diego5 Franciscian St. james Health6 University of Utah7 Mark D Noar and Assoc8 West Penn Allegheny Health System9 Vanderbilt University10 Methodist Hospital, Houston11 Virginia Mason University12 St. Lukes Hospital of Kansas City13 Anaheim Regional Medical Center14 Dalton Surgical Group15 Washington University, St. Louis16

[1] Office of the Surgeon General – U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2004). Overweight and obesity: health consequences. Accessed October 2013 from http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/obesity/calltoaction/fact_consequences.html [2] Kaplan, L. M. (2003). Body weight regulation and obesity. Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery. 7(4) pp. 443-51. Doi:10.1016/S1091-255X(03)00047-7. [3] Encinosa, W. E., et al. (2009). Recent improvements in bariatric surgery outcomes. Medical Care. 47(5) pp. 531-535. Accessed October 2013 from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19318997 [4] Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). (2007). Statistical Brief #23. Bariatric Surgery Utilization and Outcomes in 1998 and 2004. Accessed October 2013 from http://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/reports/statbriefs/sb23.jsp [5] Flum, D. R., et al. (2009). Perioperative safety in the longitudinal assessment of bariatric surgery. New England Journal of Medicine. 361 pp.445-454. Accessed October 2013 from http://content.nejm.org/cgi/content/full/361/5/445
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We will give the release a satisfactory rating because it notes that after one year patients receiving the Obalon balloon and counseling had lost about 7 percent of their total body weight (or about a quarter of their “excess” weight) compared to a bit less than 4 percent total weight loss for those given a sham balloon and counseling. However, since other intragastric balloons are already on the market, most people would want to know how the Obalon device compares. The release should have noted that because the trial did not include competing devices, there is no evidence that indicates whether the new device is any better or worse than other devices.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a report on what is believed to be the first small clinical trial of its kind, researchers at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center say they have safely used immune cells grown from patients' own bone marrow to treat multiple myeloma, a cancer of white blood cells.

Results of the trial involving a particular type of tumor-targeting T cell, known as marrow-infiltrating lymphocytes (MILs), are described in the May 20 issue of Science Translational Medicine.

"What we learned in this small trial is that large numbers of activated MILs can selectively target and kill myeloma cells," says Johns Hopkins immunologist Ivan Borrello, M.D., who led the clinical trial.

MILs, he explains, are the foot soldiers of the immune system and attack foreign cells, such as bacteria or viruses. But in their normal state, they are inactive and too few in number to have a measurable effect on cancer.

Previous laboratory research by Borrello and his colleagues showed that activated MILs could selectively target and kill myeloma cells taken from patients and grown in laboratory culture flasks.

For the clinical trial, the Johns Hopkins team enrolled 25 patients with newly diagnosed or relapsed multiple myeloma, although three of the patients relapsed before they could receive the MILs therapy.

The scientists retrieved MILs from each patient's bone marrow, grew them in the laboratory to expand their numbers, activated them with microscopic beads coated with immune activating antibodies and intravenously injected each of the 22 patients with their own cells. Three days before the injections of expanded MILs, patients received high doses of chemotherapy and a stem cell transplant, standard treatments for multiple myeloma.

One year after receiving the MILs therapy, 13 of the 22 patients had at least a partial response to the therapy, meaning that their cancers had shrunk by at least 50 percent.

Seven patients experienced at least a 90 percent reduction in tumor cell volume and lived, on average, 25.1 months without cancer progression. The remaining 15 patients had an average of 11.8 progression-free months following MILs therapy. None of the participants had serious side effects from the MILs therapy. The overall survival was 31.5 months for those with less than 90 percent disease reduction, but this number has not yet been reached in those with better responses. The average follow-up time is currently more than six years.

Borrello notes that several U.S. cancer centers have conducted similar experimental treatments, known as adoptive T cell therapy, but says the Johns Hopkins team is believed to be the only one to use MILs. Other types of tumor-infiltrating cells can be used, but they are usually less plentiful in patients' tumors and may not grow as well outside the body, says Borrello.

In nonblood-based tumors, such as melanoma, only about one-half of patients have T cells in their tumors that can be harvested, and only about one-half of those harvested cells can be grown. "Typically, immune cells from solid tumors, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, can be harvested and grown in only about 25 percent of patients who could potentially be eligible for the therapy. But in our clinical trial, we were able to harvest and grow MILs from all 22 patients," says Kimberly Noonan, Ph.D., a research associate at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

Noonan says the small trial helped her and her colleagues learn more about which patients may benefit from MILs therapy. For example, they were able to determine how many of the MILs grown in the lab were specifically targeted to the patient's tumor and whether they continued to target the tumor after being infused.

Additionally, the scientists found that patients whose bone marrow before treatment contained a high number of certain immune cells, known as central memory cells, also had better response to MILs therapy. Patients who began treatment with signs of an overactive immune response did not respond as well.

Noonan says the research team has used these data to guide two other ongoing MILs clinical trials. Those studies, she says, are trying to extend anti-tumor response and tumor specificity by combining the MILs transplant with a Johns Hopkins-developed cancer vaccine called GVAX and the myeloma drug lenalidomide, which stimulates T cell responses.

The researchers say the trials also have shed light on new ways to grow the MILs. "In most of these trials, you see that the more cells you get, the better response you get in patients. Learning how to improve cell growth may therefore improve the therapy," says Noonan.

Kimmel Cancer Center scientists are also developing MILs to treat solid tumors such as lung, esophageal and gastric cancers, as well as the pediatric cancers neuroblastoma and Ewing's sarcoma.

Experts report there are more than 20,000 new cases of multiple myeloma and more than 10,000 deaths each year in United States. It is the second most common cancer originating in the blood.

Other Johns Hopkins scientists who contributed to the research include Carol Ann Huff, Janice Davis, M. Victor Lemas, Susan Fiorino, Jeffrey Bitzan, Anna Ferguson, Amy Emerling, Leo Luznik, William Matsui, Jonathan Powell, Ephraim Fuchs, Gary L. Rosner, C. Epstein, Lakshmi Rudraraju, Richard F. Ambinder, Richard J. Jones and Drew Pardoll.

Funding for the study was provided by the Commonwealth Fund (5P01 CA015396, P30 CA006973) and the Baca and Morisi Funds.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of spelling out the results of this phase 1 trial by providing data showing that MILs can target and kill cancer cells. It shows that in more than half of the study’s patients, their cancers had shrunk by at least half. In 15 of the 22 patients, their cancers did not progress for nearly a year after the MILs therapy. This wasn’t a controlled study, so it’s unclear how these patients would have fared without the MILs treatment, and the release could have attempted to provide some insight on that point. But we’re pleased that the release focuses appropriately on the apparent safety of the approach, rather than trying to make claims about survival benefits that aren’t supportable by this kind of small, uncontrolled study. The release also explains that the research provides information suggesting which patients might benefit best from this approach, and that other research at this cancer center is centered on testing this approach on different forms of cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Most heart patients who take low-dose omega-3 fatty acid supplements don't appear to gain any additional protection against further cardiac trouble, new Dutch research cautions.

In fact, neither low doses of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), which are found in fish oil, nor of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), derived from nuts and several vegetable oils, provided any benefit to the vast majority of heart patients, the study showed.

The scientists focused on patients who were already taking medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and potential clotting. So, the researchers theorized that the poor performance of the supplements may simply reflect the overwhelming power of the medications.

Study author Daan Kromhout, from the division of human nutrition at Wageningen University in the Netherlands, is to present the findings Sunday at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Stockholm; the study will appear online in the New England Journal of Medicine simultaneously.

In the study, researchers focused on a group of more than 4,800 Dutch heart attack patients between the ages of 60 and 80, slightly more than three-quarters of whom were men.

All had experienced a heart attack at some point in the decade leading up to the study, and all were taking blood pressure medications, anti-clotting drugs and statins.

At the study's start, the patients were instructed to consume (over a period lasting a little over three years) one of four different types of margarines: one supplemented with omega-3 fatty acids; one supplemented with the plant-derived ALA; one supplemented with both omega-3 fatty acids and ALA; and one with no supplements.

The amount of supplementation added to the various margarines was deemed to be "low-dose." During the study, the patients consumed an average of 18.8 grams of margarine per day, which meant ingestion of an average of 226 milligrams of EPA combined with 150 milligrams of DHA omega-3 fatty acids and/or 1.9 grams of ALA.

By the study's end, almost 14 percent of the heart attack patients had experienced another "major cardiovascular event," with some cases ending in death.

None of the low-dose supplements seemed to stave off such events in most of the patients. One exception appeared to be among women ingesting ALA; researchers saw a 27 percent reduction in the risk for further cardiac complications, although that reduction did not quite reach statistical significance.

"The bottom-line finding of the Alpha Omega Trial is that [omega]-3 fatty acids did not reduce the primary endpoint major cardiovascular events," Kromhout said, noting that the ALA finding needs further confirmation.

Dr. Murray A. Mittleman, director of the cardiovascular epidemiology research unit at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said he was "not that surprised by these results."

"Other studies have shown no benefit from omega-3, other than specifically protecting against cardiac death linked to arrhythmia among patients who have just survived a heart attack," Mittleman noted. It is during this acute post-attack period, he explained, when patients are most vulnerable to a subsequent event.

"But here, in some cases the patients they looked at are years following their first heart attack when they start taking these supplements," he stressed. "So, that's a big difference in what kind of patient they're examining. And they're also not just looking at preventable fatalities but all heart-related events that follow. And on top of that, the supplement doses they use here are very low, much lower than those used in prior studies."

"So it might be big differences in study design that account for this new finding," Mittleman cautioned. "In any case, I would say this is absolutely worth further investigation."

Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, agreed.

"It is possible that improvements in other treatments for heart attack patients have made fish oil supplementation less important for reducing cardiovascular risk," he acknowledged. "But it's also possible that the different dosing used in this study relative to previous work made a difference in the outcome. The dosing here may have been just too low, whereas higher doses given immediately following an initial heart attack might have been protective."

"So I would say," Fonarow added, "that this is by no means the final word regarding omega-3s and cardiovascular health."

For more on omega-3 fatty acids, visit the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Adequate. The story mentioned that there did appear to be a subcategory of benefit in women who consumed the ALA fortified margarine.  It didn’t to mention the benefits seen in individuals with diabetes from the use of fortified margarine.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DURHAM, N.C. - Most high-risk lung cancer patients might not need annual low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) screenings if they are cleared of disease in their initial test, according to a study led by a Duke Cancer Institute researcher.

The researchers found that even former heavy smokers appear to have a reduced incidence of lung cancer if their initial LDCT screening is negative, suggesting that less frequent screening might be warranted.

"This has significant public policy implications," said Edward F. Patz, Jr., M.D., the James and Alice Chen Professor of Radiology at Duke and lead author of a study published online March 21, 2016 in The Lancet Oncology journal. "Not screening patients annually could save millions in health care costs and spare patients the radiation exposure and the downstream effects of false positive screenings."

Patz and colleagues analyzed data from the National Lung Screening Trial, a large prospective study that randomly assigned former smokers to either receive three annual low-dose CT scans or three chest radiographs for the early detection of lung cancer. Patients were ages 55-74 who had smoked for the equivalent of 30 years (one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years, etc.).

The researchers identified study participants in the CT-scan group whose initial screening was negative. They then compared those patients to other CT-scan recipients whose screenings detected an abnormality to assess any differences in lung cancer incidence and lung cancer-specific deaths.

Of the initial 19,066 participants with a negative initial LDCT scan, 444 (2 percent) were diagnosed with lung cancer at the time of the last available follow-up. In the first year after a negative screen and before the scheduled first annual screen, 17 patients (0.09 percent of all initial negative LDCT participants) were diagnosed with lung cancer.

An additional 75 patients (0.4 percent of the initial negative group) were diagnosed with lung cancer between the first and second annual screening. The incidence of lung cancer at the first screen among those who were initially negative was 0.34 percent, compared to 1 percent of patients who were diagnosed during the baseline screening.

The researchers determined that eliminating the first annual screening after the initial negative test might have resulted in, at most, an additional 28 lung cancer deaths in the LDCT group (186 vs. 212 deaths per 100,000 per years) over the course of the study.

"Our analysis suggests that annual screens may not be warranted for patients who have had an initial negative scan, and future risk prediction and cost-effectiveness models could incorporate these data to improve screening guidelines," Patz said.

He added that improving the accuracy of LDCT screening for lung cancer would also significantly reduce the number of annual screens. Nearly 40 percent of LDCT patients in the National Lung Screening Trial had false positives sometime during the seven years the study examined

In addition to Patz, study authors include Erin Greco, Constantine Gatsonis, Paul Pinsky, Barnett S. Kramer, and Denise R. Aberle.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: A thorough discussion of the absolute numbers affected gives a good sense of the magnitude of the benefits. The release noted, “In the first year after a negative screen and before the scheduled first annual screen, 17 patients (0.9 percent of all initial negative LDCT participants) were diagnosed with lung cancer.”
Another benefit described is the potential to dramatically reduce the number of false positive tests. According to the release, almost 40 percent of the entire group of patient volunteers (26,231 people) in the 7-year National Lung Screening Trial were given a false positive study result.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Jan. 5, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have taken another step in the hunt to find a treatment for an aggressive, likely-to-recur form of breast cancer.

In a study published in the Jan. 5 online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine, the experimental drug iniparib not only shrank tumors and increased the time they took to progress, but also surprised researchers by prolonging survival in women with what's known as triple-negative breast cancer.

This type of breast cancer lacks receptors for estrogen and progesterone and doesn't have large quantities of HER-2/neu protein, which the most successful cancer therapies target. This means that many currently available drugs simply won't affect it.

"We were surprised [at the results] because triple-negative breast cancer is very difficult to treat," said study lead author Dr. Joyce O'Shaughnessy.

"The big, big surprise was survival," added O'Shaughnessy, who nevertheless stressed that the trial was small and preliminary.

The findings were enough to generate the interest of Dr. Lisa A. Carey, the co-author of an accompanying editorial.

"It is early, but it's really exciting because it's a new class of drugs. It isn't that often that we have a completely new approach to treating cancer," said Carey, medical director of the University of North Carolina Breast Center in Chapel Hill. "This is a new book. We've just opened it up."

Iniparib inhibits a pathway that helps repair DNA; researchers call it the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) pathway. If this chain is interrupted, cancer cells don't have the necessary tools to repair themselves.

"[PARP inhibitors] work by preventing the cells from repairing damage to their DNA," Carey explained.

A similar drug, in fact, has shown benefit in patients with BRCA 1 or BRCA 2 mutations predisposing them to breast and ovarian cancer.

In this study, 123 patients with triple-negative breast cancer were randomized to receive a commonly used, well-tolerated chemotherapy regimen (gemcitabine and carboplatin) or to receive chemo plus iniparib.

More than one-half of the women responded to the combination treatment (meaning the tumor volume decreased) versus only about one-third of those receiving chemo alone.

Women receiving iniparib plus chemo lived an average of 12.3 months compared to just 7.7 months in the chemo-alone group. This may not seen like very long in either group, but for this serious a cancer, it is impressive, the researchers noted.

This was a phase 2 trial. O'Shaughnessy, who is co-director of breast cancer research at Baylor-Sammons Cancer Center, US Oncology, and Texas Oncology in Dallas, said the results of a larger (about 500 patients) phase 3 trial should be available within one to three months.

"The whole field is still preliminary and we have to be careful not to overhype the results [as] we're waiting on the results of the phase 3 trial," she said. "Phase 2 was quite positive, but we really don't know if this is going to end up benefiting patients until we get to phase 3."

In her editorial accompanying the study, Carey agreed. "Both excitement and caution are appropriate in interpreting the trial," she wrote. "Some clear drawbacks should be noted." Among them, she said, were the small size of the study group, "imbalances at baseline" favoring the iniparib group, and the "unconventional" chemotherapy regimen. But caveats notwithstanding, she concluded, the results may herald improved therapy "for an underserved subgroup of patients with breast cancer."

O'Shaughnessy added that the drug was "extremely well tolerated [by patients]. It didn't seem to add any appreciable toxicity to chemotherapy."

In the meantime, she pointed out, a woman walking through a clinic door who is diagnosed with triple-negative breast cancer shouldn't panic. "If it's only in the breast or lymph nodes, we cure most triple-negative cancers. But when it recurs and becomes metastatic, it's very difficult to treat," she explained.

The study was funded by BiPar Sciences, a subsidiary of Sanofi-Aventis which makes the drug.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefits are quantified.  Women who received Iniparib plus chemotherapy lived an average of 12.3 months while those receiving chemotherapy alone lived an average of 7.7 months.  Tumor volume decreased in 50% of the women receiving Iniparib & 33% of women receiving only chemotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new cold and flu test can precisely diagnose a dozen winter ailments and reduce unneeded use of antibiotics, says the company that sells it. Physicians say the test is accurate and the most comprehensive available, but some say its long processing time limits usefulness in emergency rooms.

Doctors currently diagnose colds and flus through a patchwork of testing, observation and process of elimination. But many of the current tests available are not very sensitive, and most test for only one or two viruses at a time. According to a 2006 study in the New England Journal of Medicine of some 3,000 children under 5 years old, only 17% who had the flu were properly diagnosed in doctors' offices, clinics and emergency rooms. Poor diagnosis can result in a missed opportunity to prescribe a flu medicine, and also sometimes results in an unneeded antibiotic if doctors wrongly think the illness is caused by bacteria.

The new test, called the xTAG respiratory panel, approved earlier this year by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is the most comprehensive FDA-approved virus-panel to date. It tests for a dozen viruses, including several types of influenza, two types of respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, three types of parainfluenza, adenovirus and even rhinovirus, which causes the common cold. According to manufacturer Luminex Corp. , Austin, Texas, the viruses in the panel are expected to account for about 85% of the viral illnesses in the U.S. this year.

The test is expected to be used mainly in hospitals and emergency rooms, but doctors can send the swab to a local lab.

To use it, doctors take a swab from the nose or throat. In the lab, genetic material from the swab is magnified millions of times and then bound to fluorescent markers, which are then read by a machine. According to data submitted to the FDA, the test detects each virus 78% to 100% of the time, depending on the type, and has few false positives. For example, the FDA-submitted data say it detects RSV, a common cause of infant pneumonia, 100% of the time, while giving false positives 2% of the time.

"This is really the gold standard. It is very sensitive," says Kathryn M. Edwards, a Nashville pediatric infectious-disease specialist and co-author of the New England Journal study.

The downside is that the test is expensive, about $300 to $400, but is covered by most insurers. It also needs extensive processing in the lab. And patients will have to wait at least six to seven hours -- maybe a day or two depending on staffing at the hospital laboratory. "Emergency departments are going to have to think twice about a test like that," says Michael Shannon, senior physician in emergency medicine at Children's Hospital Boston. Currently available tests can yield results in a half hour, though accuracy varies and they typically screen for only one or two viruses.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story presents several benefits of the xTag test.  It is 1) more sensitive and more comprehensive than currently available tests and diagnostic procedures, 2) it can address the problem of under-diagnosis of the flu in vulnerable populations, such as children and the elderly, 3) it can inform treatment decisions by potentially reducing the inappropriate use of antibiotics while indicating when they might be beneficial.   An important caveat is that it is not known whether diagnosing these viruses improves outcomes, i.e. decreased use of antibiotics, fewer hospitalizations, fewer deaths. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago — Local bans on artery-clogging trans fats in restaurant foods led to fewer heart attacks and strokes in several New York counties, a new study suggests.

The study hints at the potential for widespread health benefits from an upcoming nationwide ban, the authors and other experts say. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2015 gave the food industry until next year to eliminate artificial trans fats from American products.

New York City enacted a restaurant ban on the fats in 2007 and several counties in the state did the same. Hospital admissions for heart attacks and strokes in those areas declined 6 percent starting three years after the bans, compared with counties without bans. The results translate to 43 fewer heart attacks and strokes per 100,000 people, said lead author Dr. Eric Brandt, a Yale University cardiology fellow.

His study was published Wednesday in JAMA Cardiology.

Trans fats, also called partially hydrogenated oils, enhance food texture and structure. They were once commonly used to make restaurant fried chicken, French fries, doughnuts and other foods and found in grocery items including cookies, crackers and margarine.

These fats can boost blood levels of unhealthy cholesterol, increasing risks for heart problems. The FDA in 2006 required them to be listed on food labels and the food industry has been switching to healthier oils.

The researchers examined hospital admissions data from 2002 to 2013 in 11 New York counties that adopted bans and in 25 counties that did not. Admissions for heart attacks and strokes declined in all counties, going from more than 800 to less than 700 per 100,000 people, but the drop was steeper in counties that enacted bans.

Alice Lichtenstein, a heart and nutrition specialist at Tufts University’s Boston campus, said the results are encouraging but that other changes could have contributed, such as smoking bans and mandatory calories on menus.

Dr. Mark Creager, former American Heart Association president, said the results echo previous studies “and are consistent with the thinking of most scientists” on potential benefits of these bans.

“Policies such as these when adapted on a nationwide level will be good for our entire population,” said Creager, director of Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center’s heart center in Lebanon, New Hampshire.

Copyright 2017 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story employs both absolute numbers and percentages, so that we know how great a magnitude the change was (e.g., 43 fewer heart attacks and strokes per 100,000 people).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (January 26, 2017): Patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, known as GERD, who undergo laparoscopic anti-reflux operations compared with traditional "open" operations suffer fewer postoperative complications, experience faster recovery, and incur lower health care costs, according to study results published online as an "article in press" on the Journal of the American College of Surgeons website, ahead of print publication.



GERD affects nearly 20 percent of American adults, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.* Heartburn, a burning sensation in the chest, is a common symptom of GERD.



"Patients with GERD have an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter, which allows gastric acid to go back up into the esophagus," said lead study author Francisco Schlottmann, MD, a surgeon at the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. "Anti-reflux surgery should be considered in patients who do not achieve complete control of their symptoms [regurgitation or cough] with medications; who do not want to take medications for the rest of their lives; or who experience complications of medical therapy."



For the study, researchers analyzed data in the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) database of more than 75,000 adults who underwent either laparoscopic or open fundoplication for GERD between 2000 and 2013. NIS represents 1,000 U.S. hospitals and contains data on more than seven million hospitalizations each year. During the study period, 58.4 percent of patients underwent laparoscopic procedures and 41.6 percent had open anti-reflux operations performed through a long abdominal incision.



The study showed that the rate of laparoscopic procedures increased from 24.8 percent in 2000 to 84.3 percent in 2013. "Surprisingly, in 2003, 12 years after the first laparoscopic anti-reflux operation was reported, only 25 percent of all the anti-reflux operations were performed laparoscopically in the U.S.," Dr. Schlottmann said. "Subsequently, the rate increased, but 15 percent of all anti-reflux operations were still being performed through an open approach in 2013. We believe this percentage is very high, and we hope that in the next year this percentage will decrease."



Along with discovering that the use of laparoscopy for the surgical treatment of GERD has increased significantly in the last decade, the researchers also found that, on average, the minimally invasive approach reduced length of hospital stay by approximately two days, and open operations were more than $9,000 more expensive than minimally invasive procedures.



The researchers also found that laparoscopic procedures were better for patients in terms of fewer complications. Laparoscopic anti-reflux operations were less likely to result in postoperative blood clots, wound complications, surgical site infection, esophageal perforation (which can be life threatening), bleeding, cardiac failure, and death.



"Our study highlights the fact that laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery is as effective as the open approach, and in 2017, with all its advantages, should be the standard of care," said senior study author Marco G. Patti, MD, FACS, a surgeon and Director of the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.



"We found that laparoscopic surgery is associated with significantly lower costs. In addition, indirect costs of the open approach, including an impaired ability to work, time off from work, and intangible costs of postoperative pain and healing, are difficult to measure but also favor the laparoscopic approach," said Dr. Patti.



"GERD is a common digestive disorder that can usually be treated with dietary changes and medications such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). However, chronic and not-controlled GERD can cause serious complications. Repeated exposure to stomach acid can damage the lining of the esophagus and lead to a precancerous condition called Barrett's esophagus," said Dr. Schlottmann.



Study results also revealed that urban academic or teaching hospitals performed laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery at a higher rate than open procedures, 54.4 percent versus 45.6 percent. "We think that it is important to make this information more available to the public. In order to achieve good outcomes, anti-reflux surgery should be performed laparoscopically in specialized centers," said Dr. Patti.



Paula D Strassle, MSPH Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC also participated in this study.



Citation: Comparative Analysis of Perioperative Outcomes and Costs Between Laparoscopic and Open Antireflux Surgery. Journal of the American College of Surgeons. DOI: http://dx.

*National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Digestive Diseases Statistics for the United States. https:/ . Published November 2014. Accessed January 20, 2017.

About the American College of Surgeons

The American College of Surgeons is a scientific and educational organization of surgeons that was founded in 1913 to raise the standards of surgical practice and improve the quality of care for surgical patients. The College is dedicated to the ethical and competent practice of surgery. Its achievements have significantly influenced the course of scientific surgery in America and have established it as an important advocate for all surgical patients. The College has more than 80,000 members and is the largest organization of surgeons in the world. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release summarized how minimally invasive techniques reduced the length of hospital stay and complication rates for patients.
“Researchers also found that, on average, the minimally invasive approach reduced length of hospital stay by approximately two days, and open operations were more than $9,000 more expensive than minimally invasive procedures.
The researchers also found that laparoscopic procedures were better for patients in terms of fewer complications. Laparoscopic anti-reflux operations were less likely to result in postoperative blood clots, wound complications, surgical site infection, esophageal perforation (which can be life threatening), bleeding, cardiac failure, and death.”
We rate this satisfactory, but just barely, for citing cost differences between the two types of surgery and the average reduction in the number of days a patient must remain hospitalized.  We do wish the release had delved more into the specifics of reduced complications. How common were the surgical complications in each surgical method?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Before Starting A Statin, Talk It Over With Your Doctor

A study published Monday is pushing back against the notion that up to 40 percent of Americans should be taking statin drugs to reduce the risk of heart disease. The study, in the Annals of Internal Medicine, argues that current medical guidelines haven't adequately considered the risks from these widely used drugs.

"Some harms are mentioned, but it's entirely unclear how they were considered when coming up with the recommendations," says Milo Puhan, a physician and epidemiologist at the University of Zurich and senior author of the new study. "In our approach we very explicitly considered the harms."

It's important to note that statin drugs are generally safe, and harms are uncommon. On the other hand, the benefits aren't that great, either. Anywhere from 50 to 200 healthy people need to take a statin daily to prevent a single heart attack for five years, so even small harms may outweigh the potential benefits, the Swiss scientists say.

The most common side effect of these drugs is muscle pain, which usually goes away if patients stop taking the medicines. People taking statins are also at a higher risk of developing diabetes, which is harder to reverse.

Puhan also found that some statins were more effective than others, with atorvastatin (the generic name for Lipitor) being the best of the bunch. He notes that physician guidelines don't generally compare the relative value of these drugs, which are all available as inexpensive generics.

He also finds that benefits fade compared with harms as people get older. "The elderly do not benefit as much as previous studies might have thought," he says.

"One size doesn't fit it all," he concludes. "That's a very important message."

Puhan says, based on his assessment, perhaps 15 to 20 percent of older adults should be taking statins – far less than the 30 or 40 percent suggested by current medical guidelines.

"I think for me, as a physician," says Ilana Richman, an internist at the Yale School of Medicine, "this kind of data suggests that if we give more weight to the potential for adverse events, then maybe it's reasonable to hold off for lower-risk patients."

She co-wrote an editorial about the paper and came away from it thinking that doctors need to spend more time talking about the plusses and minuses of statin treatment, personalizing their recommendations more than they do now. She says it's a challenge to convey these sophisticated concepts in the short amount of time doctors have to spend with their patients.

Yet that kind of dialog is increasingly the expectation. In mid-November, the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology published new guidelines calling for more nuanced conversations around who would most benefit from statins.

Scott Grundy, a physician at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center who chaired the guidelines committee, says the new recommendations urge people in this gray area to get a special kind of CT scan that looks for calcium deposits in heart arteries, a signal for clogs that could cause trouble.

"If you have no coronary calcium, then your chances of having a heart attack over the next 10 years are very low," he says.

And it turns out that perhaps 40 percent of people who are identified as candidates based on their risk factors such as cholesterol levels and age actually have clear heart arteries, Grundy says. "That means a lot of people are going to be treated unnecessarily if they don't have the calcium scan."

But that test, which Grundy says is available for about $100, is controversial among some physicians. They worry that it will trigger overtreatment of conditions that the scan will pick up, but which don't require urgent attention.

And it is only useful as a screening test for people who haven't had heart disease. Statins are routinely prescribed for people who have already had a heart attack or stroke. For those patients (who weren't included in the Swiss analysis), the benefits are so clear "it's almost mandatory to be on a statin drug," Grundy says.

He disagrees with a lot of the particulars in the Swiss study. So does cardiologist Roger Blumenthal, who heads the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at Johns Hopkins. "The harms [analyzed in the paper] can be dealt with by a smart clinician," he says.

Yet both the new guidelines and the latest study agree on an important point: Doctors and patients should spend more time reviewing the benefits and risks of statins, with attention paid to each person's particular circumstances.

You can contact NPR science correspondent Richard Harris at rharris@npr.org.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We learn that “anywhere from 50 to 200 healthy people need to take a statin daily to prevent a single heart attack for five years.” That’s helpful information. It also notes that the observed benefit is less for older patients.
The story could have added that even those numbers might disputed by some experts who perceive no meaningful benefit. For example, one review found being on a statin does not help people with low risk for heart disease live longer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
More intensive treatment for patients with acute kidney injury did not bring better results in a large randomized, controlled clinical trial sponsored by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and the National Institutes of Health.

The findings will be published Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine; they were released early online.

The trial was conducted from 2003 to 2007 and included 1,124 critically ill adult patients at 17 VA hospitals and 10 university hospitals.

The study's lead author, Dr. Paul M. Palevsky, said the results may lead to a large savings in U.S. health care costs, estimated at $100 million to $250 million a year for this type of patient. He is chief of the renal section at the VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System and a professor of medicine at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

In acute kidney injury, the kidneys shut down, causing fluids and waste products to build up in the body. The VA reports the condition has a 50 percent to 80 percent death rate.

In the study, patients who did not need drugs to maintain blood pressure were assigned to either a six-day or three-day dialysis to filter toxins and extra fluid from the blood.

Those patients who needed drugs to increase blood pressure were assigned to two other forms of blood cleaning, both divided into intensive or less intensive groups.

Throughout the study, patients remained in intensive or less intensive therapy, although as their clinical conditions changed, they could change forms of therapy, Dr. Palevsky said.

There was no difference in death rates in both groups, and both also had similar rates of recovering kidney function and other organ failure.

In an accompanying editorial, Dr. Joseph V. Bonventre of Harvard Medical School wrote that he had concerns about the change of therapy offered to patients in the study.

"When a patient transitions from one therapy to another, the dialysis dose is unlikely to be equivalent," he said, adding that results could be affected by different methods in the high-intensity and low-intensity groups. "For example, there was a small over-representation of sustained low-efficiency dialysis in the intensive-therapy group."

Dr. Bonventre wrote that the study had "a predominance of male patients," so there is a question of whether its results can be applied to female patients. And, he said, the results cannot be simply applied to patients with chronic kidney disease, who then have acute kidney injury, since the study excluded any patients with advanced chronic kidney disease.

He concluded, "Given the results of the [Acute Renal Failure Trial Network] study, the renal and intensive care communities must now focus on other strategies to help this population of patients. ... We still have a long way to go in treating acute kidney injury."

First published on July 1, 2008 at 12:00 am
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did mention that the two approaches to treating acute kidney injury did not have different outcomes and specifically mentioned death rates, recovery of kidney function and rates of other organ failure.  The story also mentioned a death rate in one health care system of 50-80% from acute kidney injury. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - First results from a human trial of an Ebola vaccine from GlaxoSmithKline show it is safe and generates an immune response, scientists said on Wednesday, but larger trials are needed to see if it protects and if a booster is needed.

The vaccine is being developed by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) and GSK against the Zaire strain of Ebola — the one circulating in West Africa — and the first doses for a larger trial arrived in Liberia last week.

That trial is the first of several mid-stage studies planned for West Africa and aims to test GSK’s vaccine and one from Merck and NewLink. Johnson & Johnson and Bavarian Nordic have a vaccine in early-stage clinical tests.

The early-stage Phase I trial of GSK’s vaccine was primarily designed to test safety, but Adrian Hill, who led the work at Oxford’s Jenner Institute, said it was “encouraging” that the shot also prompted responses from the immune system.

“The safety profile is pretty much as we’d hoped and the immune responses are okay, but not great,” he told Reuters.

The data, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, were from 60 healthy volunteers given the vaccine in Britain between Sept. 17 and Nov. 18 last year.

The volunteers got one of three doses - low, medium, or high - and data from 28 days after vaccination showed the shot was safe at these doses, with only mild side effects.

“People typically experienced mild symptoms that lasted for one or maybe two days, such as pain or reddening at the injection site, and occasionally people felt feverish,” Hill said.

However, the antibody response was weaker than was found in a trial of the same Ebola vaccine in macaque monkeys, in which the animals were also found to be protected.

Hill said the lower antibody levels, together with a lower response detected in the immune system’s T-cells, suggested to him that a booster may well be needed.

Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust charity which helped fund the trial, said it provided “good initial evidence that the GSK vaccine will be safe to use in people”.

“However, we still don’t know whether it will provide protection against Ebola infection in a real-world situation,” he said. “That’s why trials in West Africa of this, and the other vaccines in development, must begin as soon possible.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provides a well balanced and thoughtful presentation of the benefits seen in the trial.  It notes the study was a phase 1 trial designed to identify safety.  We liked the caveats given in the story.  “It is safe and generates an immune response, scientists said on Wednesday, but larger trials are needed to see if it protects and if a booster is needed.” “…the immune responses are okay, but not great…” “However, the antibody response was weaker than was found in a trial of the same Ebola vaccine in macaque monkeys…” The reader gets a good overall impression of the study results and the need for additional information on the efficacy of the vaccine and that repeated dosing may be needed. The last sentence summarizes the study well, “…we still don’t know whether it will provide protection against Ebola infection in a real-world situation.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The use of proton radiotherapy to treat the most common malignant brain tumor in children is as effective as standard photon (x-ray) radiation therapy while causing fewer long-term side effects such as hearing loss and cognitive disorders, according to a study receiving online publication in Lancet Oncology. The paper from a team led by Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) investigators describes patient outcomes an average of seven years after proton therapy for medulloblastoma, a fast-growing tumor that develops in the cerebellum at the base of the brain.

"Proton radiotherapy is still not widely available in the U.S. or around the world, but it is increasingly recognized for its potential to reduce the side effects of treatment, particularly in the pediatric population," says Torunn Yock, MD, MCh, MGH Department of Radiation Oncology, lead and corresponding author of the report. "At experienced centers, proton therapy has a proven track record of treatment success and safety."

In contrast to photon radiotherapy, in which a dose of radiation is delivered all along the x-ray beam as it passes through a patient's body, in proton therapy the dose is precisely focused on the target area with little or no dose delivered to normal tissues in front of or behind the tumor. This feature has made proton therapy particularly attractive to treat tumors in or near the brain or eyes, areas where the protection of nearby healthy tissues is particularly critical.

While medulloblastoma can often be successfully treated with a combination of surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, because of its location within the brain, long-term side effects are common. These can include hearing loss, which can be particularly problematic in young children; problems with learning and memory, and neuroendocrine disorders caused by irradiation of the pituitary gland and hypothalamus. Also commonly seen are problems affecting the heart, lungs, thyroid, spine and reproductive organs, all of which tend to be more serious in children treated at younger ages.

While proton therapy may appear to be ideal for reducing these adverse effects, no previous study had prospectively examined the long-term results of children treated for medulloblastoma with proton therapy. To investigate their hypothesis that proton therapy would reduce the incidence and severity of side effects without loss of treatment effectiveness, the researchers enrolled children and adolescents ages 3 to 21 - with an average age of around 6 ½ - who received proton therapy for medulloblastoma at the MGH from 2003 to 2009. All had previous surgery to remove as much of the tumor as possible, and all received chemotherapy before, during or after proton therapy.

Study participants were tested for hearing, a variety of cognitive functions, levels of important hormones and height and weight at the outset of the study and at several follow-up visits for up to eight years. Of 59 patients who enrolled, 12 died from their tumor during the study period and one from a traumatic brain injury. Significant hearing loss was seen in 12 percent of patients three years after treatment and in 16 percent at five years, which compares with around 25 percent reported in studies using photon radiotherapy. The cognitive effects of proton therapy - primarily affecting verbal comprehension and processing speed - were also less serious than what has been reported with photon radiotherapy, and those effects were primarily seen in children who were under the age of 8 when treated.

The neuroendocrine effects of proton therapy - deficits in any hormone level were seen in 63 percent of participants seven years after treatment - were similar to what has been reported with photon therapy. However, no cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, seizure or secondary tumor effects - all of which have been reported in photon therapy studies - were seen in the current study's participants. Survival rates and the incidence and type of tumor recurrence all were similar to what has been reported for photon radiotherapy.

"Our results indicate that proton therapy maintains excellent cure rates in pediatric medulloblastoma while reducing long-term side effects, particularly in hearing and neurocognitive function, and eliminating cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal and reproductive effects," says Yock, who is an associate professor of Radiation Oncology at Harvard Medical School. "While we are currently investigating quality of life differences between proton and photon treatment, I truly believe that - particularly for the youngest children - the ability to offer them proton therapy can make a big difference in their lives."

Nancy J. Tarbell, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology, is senior author of the Lancet Oncology report. Additional co-authors are Elizabeth Weyman, Bree Eaton, MD, and Shannon M MacDonald, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology; Beow Yeap, ScD, MGH Department of Medicine; David Ebb, MD, Beverly Lavally, RN, and Mary Huang, MD, MGH Pediatric Oncology; Nicole Sherry, MD, MGH Pediatric Endocrinology; Robin Jones, MD, MGH Pediatric Neurology; Margaret Pulsifer, PhD, MGH Psychiatry; Annah Abrams, MD, MGH Child Psychiatary; and Karen Marcus, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital Radiation Oncology. The study was funded in part by National Cancer Institute grant P01 CA021239.

Massachusetts General Hospital, founded in 1811, is the original and largest teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. The MGH conducts the largest hospital-based research program in the United States, with an annual research budget of more than $800 million and major research centers in AIDS, cardiovascular research, cancer, computational and integrative biology, cutaneous biology, human genetics, medical imaging, neurodegenerative disorders, regenerative medicine, reproductive biology, systems biology, transplantation biology and photomedicine. In July 2015, MGH returned into the number one spot on the 2015-16 U.S. News & World Report list of "America's Best Hospitals."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release quantifies some outcomes, as in this statement: “Of 59 patients who enrolled, 12 died from their tumor during the study period and one from a traumatic brain injury. Significant hearing loss was seen in 12 percent of patients three years after treatment and in 16 percent at five years, which compares with around 25 percent reported in studies using photon radiotherapy.” The release later indicates that key outcomes are comparable to photon therapy: “Survival rates and the incidence and type of tumor recurrence all were similar to what has been reported for photon radiotherapy.” We’ll call this good enough for a Satisfactory rating, although the release certainly could have provided more detail on what previous studies have found with respect to photon therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A healthy intake of vitamin D in the first year of life appears to set children up to have more muscle mass and less body fat as toddlers, according to a new study published in the journal Pediatric Obesity.

The findings emerged from research initially aimed at confirming the importance of vitamin D for bone density. The additional benefit in terms of body composition came as a surprise for the research team.

"We were very intrigued by the higher lean mass, the possibility that vitamin D can help infants to not only grow healthy skeletons but also healthy amounts of muscle and less fat," said Hope Weiler, one of the study's authors and Director of the Mary Emily Clinical Nutrition Research Unit at McGill University.

For the first time, a connection was made between the benefits of achieving healthy vitamin D status during a baby's first 12 to 36 months and how muscle mass develops. The researchers achieved this by following up on a 2013 study in which 132 infants in Montréal, Québec, were given a vitamin D3 supplement at one of four different dosages between the ages of 1 month and 12 months.

The new study confirmed the importance for the development of strong bones of a vitamin D supplement of 400 IU/day during a baby's first year. This amount is in line with current Canadian health guidelines. The researchers found that higher doses did not provide any additional benefit -- at least not in terms of bone development.

But the body scans used to assess bone density also allowed the team to measure the children's muscle and fat mass. While there were no significant differences in body composition across the different dosage groups, the researchers found children who had vitamin D stores above the threshold recommended by the Canadian Paediatric Society (CPS) averaged around 450 grams less body fat at 3 years of age.

Vitamin D supplementation is routinely recommended for babies until they can get an adequate amount through their diet. The skin synthesizes vitamin D when exposed to sunlight, making supplementation all the more important where long winters reduce the opportunity for this to happen. In addition, Health Canada advises parents and caregivers to avoid direct sunlight and avoid use of sun block creams in young infants.

Further analysis also indicated a correlation between lean muscle mass and the average level of vitamin D in the body over the first three years of a child's life. The only other factor found to make a significant difference to the children's amount of body fat was their level of physical activity.

"Vitamin D supplementation trial in infancy: body composition effects at 3years of age in a prospective follow-up study from Montréal", by T. J. Hazell, S. Gallo, C. A. Vanstone, S. Agellon, C. Rodd, and H. A. Weiler, Pediatric Obesity doi:10.1111/ijpo.12105
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this a borderline Satisfactory rating because the release provides a number associated with vitamin D supplements —  450 grams less body fat. However, the release presents some of the findings in a confusing way that could be misleading to readers. It confuses blood levels of vitamin D with doses of vitamin D supplements and it reports that children with higher blood levels of vitamin D averaged around 450 grams (1 pound) less body fat, but the headline says supplements reduce body fat. The researchers clearly stated, “This long-term follow-up of a vitamin D supplementation study in children demonstrates no difference in body composition across any dosage groups (400, 800, 1200 and 1600 IU).” The release notes that “there were no significant differences in body composition across the different dosage groups”, which makes the headline claiming that vitamin D supplements reduced body fat incompatible with what the researchers actually reported.
The release does report that physical activity also made a difference, but did not offer any comparison to the claimed effects of vitamin D levels.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Corey Thomas admitted to his pharmacist that he hated the blood pressure medications a previous doctor had prescribed for him. They came with "horrible" side effects, he said, and so he rarely took them.

As a blood pressure monitor squeezed snugly around his arm, the pharmacist counseled Thomas, 49, on his diet and stress level while checking his blood pressure. She then helped Thomas find a medication better suited for his body.

Thomas was not at a health clinic or pharmacy or a primary care physician's office.

He was at the barbershop where he works in Inglewood, California. As part of a study, these health services were provided at his barbershop and others across Los Angeles County.

The study, published Monday in the New England Journal of Medicine , tested whether pharmacist-led programs in barbershops could significantly lower high blood pressure in black men in the United States.

Results from 12 months after the study show that when guidance was coupled with medication, a blood pressure measurement of less than 130/80 was achieved by 68% of men who participated in the study program, versus 11% of those who didn't.

"To a certain extent, I was surprised by the magnitude of the effect of the intervention," said Ciantel Blyler, a clinical pharmacist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles who was a co-author of the study.

"Especially once we sat down and looked at the blood pressure control rates and we were comparing the intervention group and the control group, I was sort of taken aback," she said.

"The first number, called systolic blood pressure, measures the pressure in your blood vessels when your heart beats," the CDC says. "The second number, called diastolic blood pressure, measures the pressure in your blood vessels when your heart rests between beats."

Many older black men tend to avoid seeing the doctor until they have a serious health problem, and then they "use the emergency room as a doctor," Thomas said.

"If it wasn't for the program, a lot of guys wouldn't have known they had high blood pressure," he said of the study. "Unfortunately, I wish we had other programs to come in, too."

On the other hand, the barbershop represents a safe haven in the black community -- a no-judgment zone -- where conversations about health and other personal topics are commonplace.

As a barber, "we know more about our customers than their spouses do," Thomas said.

Shape your hair and your blood pressure

The new study included 319 black men across 52 black-owned barbershops in California's Los Angeles County. The men, 35 to 79 years old, had systolic blood pressure of 140 or more.

The researchers randomly assigned the men, based on their barbershop, to participate in the pharmacist-led program or to a control group between February 2015 and July 2017.

In the program group, barbers encouraged the men to meet with specially trained pharmacists at the barbershop to help monitor their blood pressure. The pharmacists could prescribe drug therapy under a collaborative agreement with the men's doctors.

At his barbershop, Thomas said, many customers were hesitant to open up to the pharmacists and doctors and to meet with them for health consultations.

"No one wanted to do it," he said. "But by them being there -- they were in there every day -- and then we got used to them, and they warmed up to everybody. ... Then a lot of guys eventually were like, 'I'll go. Let me make sure I'm OK.' "

Blyler said it didn't take long for the customers to warm up to her and her colleagues.

"They understood that we were there with good intentions. It was a very comfortable environment, and folks were very welcoming, and it really worked," she said.

In the control group, barbers encouraged the men to make lifestyle changes and doctor appointments, but not much else changed in their usual barbershop visits.

By the end of the study, the researchers found that the barbers' role in encouraging the men to monitor and improve their health resulted in a significant reduction in blood pressure, when coupled with medication from the pharmacists.

In participants assigned to the pharmacist-led program, the average reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure were 21.6 and 14.9 greater, respectively, than in those assigned to the control group at six months, the researchers found.

At 12 months, the average reductions were "statistically indistinguishable" from the six-month data, according to the researchers.

'Medical mistrust has been an important barrier'

The study had some limitations, including that it was not blind, because both participants and researchers knew who was assigned to the pharmacist-led program and who was in the control group.

Additionally, more research is needed to determine whether similar study results would occur on a national level, since the study was conducted only in the Los Angeles area.

Also, pharmacists aimed to lower blood pressure in the program participants to less than 130/80, whereas the primary care providers of those in the control group probably targeted a blood pressure of less than 140/90.

The researchers found that 17.5% of men who received help were screened, compared with 8.4% of those who didn't receive the screening help.

"Medical mistrust has been an important barrier to African-Americans seeking health care, and so the barbershop -- where men go on a monthly basis and have an opportunity to develop a rapport with a trusted key opinion leader in the community -- that rapport is a perfect foundation for talking about health," Ravenell said.

"We know that when it comes to people being receptive to health messages, the setting and the mood that people are in can have an impact on how open they are to receiving those messages," he said. "Since the barbershop is a place where men want to be, it's a place that's known for open collegial conversation, it really is a perfect place to relay health messages that are important for black men."

The history of barbershops as havens for health

In the years to come, as racial segregation laws limited the spaces where black Americans could gather, the barbershop served as a safe meeting space for the black community. In barbershops, black men could speak openly and honestly about a range of topics, including their health -- and that seems to continue today.

"I think that what's so wonderful about health outreach in the barbershop: It's a comfortable place," Blyler said.

"Folks can ask questions or get information about their health in a 'low-stakes,' relaxed environment," she said. "Barbershops are a social hub for black men, a place where they gather, when getting a haircut or not, and share information."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly states that men in the intervention group experienced a much greater reduction in their blood pressure readings as compared to the control group. It included this quantified statement, “It turned out that, when the guidance was coupled with medication, a blood pressure level of less than 130/80 was achieved among 63.6% of men who participated in the study’s program, versus 11.7% of those who didn’t.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With calcium, adolescent girls may be the only group that is getting too little, the panel found. Older women, on the other hand, may take too much, putting themselves at risk for . And there is evidence that excess calcium can increase the risk of heart disease, the group wrote.

As for vitamin D, some prominent doctors have said that most people need supplements or they will be at increased risk for a wide variety of illnesses, including heart disease, and autoimmune diseases.

And these days more and more people know their vitamin D levels because they are being tested for it as part of routine physical exams.

“The number of vitamin D tests has exploded,” said Dennis Black, a reviewer of the report who is a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at the .

At the same time, vitamin D sales have soared, growing faster than those of any supplement, according to The Nutrition Business Journal. Sales rose 82 percent from 2008 to 2009, reaching $430 million. “Everyone was hoping vitamin D would be kind of a panacea,” Dr. Black said. The report, he added, might quell the craze.

“I think this will have an impact on a lot of primary care providers,” he said.

The 14-member expert committee was convened by the Institute of Medicine, an independent nonprofit scientific body, at the request of the and Canadian governments. It was asked to examine the available data — nearly 1,000 publications — to determine how much vitamin D and calcium people were getting, how much was needed for optimal health and how much was too much.

The two nutrients work together for bone health.

Bone health, though, is only one of the benefits that have been attributed to vitamin D, and there is not enough good evidence to support most other claims, the committee said.

Some labs have started reporting levels of less than 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood as a deficiency. With that as a standard, 80 percent of the population would be deemed deficient of vitamin D, Dr. Rosen said. Most people need to take supplements to reach levels above 30 nanograms per milliliter, he added.

But, the committee concluded, a level of 20 to 30 nanograms is all that is needed for bone health, and nearly everyone is in that range.

Vitamin D is being added to more and more foods, said Paul R. Thomas of the Office of Dietary Supplements at the National Institutes of Health. Not only is it in orange juice and milk, but more is being added to breakfast cereals, and it now can be found in very high doses in supplement pills. Most vitamin D pills, he said, used to contain no more than 1,000 international units of it. Now it is easy to find pills, even in places like , with 5,000 international units. The committee, though, said people need only 600 international units a day.

To assess the amounts of vitamin D and calcium people are getting, the panel looked at national data on diets. Most people, they concluded, get enough calcium from the foods they eat, about 1,000 milligrams a day for most adults (1,200 for women ages 51 to 70).

Vitamin D is more complicated, the group said. In general, most people are not getting enough vitamin D from their diets, but they have enough of the vitamin in their blood, probably because they are also making it naturally after being out in the sun and storing it in their bodies.

The American Society for Bone and Mineral Research and other groups applauded the report. It is “a very balanced set of recommendations,” said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a endocrinologist and the society’s president.

But Andrew Shao, an executive vice president at the Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group, said the panel was being overly cautious, especially in its recommendations about vitamin D. He said there was no convincing evidence that people were being harmed by taking supplements, and he said higher levels of vitamin D, in particular, could be beneficial.

Such claims “are not supported by the available evidence,” the committee wrote. They were based on studies that observed populations and concluded that people with lower levels of the vitamin had more of various diseases. Such studies have been misleading and most scientists agree that they cannot determine cause and effect.

It is not clear how or why the claims for high vitamin D levels started, medical experts say. First there were two studies, which turned out to be incorrect, that said people needed 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood, the upper end of what the committee says is a normal range. They were followed by articles and claims and books saying much higher levels — 40 to 50 nanograms or even higher — were needed.

After reviewing the data, the committee concluded that the evidence for the benefits of high levels of vitamin D was “inconsistent and/or conflicting and did not demonstrate causality.”

Evidence also suggests that high levels of vitamin D can increase the risks for fractures and the overall death rate and can raise the risk for other diseases. While those studies are not conclusive, any risk looms large when there is no demonstrable benefit. Those hints of risk are “challenging the concept that ‘more is better,’ ” the committee wrote.

That is what surprised Dr. Black. “We thought that probably higher is better,” he said.

He has changed his mind, and expects others will too: “I think this report will make people more cautious.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story was mostly concerned with discussing the lack of benefit from taking extra vitamin D and calcium. And in this area it excels. While the story does lack precision when it suggests that adolescent girls should be getting more calcium (it never specifies how much they are getting now, how much more they’d need to meet the recommendations, or what benefits they might expect from this increased intake), it would be difficult for a journalist to come up with any sort of quantifiable benefit or harm estimate from the IOM report. The story captured the overall gist of the problem, which is that the evidence base is complex and still inadequate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Giving school children access to chilled, self-serve water may help chip away at childhood obesity, a new study of more than one million New York City school students suggests.

The study, published in JAMA Pediatrics, analyzed data collected from 1,227 elementary and middle schools across New York City - some with and some without "water jets." The large, clear, electrically cooled jugs with a push lever for fast dispensing were placed in 483 school cafeterias, about 40 percent of schools during the 2008-2009 and the 2012-2013 school years.

Schools with water dispensers saw a modest weight drop among students, according to the study by researchers from NYU Langone Medical Center, New York University's Institute for Education and Social Policy, and the Center for Policy Research at Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs.

"We associated these water dispensers with almost a one percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being overweight for boys and a little over a half a percentage point reduction for girls," said lead researcher Brian Elbel, an associate professor of population health and health policy at NYU School of Medicine.

"Even a small, straightforward, relatively inexpensive policy intervention was associated with a small but statistically significant drop," Elbel told CBS News.

Water jets also were linked with a decrease in the amount of half-pints of milk students bought, which could be a potential mechanism of weight reduction, the researchers found.

Modern water dispensers may be more effective than old-fashioned water fountains since water quality and cleanliness may deter kids from using older fountains, and they're not as efficient at serving large numbers of children, experts noted in an accompanying editorial.

The editorial, entitled "Power of a Simple Intervention to Improve Student Health: Just Add Water," said the study's findings are significant.

"Sometimes, a very simple intervention can have a powerful effect," wrote Lindsey Turner, of Boise State University, in Idaho, and Erin Hager, from the University of Maryland School of Medicine, in Baltimore.

"The study by Schwartz and colleagues in this issue of JAMA Pediatrics adds to a growing body of evidence supporting the importance of providing drinking water access in schools. In this study, the findings demonstrate that water access in schools can promote healthy weight outcomes among students," Turner and Hager said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The CBS story does a good job quantifying the benefits in absolute terms, when the lead researcher points out that water dispensers were associated with “a one percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being overweight for boys and a little over half a percentage point reduction for girls.” The article translated this for readers as “a modest weight drop among students.”
The piece also notes that water jets were linked with “a decrease” in the amount of half-pints of milk students bought, but it does not give any specific numbers. Specifically, researchers found a 12.3 decrease in the number of all types of milk purchased per student per year.
We think the quantification of benefits in absolute terms is enough to merit a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jay Konduros used to rush home several times a year after accidentally cutting or bumping himself. There he would inject himself with refrigerated blood-clotting factor to prevent internal bleeding and extensive bruising and swelling. “I was walking on eggshells all the time,” said the former aerospace engineer who has a blood disorder called hemophilia B.

Then, last year, Konduros enrolled in a clinical trial, receiving an experimental gene therapy at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Almost immediately, he began producing the missing clotting factor. Several weeks later, after he dropped a heavy box on his shin, he watched a bruise develop and shrink within hours. “Are you kidding me?” he thought. “Life's easy if this is what happens.”

Konduros, 53, who runs a bakery and cafe in southeastern Ontario, is one of 10 men in an early-stage trial sponsored by Spark Therapeutics. (The disorder is much more common in men than women.) On Wednesday, researchers reported that a single intravenous infusion of Spark's novel gene therapy enabled patients to safely produce sufficient clotting factor to prevent dangerous bleeding episodes.

The treatment also “nearly universally eliminated” the need for preventive infusions of clotting factor a few times a week, the scientists said. And its effects lasted; after a year and a half, the longest patient follow-up, the therapy was continuing to work.

The results, published Wednesday online in the New England Journal of Medicine, represent “another example of the gene-therapy renaissance,” Matthew Porteus, a pediatrician at Stanford University, wrote in an accompanying editorial. He said the data suggests that the treatment ultimately might provide an “ideal cure” for hemophilia B.

Still, he noted, the study has some limitations. The follow-up period was relatively short, from 28 to 78 weeks in the new report; longer-term studies are needed to prove safety and effectiveness over extended periods. In addition, he said, researchers need to find ways to provide the therapy to a broader group of people, including children, and to figure out how to reduce the costs involved.

The researchers presented earlier findings on the gene therapy a year ago at the American Society of Hematology's annual meeting, but the latest data covers a larger patient group and a longer time period.

The hemophilia gene therapy is one of several being tested for conditions including sickle cell anemia and Huntington's disease. The one-time treatments seek to fight the disease by adding correct copies of a patient's defective genes. If approved, such treatments are expected to command stratospheric prices. For example, a separate Spark gene therapy for a rare type of childhood blindness, which is on track for Food and Drug Administration clearance soon, could cost $1 million per patient for infusions in both eyes, according to some Wall Street analysts.

Still, the therapies can produce at least some offsetting savings. Porteus noted in his editorial that the hemophilia therapy resulted in savings of about $200,000 a year per patient because of the elimination of clotting-factor infusions.

Other experts also were impressed by the results. The hemophilia study “is small but very promising, and it gives me the sense that gene therapy for hemophilia B is going to be at our disposal in no time, maybe a few years from now,” said Aric Parnes, who is associate director of the Boston Hemophilia Center at the Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center and wasn't involved in the study. “One of the key things is, how long will the treatment last? Does it wane over time? So far, with a full year, it doesn’t look like that is happening.”

Lindsey George, the lead investigator and a hematologist at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, said that nine of the 10 men in the trial didn't experience any bleeding episodes after the gene therapy treatment. The one patient who needed clotting factor because of bleeding used 91 percent less than before, she said.

“People were planning their lives around hemophilia, and now they are doing activities that they weren't before,” George said. “One man who came in a wheelchair is now out of a wheelchair and is coaching Little League.”

People with hemophilia B inherit a gene mutation on the X chromosome that interferes with their ability to produce normal levels of blood-clotting factor IX. (Because women have two copies of the X chromosomes, the other one can compensate, so they may carry the disease but not suffer from it.) Bleeding episodes — which can result from injury or occur spontaneously — can cause extensive damage and be life threatening.

The therapy developed by Spark, a biotech company spun off from the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia in 2013, involves a bioengineered gene designed to prompt the body to produce increased levels of a different clotting factor. The gene is transported to the liver, where clotting factor is made, by a harmless virus called an adeno-associated viral vector. For the current trial, which is being funded by Spark and Pfizer, researchers used a clotting factor that is 8 to 10 times as strong as the normal version. The stronger factor is called Factor IX-Padua, because it was discovered in 2009 in an Italian family.

Patients produced clotting-factor levels that were enough to allow blood to clot but not to spur an undesirable immune-system response, the researchers said.

FDA advisers urge approval for first gene therapy for inherited disease

In a first, scientists edit genes inside a man's body to try to cure a disease. What's next?

'This is not the end': Using immunotherapy and a genetic glitch to give cancer patients hope
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story summarizes the outcome of the small, 10-person trial that dominates this narrative:
Lindsey George, the lead investigator and a hematologist at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, said that nine of the 10 men in the trial didn’t experience any bleeding episodes after the gene therapy treatment. The one patient who needed clotting factor because of bleeding used 91 percent less than before, she said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Nick Collado, a 26-year-old insomniac and the founder of Lulla Pies, argued that the melatonin they contain, while synthetic, is more “natural” than the Ambien he used to take. “I realized there’s got to be more people like me who don’t want to take prescription drugs anymore, who want to take an alternative,” Mr. Collado said.

But Dr. David S. Seres, the director of medical nutrition at Columbia Medical Center, cautioned that consumers should consult their doctors before trying such products.

“The promoters of these are appealing to people who think it’s better to do things outside of the medical establishment,” he said, adding that “the desire to help people is an extremely strong motivator, but so is money.” He pointed to a section of the National Institutes of Health’s Web site that lists several drugs, including sedatives like clonazepam and birth control pills, whose efficacy might be altered by melatonin.

“A hangover effect has been reported” with large doses, said Anna Rouse Dulaney, a toxicologist with the Carolinas Poison Center. But she added, “I don’t want to go on the record saying this drug ‘can’ cause respiratory issues, that should be a ‘may.’ ”

Lazy Cakes appear harmless, even amusing, with swirly purple packaging; Kush Cakes have a tie-dye-printed wrapper. But they are not to be underestimated.

Of melatonin, Dr. Seres warned, “If you take it while you’re driving a car, you will find yourself in a ditch.”

Maybe. Dr. Alfred J. Lewy, a professor of psychiatry at Oregon Health and Science University who has studied melatonin, a neurohormone, estimated that only a third of the population is susceptible to its effects in a supplement.

And yet Tracy Evans, who owns a bar where musicians perform in Erie, Pa., that has sold hundreds of Lazy Cakes, said she instructs employees to tell partygoers, “I highly recommend you wait to where you’re going to be at the end of the night before eating.”

Why? “It knocks you out — in a good way, not a bad way,” said Ms. Evans, 34. “For me, it’s not to chill. For me, it’s to get a good night’s sleep.”

Yet the products, intended for adults only, are being marketed as a novel way to relax in a stressed-out, wired world. Labels on Lazy Cakes and Mary J’s brownies that were bought online urge users to “Take ½ brownie, two times a day.” With tiny type, the labels warn against operating heavy machinery or driving.

But some medical professionals are concerned that the chocolate taste might encourage indiscriminate gobbling.

“It’s a colossally bad idea to put melatonin in food,” Dr. Czeisler said. “It should not be permitted by the F.D.A.”

Technically, it is not. Stephanie Yao, a spokeswoman at the F.D.A., wrote in an e-mail that any item that uses melatonin “as an additive may be subject to regulatory action.”

That is why the makers of these new baked goods label them “Not for food use.” They want them to be considered dietary supplements, which do not need the F.D.A.’s premarket approval and are not required to be proved safe or effective.

“It sounds to me like they are trying to claim that the entire brownie is like a tablet, which is, of course, preposterous,” Dr. Czeisler said.

Tim Barham, the vice president of HBB, the maker of Lazy Cakes, said, “We look at the brownie as a supplement.”

News reports have classified Lazy Cakes as dietary supplements, but last month, Douglas Karas, an F.D.A. spokesman, said in an e-mail that the agency “has not made a determination on Lazy Cakes’ status as either a food or a dietary supplement.”

In January last year, the F.D.A. sent a warning letter to Peter Bianchi, the creator of Drank, a purple drink with 2 milligrams of melatonin in each can that went on the market in 2008, spawning several competitors.

The letter cited safety concerns about melatonin in food, specifically research indicating that melatonin reduced glucose tolerance for people with Type 1 diabetes and that some men using it had reported enlarged breasts. It also warned that women who are pregnant or trying to conceive should avoid melatonin “based on possible hormonal effects.” (Drank’s bottle now say it is a dietary supplement.)

Dr. Lewy dismissed the idea that harm might lurk in a melatonin-laced brownie. “It really doesn’t have any documented side effects except for making you sleepy at bedtime, which is good,” he said. That said, he would not advise eating Lazy Cakes, partly because he was not sure that their other purportedly sleep-inducing ingredients like valerian root work and partly because food delays rather than hastens the absorption of melatonin.

Also, Dr. Lewy said, “I don’t need the calories.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story is clear that – despite the claims made by some who stand to profit – there is no quantifiable information about benefits documented about these products.  And there’s this closing skepticism from Dr. Lewy: “he was not sure that their other purportedly sleep-inducing ingredients like valerian root work and partly because food delays rather than hastens the absorption of melatonin.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- If you've just had your first heart attack, doctors may one day be able to reverse the damage done with stem cell therapy.

An intravenous method of injecting stem cells into patients who had experienced heart attacks within the previous 10 days suggested that this method works to repair -- not just manage -- heart damage, a recent study found.

The study is a step forward in a field in which a lot of approaches have been tried in animals and preliminary human trials, but none has been approved for widespread clinical use for heart patients.

The new results are a milestone in stem cell research, and for patients, said Jeffrey Karp, a researcher at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, who runs a stem cell biology lab at Harvard University. He was not involved in the study.

Most current clinical approaches are focused on managing problems, not addressing the root of the damage, he said.

"Many patients who have a heart attack will go on to suffer heart failure," he said. "It's imperative to try and fix the root of the problem as quickly as possible."

The research, published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, were part of a phase I study that set out to show safety. The trial has moved on to phase II, which is taking place in 50 hospitals in the United States, said Dr. Joshua Hare, director of the Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute at the University of Miami's Miller School of Medicine and lead author of the study.

"We're looking on the time frame here of five years, in the best-case scenario, to have approved cardiac stem cell therapies," Hare said.

Coronary heart disease, which causes heart attacks and angina -- chest pain resulting from the heart not getting enough blood -- is the leading cause of death in the United States, with nearly 450,000 in 2005, according to the American Heart Association. About 1.1 million people have attacks occur in the United States each year, according to the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute.

The particular kind of cells used in this research are called mesenchymal stem cells, and come from adults, not embryos.

The researchers are using a mesenchymal stem cell therapy that is marketed by Osiris Therapeutics Inc. under the name Prochymal. The drug, which consists of stem cells from donor bone marrow, gets injected into the vein. The cells then travel through the bloodstream and take up residence in the heart.

Mesenchymal stem cells have some natural homing capability, and injury serves as a homing beacon for them, Karp said.

The stem cells reduce the amount of scar tissue and increase the pumping strength of the heart in heart attack patients, Hare said. To a limited extent, they also grow new heart muscle.

The phase I results from 53 patients are not definitive proof that the treatment is effective, but do suggest so, Hare said. In accordance with clinical trial regulations set by the Food and Drug Administration, phase I is meant to show safety, while phase II and phase III trials are done on a larger group of subjects and evaluate how well the drug works.

In this trial, patients' doses ranged from 35 million cells to 350 million cells. There was no change or increase in side effects in treatments getting higher doses of cells, but it seemed that the treatment was more effective -- at least in terms of reducing electrical problems -- in the high dose group, he said.

In separate trials, researchers are looking at how the technique works in patients who have had heart attacks many month or years in the past, Hare said.

The study shows the results of a six-month follow-up with patients in 2007, and researchers are presently working with data from the two-year follow-up.

More broadly, besides bone marrow transplantations, there have not been any major successes in the stem cell field in terms of helping large numbers of patients, Karp said.

"Mesenchymal stem cells are poised to really be the next major success in cell therapy that could be used to treat tens of thousands of patients," he said.

There are several advantages to using mesenchymal stem cells for heart therapy. First, they are adult stem cells, so there are no ethical issues that surround research on embryonic stem cells. Secondly, at least from a safety perspective, mesenchymal stem cells do not require matching -- any donor can give cells to any other donor, and no immunosuppresant drugs are necessary, he said.

Still, millions of cells are required in order for enough stem cells to reach the heart and have a therapeutic benefit, and it's costly to get the required numbers of cells for each patient, Karp said. An area of improvement would be making the stem cell treatment more efficient, he said.

"If we could increase the number of cells that could reach the heart, that would have significant advantages to this approach," Karp said.

This method of intravenous injection means that the procedure theoretically could be performed in a doctor's office or clinic, increasing the accesibility to patients, Karp said.

A more invasive stem cell delivery technique has been showing positive results in other clinical trials, involving injecting patients' own stem cells directly into heart muscle.

The largest national stem cell study for heart disease, sponsored by Baxter Inc., uses this surgical method, and recently announced success in a 12-month phase II trial for patients with severe angina. Researchers found that participants had less pain and an improved ability to walk.

Because stem cells are delivered through a catheter in this method, there is a risk of perforation of about 1 percent, Dr. Douglas Losordo, cardiologist at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, told CNN earlier this year. The drug, GCSF, which mobilizes stem cells, also carries a small risk of blood clotting.

For the Osiris trials, further research is ongoing determine whether patients would benefit more from more infusions of the stem cells, or if it's better for the stem cells to come from their own bodies instead of from a donor, Hare said.

While there's less chance of a person's body rejecting his or her own stem cells than from a donor, there is a time delay, he said. Taking bone marrow and amplifying the stem cells in it could take up to five weeks, whereas donor cells could be made readily available, he said. On the other hand, it is unclear whether a donor could potentially transmit a disease to the recipient in the process.

If you are interested in enrolling in a clinical trial, you can find one at clinicaltrials.gov. The Orisis trial is still recruiting participants.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Since the study is designed to prove safety, there are no credible benefits data to report. 
The report does allow sources to make general claims of benefit based on that preliminary data, but the reporter shows restraint by not plucking benefits data points from the study. 
On a close call, the story earns a satisfactory rating. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Food and Drug Administration advisory committee voted 13-0 on five separate times to endorse Merck and Co.'s Gardasil. The anticipated cost of the vaccine, administered in three shots over six months, is $300 to $500, a possible impediment to widespread vaccination campaigns.

Gardisil is likely to be approved in early June, After that, the vaccine will move into the hands of the Centers for Disease Control, which will have to decide if it should be a mandatory vaccine or just a recommended vaccine, CBS News correspondent Elizabeth Kaledin reports.

The drug protects against the two types of human papillomavirus (HPV) believed responsible for about 70 percent of cervical cancer cases. The vaccine also protects against two other virus types that cause 90 percent of genital wart cases. All four virus types are sexually transmitted.

However, this vaccine should not be considered a replacement for the standard screening test: the pap smear, adds Kaledin.

The FDA is not required to follow the recommendations of its outside panels of experts, but usually does. An agency decision is expected by June 8.

HPV is the most common sexually transmitted disease. It affects more than 50 percent of sexually active adults. The cervical cancer it can cause kills each year about 290,000 women worldwide, including 3,500 women in the United States, where regular pap smears often detect precancerous lesions and early cancer.

"This is certainly a wonderful, good step in addition to our screening processes" in helping eradicate cervical cancer, said Dr. Monica Farley, who heads the advisory panel. She is a bacterial infectious disease expert at the Emory University School of Medicine.

Advocates are recommending the vaccine be given to 11- and 12-year-old girls before they become sexually active, but argue that it is not a license to behave promiscuously, Kaledin reports.

Making their case for approval, Merck officials suggested that development could make Gardasil the biggest advance in preventing cervical cancer since the pap test.

"Gardasil has the potential to meet an unmet medical need as the first vaccine to prevent cervical cancer," Merck's Dr. Patrick Brill-Edwards told the Vaccine and Related Biological Products advisory committee.

Several speakers said the vaccine should not replace screening. Merck said the drug is not intended to do that.

"We would like to see the FDA mandate some sort of labeling or other mechanism to communicate to health care providers and patients the continued need for regular cervical screening," said Amy Allina, program director of the National Women's Health Network.

Merck said the vaccine could be used in females age 9 to 26, but would work best when given to girls before they begin having sex.

Pending action by the FDA, the national Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices will decide in June whether to endorse routine vaccination with the vaccine.

The committee's HPV vaccine group is recommending giving the vaccine to girls 11 and 12. The 15-member committee of experts who advise the government will consider recommendations for females 13 to 26.

The committee's HPV vaccine workgroup is recommending the vaccine be given to girls 11 and 12, and the committee will consider recommendations for females 13 to 26.

Early opposition to Gardasil was based on concerns it could encourage sexual activity in the young. But that largely faded away because of vaccine's potential for reducing cancer.

FDA reviewers said Gardasil appears safe and effective, according to agency documents. One agency reviewer, Dr. Nancy Miller, told the advisory committee that Merck submitted data to support the use of the vaccine in females 9 to 26.

Miller said Gardasil does not necessarily protect against one or more of the four viruses in people already infected before they get the vaccine, and can increase their risk for precursors to cervical cancer.

Also, the drug does not protect against infection from the many other virus strains not included in the vaccine. In addition, the FDA staff highlighted five cases where children with birth defects were born to women who received the vaccine around the time of conception.

Merck, based in Whitehouse Station, N.J., developed the vaccine and tested it in more than 27,000 females and males.

Thursday's discussion focused on its use in preventing HPV-related disease in girls and women, including those as young as 9. But only 250 9-year-old girls and boys received Gardasil in trials.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does explain that the vaccine is effective against 70% of HPV infections, potentially saving 3,500 deaths from cervical cancer per year. The story should have provided more context. In order to realize the purported benefits, every eligibile individual would need to be vaccinated and the vaccine would have to be 100% effective. These are both unrealistic because women in lower socioeconomic groups have a higher incidence of HPV and lack access to healthcare.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration approved a new drug on Tuesday to treat serious cases of eczema.

The drug, called Dupixent, is a twice-a-month injection under the skin. Patients can do it at home. It’ll cost $37,000 a year but the drug’s makers, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi, have stressed that’s the wholesale price and make a point of saying there will be programs to help people pay for it.

It’s approved for people with atopic dermatitis, a catchall term for itchy skin caused by allergy.

It can be very unpleasant.

“The cause of atopic dermatitis is a combination of genetic, immune and environmental factors. In atopic dermatitis, the skin develops red, scaly and crusted bumps, which are extremely itchy,” the FDA says.

“Scratching leads to swelling, cracking, weeping clear fluid, and finally, coarsening and thickening of the skin.”

There are many treatments out there now, from simple skin lotions to steroid creams and immune suppressant drugs like tacrolimus. But none of these works for everybody, and the immune suppressant drugs can raise the risk of cancers such as lymphoma.

Dupixent is for the hard-core cases that aren’t helped by anything else.

It’s a monoclonal antibody — a targeted immune system drug — that inactivates two inflammatory compounds called interleukin 4 or IL-4, and IL-13. “By binding to this protein, Dupixent is able to inhibit the inflammatory response that plays a role in the development of atopic dermatitis,” the FDA said in a statement.

Known generically as dupilumab, the drug can cause serious allergic reactions and eye inflammation. “The most common side effects include injection site reactions; cold sores in the mouth or on the lips; and eye and eyelid inflammation, including redness, swelling and itching,” the FDA notes.

The agency gave it both priority review and breakthrough therapy status, speeding it through the approval process.

Studies of about 2,000 people showed Dupixent injections resulted in clear skin or nearly clear skin for about two-thirds of those who tried it, and it reduced itching sharply in 40 percent.

"People with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis cope with intense, sometimes unbearable symptoms that can impact them for most of their lives," Julie Block, president and CEO of the National Eczema Association, said in a statement provided by the company.

“Of the adults with uncontrolled moderate to severe atopic dermatitis in the United States, it is estimated that 300,000 are most in need of new treatment options,” Regeneron said.

In a nod to the sensitivity around drug prices, the company stressed that there is no single price for the drug.

“The Wholesale Acquisition Cost (WAC) of Dupixent in the United States is $37,000 annually. Actual costs to patients, payers and health systems are anticipated to be lower as WAC pricing does not reflect discounts, rebates or patient assistance programs,” it said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story states that studies in about 2,000 people showed injections “resulted in clear skin or nearly clear skin for about two-thirds of those who tried it, and it reduced itching sharply in 40 percent.”
This is enough for a satisfactory rating, but the story should have mentioned that close to 10 percent of patients on a placebo saw the same improvement in their rash. It also would have been stronger if it had explained how the benefits were measured (how is a “sharp” reduction in itching measured?), how much time it took to achieve the results, and if the results were sustained.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Sept. 11, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- New research suggests that Opdivo -- a drug that works with the immune system to fight melanoma -- is more effective than the current standard of care for patients who've had surgery to remove advanced tumors.

The international study was funded by Opdivo's maker, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and included more than 900 patients with stage III and stage IV melanoma.

Patients were treated at 130 medical centers across 25 countries. All underwent surgery for their cancer before they began treatment with either Opdivo (nivolumab) or Yervoy (ipilimumab), the drug that's the current standard of care.

Both drugs are "immunotherapies," which work by boosting the immune system's ability to spot and destroy tumor cells.

After a year of treatment, 71 percent of patients in the Opdivo group were alive without any recurrence of the disease, compared with 61 percent of those treated with Yervoy. And at 18 months, the rate was 66 percent for Opdivo and 53 percent for Yervoy, the findings showed.

According to the Skin Cancer Foundation, metastatic melanoma accounts for only about 1 percent of skin cancer cases but causes the majority of skin cancer deaths.

"Our results demonstrate that [Opdivo] is more effective in treating patients with stage III and IV melanoma, cutting the risk of relapse by a third," lead researcher Dr. Jeffrey Weber, professor of medicine at NYU School of Medicine, said in a university news release.

"Results like this will change how we practice medicine. Hopefully, physicians will embrace the use of [Opdivo] in these high-risk patients as adjuvant therapy," added Weber, who also helps direct NYU's Perlmutter Cancer Center in New York City.

One cancer surgeon who reviewed the findings was impressed.

"Based on this study, it appears that patients with advanced melanoma who have their disease completely removed by surgery should go on to receive additional therapy with Opdivo," said Dr. Gary Deutsch. He is a surgical oncologist at Northwell Health's Imbert Cancer Center in Bay Shore, N.Y.

"Not only did these patients have a better survival outcome at one year, but they had only one-third the side effects compared to Yervoy," Deutsch said.

The study found that patients taking Opdivo had fewer severe side effects than those taking Yervoy, at 14 percent versus 45 percent. Five percent of patients on Opdivo had to stop treatment due to side effects, compared with 31 percent of those on Yervoy. The most common side effects for both drugs were fatigue and diarrhea.

Weber added that "the safety of [Opdivo] is very promising."

The study is scheduled for presentation Monday in Madrid, Spain, at the annual meeting of the European Society for Medical Oncology. It was also published online Sept. 10 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Both Opdivo and Yervoy are already approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat advanced (metastatic) melanoma. In some patients, the drugs are used in combination.

Dr. Michele Green is a dermatologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. She said any advance in the care of aggressive melanomas is welcome news for patients.

"It is amazing that there is now an alternative that is superior to conventional chemotherapy for advanced metastatic disease," Green said after reviewing the new study findings. "With these advanced melanomas -- that have high risks of recurrences and have poor outcomes -- it is vital to look at alternative treatments. The future in cancer treatments lies in immunotherapy and other targeted options."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on melanoma.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly defines the benefit (survival without recurrence of the cancer) and offers clear numbers: “After a year of treatment, 71 percent of patients in the Opdivo group were alive without any recurrence of the disease, compared with 61 percent of those treated with Yervoy. And at 18 months, the rate was 66 percent for Opdivo and 53 percent for Yervoy, the findings showed.”
One detail we think would have been good to add–“recurrence-free survival” doesn’t tell you how many patients are actually living longer specifically because of the treatment. It’s just telling you how much time elapses before recurrence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Contrary to earlier reports, giving acetaminophen (Tylenol, etc.) for pain and fever does not worsen asthma in young children with the condition, concludes a randomized trial in the August 18 New England Journal of Medicine.

The Acetaminophen Versus Ibuprofen in Children with Asthma (AVICA) trial, led by researchers at Boston Children's Hospital for the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute's Asthma Network (AsthmaNet), is the only blinded, randomized, controlled trial to date to prospectively compare acetaminophen head-to-head with ibuprofen (Motrin, etc.) in children with asthma.

The 18-site study should settle a debate that originated when several retrospective studies seemed to indicate that children had exacerbations of their asthma when receiving Tylenol for pain and/or fever.

"We found no matter how you slice it, there was absolutely no difference between Tylenol and Motrin," says senior investigator and corresponding author Wanda Phipatanakul, MD, MS, of Boston Children's Hospital's Division of Allergy and Immunology. "Our findings should alleviate the concerns for safety that were based on observational data."

The study enrolled 300 children 1 to 5 years old with mild persistent asthma. Their families were randomized to use either acetaminophen or ibuprofen as indicated for pain and fever over a 48-week period.

Both groups received the same asthma control therapies: daily inhaled glucocorticoids, as needed inhaled glucocorticoids, and daily oral leukotriene receptor antagonist. (The asthma therapies were given in varying order as part of a concurrent randomized trial, making this, in effect, a "trial within a trial.") Medication adherence was closely monitored.

Of the original 300 children, 226 (75 percent) completed the study. Children in the acetaminophen and ibuprofen groups used similar amounts of these medications for pain and/or fever (median, 5.5 doses).

During the 48 weeks, there were no statistically significant differences between groups:
• The number of asthma exacerbations per child averaged 0.81 in the acetaminophen group versus 0.87 in the ibuprofen group.
• At least one asthma exacerbation occurred in 49 percent of the acetaminophen group, vs. 47 percent of the ibuprofen group. At least two episodes occurred in 21 and 24 percent, respectively.
• The percentage of days with full asthma control were virtually the same for acetaminophen and ibuprofen: 85.8 and 86.8 percent, respectively.
• Use of "rescue" medication (albuterol) was essentially the same: 2.8 vs. 3.0 puffs per week.
• Unscheduled healthcare visits for asthma were equivalent, averaging 0.75 vs. 0.76 episodes per child.

While the study was modest in size, it was powered to detect any clinically significant differences, more so than past retrospective studies, Phipatanakul notes. "There was no difference that would cause me to be alarmed," she says.

The researchers note that earlier studies linking acetaminophen with increased asthma symptoms did not use a randomized design. Those studies therefore couldn't rule out the possibility that the asthma exacerbations were caused by the respiratory infections themselves.

"The toddler age is a wheezy age when kids are developing asthma, but they also get a lot of fevers and colds," says Phipatanakul. "Without a randomized design, it's hard to tease out the effects of medications."

Since the study was limited to young children with mild persistent asthma receiving asthma controller therapy, the authors also note that their findings may not apply to other age groups or children with more severe asthma. Further studies will be necessary to answer those questions.

William J. Sheehan, MD, of Boston Children's Hospital was first author on the paper. The study was funded by The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute's Asthma Network (AsthmaNet) and grants from the National Institutes of Health (HL098102, HL098096, HL098075, HL098090, HL098177, HL098098, HL098107, HL098112, HL098103, HL098115, TR001082, TR000439, TR000448, TR000454, K23AI104780, and K24AI106822).

Boston Children's Hospital is home to the world's largest research enterprise based at a pediatric medical center, where its discoveries have benefited both children and adults since 1869. More than 1,100 scientists, including seven members of the National Academy of Sciences, 11 members of the Institute of Medicine and 10 members of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute comprise Boston Children's research community. Founded as a 20-bed hospital for children, Boston Children's today is a 404-bed comprehensive center for pediatric and adolescent health care. Boston Children's is also the primary pediatric teaching affiliate of Harvard Medical School. For more, visit our Vector and Thriving blogs and follow us on our social media channels: @BostonChildrens, @BCH_Innovation, Facebook and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: One of the questions the study attempted to answer was whether ibuprofen is a safer drug than acetaminophen in children with mild persistent asthma. This release does a laudable job laying out the figures for the number of asthma exacerbations for each group. It also includes quantitative data for the percentage of days with full asthma control, use of “rescue medication” and unscheduled healthcare visits. It also used the term “significant” correctly, stating that there “were no statistically significant differences between groups” (a common mistake we’ve seen in other releases).
Due to all these factors, we give the news release a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Editor's note: Tune in as Dr. Sanjay Gupta explores the signs, tests and lifestyle changes that could make cardiac problems a thing of the past on "The Last Heart Attack," Saturday, August 27, 8 and 11 p.m. ET on CNN.

Researchers in Canada have shown that a special cholesterol-lowering diet works well – even with only two nutritional counseling sessions over six months.

Making dietary changes like eating oat bran for breakfast, drinking soy milk instead of dairy, soy burgers in place of hamburgers, and fruit and nuts instead of a full lunch prompted a double-digit drop in both total cholesterol and LDL or "bad" cholesterol.

The study was published Tuesday in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Lead author Dr. David Jenkins, Canada research chair in nutrition and metabolism at the University of Toronto and St. Michael's Hospital, had previously shown the effectiveness of a cholesterol-lowering diet when all the meals were provided to participants.

"The question one had to address was how does this play out with people in the real world," Jenkins said in a telephone interview.

To put the diet to the real-world test, participants received a one-hour counseling session with a dietitian and an illustrated study booklet at the outset and, later, received a 30-40 minute follow up session.

"It was just advice," Jenkins said. Even so, the results were dramatic.

Total cholesterol dropped from 256 to 230, while the LDL or "bad" cholesterol decreased from 173 to 148, according to the study.

Jenkins said participants achieved these results even though compliance to the whole grain, vegetarian diet was only about 40%.

In addition to the soy protein, nuts and whole grains, participants in the diet were encouraged to eat peas, beans and lentils.

A control group advised to eat a vegetarian, low-saturated diet but not with the cholesterol-lowering foods a saw a slight dip in total cholesterol, from 249 to 246, and in LDL, from 167 to 161.

Both groups lost about four pounds over the six months.

The 351 participants in the study suffered from high cholesterol but were not on a cholesterol-lowering statin medication. The study was conducted from June 2007 to February 2009 at academic centers in Quebec City, Toronto, Winnipeg, and Vancouver.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story tells us how much the diet reduced cholesterol, providing the actual values from the lab report. It could have also estimated the expected reduction in 10-year cardiovascular risk that this would correspond to.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Jane Adrian, 61, a landscape architect in Glendale, Calif., saw her parents and two co-workers suffer from the painful, blistering condition known as shingles, so when the vaccine became available, she got it.

Even though the vaccine is only about 55 percent effective, "it's better than nothing," she said. "Now I feel relieved."

A study of a cross-section of adults enrolled with a health-management organization in southern California shows that the vaccine provides protection for many older adults without many side effects.

The findings are published in the Jan. 12 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Shingles is caused by the herpes zoster virus and only strikes people who have had chicken pox. It usually starts as a rash on one side of the face or body, often causing pain, itching and tingling. About a million cases occur in the United States each year, and attacks can last two to four weeks.

"Even after the rash has healed, the pain can last for months or even years," said lead study author HungFu Tseng, a research scientist at the Kaiser Permanente Division of Research and Evaluation in Pasadena, Calif.

Zostavax, as the vaccine is called, was approved in 2006, based on the results of clinical trials. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the shot for eligible people aged 60 and older.

Tseng's team wanted to test the vaccine's real-world performance, so they compared 75,761 vaccinated members of the Kaiser Permanente health plan to 227,283 members who elected not to have the shot. Kaiser funded the study.

In vaccinated individuals, the rate of shingles was 6.4 cases per 1,000 people in a year while it was twice that -- 13 per 1,000 -- in the unvaccinated population, the investigators found.

The vaccine also reduced the risk of ophthalmic herpes zoster (infection that affects the eye) by 63 percent and hospitalization by 65 percent.

Those who had been vaccinated were more likely to be white, female and in better overall health than the unvaccinated people, the researchers noted. Lack of awareness, concerns about effectiveness or safety, and cost may have kept some people from getting the shot, Tseng said.

"People 60 and over can consider talking to their physician about the possibility of receiving the vaccine to reduce their risk, and the doctor can evaluate if they are eligible," said Tseng.

Patients with leukemia, lymphoma, HIV or an allergy to any ingredients in the vaccine are ineligible for the shot.

"It does bolster our confidence that it's effective in the real world," said Dr. Bruce Hirsch, an attending physician in infectious diseases at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., who was not involved with the study.

But the vaccine can cost a couple of hundred dollars, he said, perhaps making it out of reach for those with limited resources.

Because shingles is not contagious and doesn't present a risk of death, Hirsch said he would recommend the flu vaccine and the pneumococcal vaccine over this one for uninsured patients who would have to pay out-of-pocket.

"This study helps me in terms of advising patients and prioritizing," Hirsch added.

While less reliable than some childhood vaccines, which are usually 90 percent effective in preventing certain illnesses, the shingles vaccination is still worthwhile, said Dr. Ciro Sumaya, professor of health policy and management at Texas A&M Health Science Center School of Rural Public Health.

"I think it's a very good vaccine, and it's a safe vaccine, but obviously there needs to be continuing surveillance of usage of the vaccine to make sure there are no adverse effects that are seen in one in a 100 million cases versus one in five or 10,000 people," said Sumaya, also a member of CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.

For now, he advises getting it. "It's protecting against a severe disease, particularly in elderly adults," he said, "so the benefit, I think, is overwhelming that we should be using this because it's recommended."

The CDC has more on the shingles vaccine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 



Interestingly, while other stories about this study touted the finding that vaccination cut the risk of shingles by more than half, this story points out that compared to many other vaccines, a 55 percent reduction in relatively risk is a weak performance. The comment from one individual that the vaccine is “better than nothing” also helps readers put the benefits into perspective. The story does include endorsement of vaccination and descriptions of the terrible pain shingles attacks can inflict. It also points out that this study provides information about a reduction in the risk of serious eye problems caused by shingles that was collected by the clinical trial that led to the vaccine’s approval.
The story reports the absolute annual shingles attack risk figures of 6.4 per 1,000 among the vaccinated participants versus 13 per 1,000 among those not vaccinated. We would have like to also see the story mention that the results indicate that about 71 people need to be vaccinated to prevent one from suffering a shingles attack. And since the story reported relative risk reduction statistics for ophthalmic herpes zoster cases, it should have also told readers the absolute numbers.
The story should have pointed out that the study looked at a limited time span and that the researchers can’t say whether the effects of the vaccine persist through later years. That’s an important caveat, since a 60-year-old who had chicken pox as a child is at risk for a shingles attack for the remaining decades of life. If the vaccine cuts the risk of attacks in half, but only for the first few years after vaccination, then the lifetime reduction in risk would be much smaller.

Also, the final quote from an expert saying “the benefit, I think, is overwhelming” may overpower all the statistics, leaving readers with an unbalanced summary of the benefits of this vaccine.
So, while overall the story had a mixed performance on this criterion, we’ll give it a satisfactory score.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Breast cancer study: Fruits, veggies not the answer

But researchers at M.D. Anderson say a healthy diet, exercise help ward off its recurrence

A healthy diet and exercise help prevent the return of breast cancer, but meals loaded with fruits and vegetables provide no extra benefit, according to a new study.

The study, conducted at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and six other facilities, found recurrence and survival rates were no better for those who ate nine or more daily servings of fruits and vegetables than for those who ate five.

"The good news is that a healthy diet is sufficient," said Lovell Jones, a professor in M.D. Anderson's department of health disparities and the study's principal investigator here.

"We always assumed we're not eating enough fruits and vegetables and that the more we ate, the better," Jones said. "Now we know you don't have to eat nine, 10 or 11 servings a day."

The findings, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, are a setback to the hope that better diets can prevent breast cancer recurrence.

Cancer recurred in 17 percent of women in the study, regardless of whether they were in the five-serving or nine-serving group. About 10 percent in both groups died, the vast majority from breast cancer.

The study focused on more than 3,000 women — average age 53 — who had been treated successfully for early-stage breast cancer. They were followed for six to 11 years.

An earlier analysis of the study concluded that women who ate five servings of fruit and vegetables and exercised 30 minutes a day had significantly improved cancer-free survival.

Previous research into diet and breast cancer has shown mixed results, but the authors of this study said the earlier ones were not rigorous.

Researchers emphasized such nutrient-dense vegetables as dark, leafy greens, sweet potatoes and carrots and didn't count iceberg lettuce and french fries. A serving was a half-cup.

John Pierce, head of cancer prevention at the University of California at San Diego and the study's lead investigator, said he and Jones will further analyze the study to see whether certain groups — blacks, those with certain genetic profiles and post-menopausal women — benefit from extra servings of fruits and vegetables.

Pierce said that as many as 20 percent of women could fit into a group that benefited. But he also acknowledged the results so far were a surprise.

"I went into the study expecting to see a difference between the two groups," he said. "I don't think anyone expected a washout like this."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story not only provided the information that the two groups did not differ in terms of rates for breast cancer recurrence or death, but included the estimates of this from the study summary.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women undergoing surgery for endometrial cancer can confidently opt for a minimally invasive hysterectomy performed by a skilled surgeon — with or without a robot’s help — suggests a new review of surgical outcomes.

The researchers found that the two advanced minimally invasive techniques led to similar results, and both appeared to be generally superior to the traditional open procedure.

“With minimally invasive surgery by an experienced surgeon’s hands, the incisions are smaller, pain and suffering is less, visualization is better, and recovery is faster than with open surgery,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat of the Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta who was not involved in the review, told Reuters Health.

“Robotics makes it easier for surgeons to transition from open to minimally invasive procedures,” he added.

More than 40,000 women are diagnosed with endometrial cancer in the U.S. every year. Treatment usually involves surgical removal of the uterus, known as hysterectomy. At the same time, lymph nodes are often removed to determine the stage of the cancer and whether further treatment is necessary.

The research team from the Florida Hospital Cancer Institute, in Orlando, reviewed eight prior studies, including nearly 1,600 patients who underwent either an open, closed or robot-assisted hysterectomy and lymph node removal.

In the open surgery, a relatively large incision is made in the abdominal wall. The closed procedure, known as laparoscopy, requires a much smaller cut, through which small instruments and a video camera are inserted. However, this minimally invasive approach also calls for significant training on the part of the surgeon to overcome challenges such as the counterintuitive movements involved in working from images on a TV monitor.

Robotic-assisted surgery is similar to laparoscopy, only the instruments and cameras are integrated into robotic arms, which the surgeon operates through a control console. The robotic equipment provides better three-dimensional vision, increased range of motion and intuitive, downscaled movements, while adding a few thousand more dollars to the procedure’s price tag, the authors note.

“Also with the computer-enhanced robotic technology, no matter how much coffee you drink in the morning, your movements don’t have tremors,” said Nezhat.

Based on their review, the researchers found that minimally invasive surgeries done with a human hand and instruments or with robotic assistance equipment took around the same time and resulted in similarly long stays in the hospital. However, about half as much blood was lost when robots were enlisted than with standard laparoscopy.

Both minimally invasive techniques resulted in longer-duration operations than open surgery. But both also led to shorter hospital stays and, in the case of robotic surgery, less blood-loss.

Further, the average number of lymph nodes removed was about the same in the robotic and open procedures, suggesting that both approaches result in about equal surgeon accuracy in staging endometrial cancer.

No differences between the three methods were seen in the numbers of complications, report the researchers in the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology.

“The robot will not really decrease human errors but it will make the surgery easier,” Dr. Tommaso Falcone of the Cleveland Clinic, in Ohio, who was also not involved in the study, told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

“Robotics increases the chance that a hysterectomy can be done by laparoscopy,” he added. “However, if the surgeon is skilled enough to do the hysterectomy without the robot by laparoscopy then the outcomes will be similar.”

Nezhat further noted that while robotic assistance can be a good “enabler” for a minimally invasive approach, surgeons should have at least the basic knowledge of regular laparoscopy too, as there may be times when the robotic equipment doesn’t work.

The reviewers point out that some of the differences found, such as the longer operation times for robotic-assisted surgery, may be due to surgeons’ inexperience with the new tool and could improve over time.

On the other hand, the newness of the technology could have deterred surgeons from using it for difficult cases, potentially biasing the results in a positive way for the robotic technique.

Robotic surgery equipment only received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval in 2005. More research is needed to be able to compare long-term outcomes, wrote the researchers.

Nezhat advises women to look for a surgeon experienced in doing minimally invasive surgery. If a robot is to be enlisted, he recommends asking how the procedure would be performed if the robot is not available or if it doesn’t work.

“Robotic-assisted surgery is in its infancy, and it definitely has a future,” said Nezhat. “Its benefits should offset its higher costs.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story summarized the findings succinctly: the robotic and laparascopic surgeries: “took around the same time and resulted in similarly long stays in the hospital. However, about half as much blood was lost when robots were enlisted than with standard laparoscopy. Both minimally invasive techniques resulted in longer-duration operations than open surgery. But both also led to shorter hospital stays and, in the case of robotic surgery, less blood-loss. Further, the average number of lymph nodes removed was about the same in the robotic and open procedures, suggesting that both approaches result in about equal surgeon accuracy in staging endometrial cancer.”
However, we would have liked to have seen a bit more discussion on the issue of blood loss. Although the amount of blood loss seen in the patients who underwent a robot-assisted procedure was statistically lower, there was no difference in the patients’ need for a transfusion. The 8 studies also had dramatically different blood loss in all three groups. The range of blood loss in patients undergoing a robot-assisted procedure was almost 3 fold (66.6ml in the Veljovich study as compared to 166 in the Bell study).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, March 2, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- The new chemotherapy drug eribulin extends the lives of metastatic breast cancer patients who have received extensive treatment, according to a new study.

The researchers found that among patients whose cancer had spread, those who took the drug lived a median of 2.5 months longer than those who received a physician-chosen treatment -- 13.1 months versus 10.6 months.

The study included 508 women who were given eribulin and 254 women who received treatment of the physician's choice, which was defined as: any single-agent chemotherapy, hormonal or biological treatment approved for cancer treatment; radiotherapy; or symptomatic treatment alone.

The most common side effects in both groups were fatigue and depletion of white blood cells. Numbness and pain stemming from nerve damage were the most common adverse event connected to eribulin that led women to drop out of the study (24, or 5 percent).

The study, known as the EMBRACE trial, was funded by Eisai Inc., which markets eribulin. Dr. Javier Cortes, of the Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology in Barcelona, Spain, and colleagues published the findings in the March 3 online edition of The Lancet.

"This global phase 3 study establishes a potential new standard treatment for women with heavily pretreated metastatic breast cancer, for whom there was previously no chemotherapy treatment with proven survival benefit," the authors wrote.

In a related editorial, Drs. Nancy U. Lin and Harold J. Burstein, of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School in Boston, said: "EMBRACE provides much needed, high-level evidence for chemotherapy use in patients with heavily pretreated breast cancer. And that evidence suggests that the methods to treat advanced breast cancer are growing, the treatment challenge in refractory disease is a little bit less daunting, and the treatment results are a little bit better than they were before."

Commenting on the study, Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said, "The findings of this trial are exciting because they will propel eribulin into wider use. This drug shows much promise, and it should certainly be included in additional trials to fully establish its benefit."

"It would be interesting to see if the drug offers the same benefit in women that have not been treated with multiple drugs before exposure to eribulin," she added.

The Metastatic Breast Cancer Network has more about metastatic breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefit of eribulin over various treatments chosen by the physicians was clearly stated in the article.  “The researchers found that among patients whose cancer had spread, those who took the drug (eribulin) lived a median of 2.5 months longer than those who received a physician-chosen treatment — 13.1 months versus 10.6 months.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Research at Group Health points to bupropion (Wellbutrin) as first choice for overweight and obese patients with depression

SEATTLE--Group Health researchers have found that bupropion (marketed as Wellbutrin) is the only antidepressant that tends to be linked to long-term modest weight loss.

Previously, Group Health researchers showed a two-way street between depression and body weight: People with depression are more likely to be overweight, and vice versa. These researchers also found that most antidepressant medications have been linked to weight gain.

Prior research on antidepressants and weight change was limited to one year or shorter. But many people take antidepressants--the most commonly prescribed medications in the United States--for longer than a year. So for up to two years the new study followed more than 5,000 Group Health patients who started taking an antidepressant. The Journal of Clinical Medicine published it: "Long-Term Weight Change after Initiating Second-Generation Antidepressants."

"Our study suggests that bupropion is the best initial choice of antidepressant for the vast majority of Americans who have depression and are overweight or obese," said study leader David Arterburn, MD, MPH. He's a senior investigator at Group Health Research Institute (GHRI), a Group Health physician, and an affiliate associate professor in the University of Washington (UW) School of Medicine's Department of Medicine. But in some cases, an overweight or obese patient has reasons why bupropion is not for them--like a history of seizure disorder--and it would be better for them to choose a different treatment option.

"We found that bupropion is the only antidepressant that tends to be linked to weight loss over two years," Dr. Arterburn said. "All other antidepressants are linked to varying degrees of weight gain."

After two years, nonsmokers lost an average of 2.4 pounds on bupropion--compared with gaining an average of 4.6 pounds on fluoxetine (Prozac). So those who took bupropion ended up weighing 7 pounds less than did those on fluoxetine.

Unsurprisingly, that difference wasn't seen in people who smoked tobacco. Bupropion is often used to help patients stop smoking. So smokers who take bupropion are likely to be trying to quit--and coping with the weight gain that often accompanies attempts to quit smoking.

"A large body of evidence indicates no difference in how effectively the newer antidepressants improve people's moods," said Dr. Arterburn's coauthor Gregory Simon, MD, MPH, a Group Health psychiatrist, GHRI senior investigator, and research professor in psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the UW School of Medicine. "So it makes sense for doctors and patients to choose antidepressants on the basis of their side effects, costs, and patients' preferences--and, now, on whether patients are overweight or obese."

Bupropion should be considered the first-line drug of choice for people who are overweight or obese, Dr. Simon said. But patients should consult their doctor about which medication is right for them, before making any changes, including starting, switching, or stopping medication.

Grant R01 MH083671 from the National Institute of Mental Health funded this research.

Drs. Arterburn and Simon's coauthors are GHRI Senior Investigator Denise M. Boudreau, PhD, Research Project Management Director Emily O. Westbrook , Programmer Analyst Mary Kay Theis, and Andy Bogart; Tamar Sofer, PhD, a biostatistician at the UW School of Public Health and post-doctoral research fellow at Harvard University; and Sebastien Haneuse, PhD, an associate professor of biostatistics at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, who used to work at GHRI.

Group Health Research Institute does practical research that helps people like you and your family stay healthy. The Institute is the research arm of Seattle-based Group Health Cooperative, a consumer-governed, nonprofit health care system. Founded in 1947, Group Health Cooperative coordinates health care and coverage. The Institute has conducted nonproprietary public-interest research on preventing, diagnosing, and treating major health problems since 1983. Government and private research grants provide its main funding. Follow Group Health research on Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, LinkedIn, or YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release states that “After two years, nonsmokers lost an average of 2.4 pounds on bupropion–compared with gaining an average of 4.6 pounds on fluoxetine (Prozac). So those who took bupropion ended up weighing 7 pounds less than did those on fluoxetine.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"The positive result was only marginally significant, and the negative result was clear," said Dr. Thomas McGlashan, a professor of psychiatry at Yale and the study's lead author. "This might discourage people, and legitimately so, from using this drug for prevention because of the weight gain, but hopefully it won't discourage study" of other drugs.

Critics have charged that treating people for a disorder that has not yet been diagnosed is not only premature but stigmatizing, especially for adolescents. The new study was intended in part to clarify the trade-off between the risks and the potential benefits of preemptive treatment.

"Unfortunately, the study's numbers are so small that it cannot be decisive on the key issue, which is whether it's prudent to treat people early when there are uncertainties about the diagnosis and given the effect of stigma and adverse effects," said Dr. William Carpenter, director of the Psychiatric Research Center at the University of Maryland, who was not involved in the study.

The study was plagued by recruitment problems from the beginning, in 1997. Mild, psychosis-like symptoms are rare in adolescents, and families often wait until symptoms are pronounced before seeking treatment, Dr. McGlashan said. Good candidates trickled in slowly; and the researchers added several recruitment sites along the way to increase the numbers of people in the study.

They eventually enrolled 60 people, most of them adolescents, who scored highly on a scale that assesses risk for psychosis. The scale rates severity of more than a dozen symptoms, including suspiciousness, grandiosity and bizarre thoughts. From 20 to 45 percent of people who score high on the scale go on to develop full-blown psychosis, in which these symptoms become extreme, researchers have found.

The researchers split the participants into two groups, one that received drug treatment and one that took placebo pills. In the first year of a two-year trial, 5 of the 31 of those on medication developed full-blown psychosis, compared with 11 of 29 of those who were taking dummy pills.

But by then, more than two-thirds of the young people in both groups had dropped out, making it difficult to interpret differences between them. Some left the study without explaining why; others moved; and 10 of those on medication quit the study because they felt the drug was not working, could not make the appointments or did not like the side effects, among other reasons.

Those on medication gained an average of 20 pounds during the study. Weight gain is a common side effect of Zyprexa.

"It's a pessimistic trade-off, the weight gain and other side effects for what looks like a modest delay in the acute psychotic episode," said Dr. Steven Hyman, a professor of neurobiology at Harvard. "It's clear we need more efficacious drugs with milder side effects."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Provides some quantification of the benefit of taking Zyprexa to delay psychosis after one year of treatment, but this difference was marginally statistically significant, which is also mentioned. What the story does not report: After the medication was stopped, these patients showed more severe psychotic symptoms than when they were first recruited for the study, suggesting that while symptoms were blunted, the disorder progressed despite the use of anti-psychotic medication. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Boston)--Despite the continued controversy surrounding the use of testosterone in men who have testosterone deficiency (hypogonadism), a new study has found that long-term use of testosterone therapy not only improves vigor and vitality, but may reduce the risk of death due to cardiovascular (CV) disease.

These findings appear online in the Journal of Cardiovascular Pharmacology and Therapeutics.

Testosterone (T) is the primary male sex hormone. In men, T plays a key role in the development of male reproductive tissues as well as promoting secondary sexual characteristics such as increased muscle and bone mass and growth of body hair. In addition, T is essential for overall health and well-being and for the prevention of osteoporosis. Insufficient levels of circulating T in men, contributes to frailty and bone loss.

In the absence of large, prospective, placebo-controlled clinical trials of longer duration, substantial evidence regarding the safety and risk of testosterone therapy (TTh) with regard to cardiovascular outcomes can only be gleaned from observational studies. To date, there are limited studies comparing the effects of long-term TTh in hypogonadal men who were treated or remained untreated with T.

Researchers at Boston University Schools of Medicine (BUSM) and Public Health (BUSPH), along with researchers in Germany, established a registry to assess long-term effectiveness and safety of T in men. For this study, they sought to compare its effects on a host of parameters (obesity, cholesterol levels, diabetes, liver function) considered to contribute to cardiovascular disease.

The researchers followed a group of men for eight years who had been on TTh and compared them with another group of men who remained untreated for the same time period. They found there were only two deaths in the TTh group and neither was related to CV events. In the non-treated control group, there were 21 deaths, 19 of which were related to CV events. Furthermore, there were 26 non-fatal myocardial infarctions and 30 non-fatal strokes in the control group but none in the T-treated group.

According to the researchers, long-term TTh in men with hypogonadism appears to be an effective approach to achieve sustained improvements in cardiometabolic function and reduces the risk of CV events. "The low CV events observed in the T-group compared to the untreated (control) group strongly suggest that TTh is protective. We believe that the protective effect of T on the CV system provides clinicians with the opportunity to utilize this approach for secondary prevention for hypogonadal men with a history of CV events," explained corresponding author Abdulmaged M. Traish, PhD, professor of biochemistry and urology at BUSM.

Contributing authors Dr. Farid Saad is a full time employee of Bayer Pharma. 

Dr. Ahmad Haider has received partial compensation for data entry from Bayer Pharma. 

Dr. Gheorghe Doros has received payment for statistical analysis from Bayer Pharma.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The text does a good job of describing the differences in cardiovascular outcomes between men receiving testosterone treatment and those who chose not to. But the release never tells us how many people were in each group or what the event rate was, which makes it difficult to make a comparison. And, as the release alludes, the observational design of the study means the cardiovascular outcomes are not conclusive.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Although the scans looked promising, the companies needed to show that what they revealed was the same as what a pathologist would see on autopsy.

That was what Avid demonstrated with its study, presented Sunday by its medical director, Dr. Christopher M. Clark.

Dr. P. Murali Doraiswamy, a biological psychiatrist at Duke who had helped recruit patients for the study, called the results among “ the most highly anticipated data from the entire meeting.”

To compare the scans with autopsy results, the company scanned the brains of 35 people in hospices who were expected to die within six months. Some had Alzheimer’s and others did not. After the patients died, their brains were shipped to Phoenix, where a pathologist sliced them into about 100 tiny pieces and sent them off for analysis of plaque.

Pathologists in Montreal analyzed the brain slices with a computer that counted plaques. Independently, pathologists in Chicago analyzed them the traditional way — by looking at the brain slices under a microscope and manually counting the microscopic plaques.

Meanwhile, in Philadelphia, radiologists examined the scans and calculated how much plaque was present in the patients’ brains and, independently, used a computer to analyze the amount of plaque in the scans. Neither the radiologists nor the pathologists knew whether the patients had dementia.

In 34 of the 35 patients, the PET scan, the pathologists’ report and the computerized pathology report agreed. In one patient who had Alzheimer’s, the pathologist and the radiologist analyzing the scan did not see much plaque, but the computerized analysis of the scan and the two autopsy reports did.

And the data showed that the scans were completely accurate in ruling out Alzheimer’s pathology: unlike doctors, they never said people had Alzheimer’s pathology when they did not.

In addition, the company scanned the brains of 76 younger people who would not be expected to have plaque in their brains. None did.

“That was very reassuring,” said Dr. Michael W. Weiner, an Alzheimer’s expert at the University of California, San Francisco.

Dr. Reisa A. Sperling, an Alzheimer’s expert at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and co-chairwoman of the session where the results were presented, said, “Personally, I found the data quite convincing.”

Dr. Sperling, an investigator on a different AVID study but who is not paid by the company, said the challenge now will be to see whether the scans can accurately predict whether people are developing Alzheimer’s before they have symptoms.

That is the stage, she said, “where we have the best chance of changing the course of the illness.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION:  The story reported that the study found the test was able to correctly assign people into categories of having or not having Alzheimer’s disease in 34 out of 35 cases.  It was much less clear about how accurate diagnosis in terminally ill patients (as defined as being in hospice) translates into benefit for these patients.  The tests of young people without disease was still not compelling that this test will be able to parse out less severe cases correctly.
The story did mention that it was not yet known if the test could be used to identify cases earlier in the course of the disease.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The drug, finasteride, is available as a generic for about $2.00 a day, and millions of men safely take it now to shrink their prostates, its approved use.

With finasteride, as many as 100,000 cases of prostate cancer a year could be prevented, said Dr. Eric Klein, director of the Center for Urologic Oncology at the Cleveland Clinic.

Dr. Howard Parnes, chief of the prostate cancer group at the National Cancer Institute’s division of cancer prevention, also is convinced. “There is a tremendous public health benefit for the use of this agent,” he said.

While it might seem convoluted to offer a drug to prevent the consequences of overtreatment, that is the situation in the country today, others say. Preventing the cancer can prevent treatments that can be debilitating, even if the cancers were never lethal to start with.

“That’s the bind we’re in right now,” said Dr. Christopher Logothetis, professor and chairman of genitourinary medical oncology at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. “Most of the time, treatment wouldn’t help and may not be necessary. But the reality is that people are being operated on.”

“We are trying to avoid a diagnosis to avoid a prevention whose value is disputed,” he said. With finasteride, Dr. Logothetis added, “we’re trying to overcome our other sins.”

Other experts say, Not so fast. Finasteride might not make much of a difference in the death rate because so few men die from prostate cancer. What the drug’s proponents are advocating is taking a drug to somehow compensate for what many believe is the nation’s overzealous diagnosis and treatment of the disease.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut, explains: While 10 percent of men 55 and older find out they have prostate cancer, the cancer is lethal in no more than 25 percent of them. So if finasteride reduced the prostate cancer’s incidence by 30 percent, about 7 percent of men would get a cancer diagnosis and approximately 1.8 percent instead of 2.5 percent would have a lethal cancer.

“Finasteride might make a difference but only in a very small subset of men,” Dr. Albertsen said.

And, he adds, the study did not look for a decline in death rates, and it is unlikely that any study ever will — it would take too long and be too expensive. Yet the ultimate goal of prevention is to save lives. It remains an assumption that finasteride would have much impact on the minority of prostate cancers that, despite early detection and treatment, still kill.

Finasteride blocks the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, a hormone active mostly in the prostate and the scalp, and that all prostate cancers need to grow.

The drug is available from Merck & Company, as Proscar, and from six companies as a generic to shrink the prostate in older men whose prostates can enlarge, making urination difficult.

Researchers say it turns out that shrinking the prostate also may be good for cancer detection by making it easier to find all tumors, including the most aggressive.

“The data are compelling,” said Dr. Peter Scardino, chairman of the department of surgery at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, a convert who originally thought the drug was dangerous. “Finasteride has to be recognized as the first clearly demonstrated way to prevent prostate cancer with any medication or any oral agent at all.”

Finasteride has had its ups and downs. Its chronicle began in 1993, with the start of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and involving 19,000 men. Half took finasteride pills; the rest a placebo. In March 2003, 15 months before the study’s scheduled end, its directors halted it abruptly. The reason was that the results were overwhelmingly compelling — men taking the drug were not getting prostate cancer.

Yet despite that note of triumph, a troubling finding emerged. The study was designed to look for a reduction in the overall prostate cancer rate. And that is what it found. But, as Dr. Scardino pointed out in an editorial five years ago in The New England Journal of Medicine that accompanied the study, it appeared that 6.4 percent of the men who took the drug got fast growing, ominous-looking tumors. In contrast, such tumors were found in 5.1 percent, of men who took the placebo.

The concern was that the drug might be preventing cancers that never spread. At the same time, finasteride might actually be causing aggressive cancers that can kill.

It would, of course, be the worse possible outcome. Dr. Scardino’s editorial warned healthy men not to take finasteride.

That seemed to leave the drug dead. The study researchers, though, wondered if that conclusion was correct. Maybe, they thought, by shrinking the prostate, the drug was just making it easier to find aggressive tumors.

When doctors do a biopsy for prostate cancer, they probe the gland with a needle, hoping to find cancer cells. But prostate cancer grows as little nests and an aggressive cancer will appear as dangerous-looking cells in some clusters and less dangerous in others. A smaller prostate means a doctor is more likely to hit upon cancer nests and more likely to find aggressive-looking cells.

The researchers had a way to learn if they were correct. Most of the men in the study who had cancer — aggressive or not — chose to be treated and many had their prostates removed. A pathologist could carefully examine every one of those 500 prostates and compare the kinds of cancers found at surgery to those initially diagnosed at biopsy.

It took years, but the analysis showed the hypothesis was right. Now, two groups of independent researchers conclude, in papers in the current issue of Cancer Prevention Research, that finasteride decreases the risk of having any tumor at all — large or small, fast growing or slow growing, by the same amount — nearly 30 percent.

With this new analysis, many prostate cancer specialists, including Dr. Scardino, say their view of the drug has completely changed. The study actually found that finasteride protects against both lethal and less dangerous tumors and could cut prostate cancer risk by nearly a third.

Even the effect on smaller tumors has important implications, said Dr. Ian M. Thompson, Jr., the study’s principal researcher and a urologist at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio.

“The cancers that were prevented were the ones men are having surgery and radiation for today,” Dr. Thompson said.

Now, though, prostate cancer specialists have a new problem: How can they change the drug’s image?

Drug companies are unlikely to be instrumental, Dr. Thompson and others say, because finasteride’s patent has expired, giving companies little incentive to apply to the Food and Drug Administration to market it as a cancer preventative. Without F.D.A. approval, finasteride cannot be advertised as preventing cancer and insurers may not pay for it.

But doctors can prescribe drugs for other purposes at their discretion and Dr. Parnes said that men and their doctors may be persuaded to try it.

In the meantime, GlaxoSmithKline, which has a patented drug, Avodart, to reduce the size of men’s prostates, has a study asking whether its drug can prevent prostate cancer. If it can, and the drug agency approves Avodart for cancer prevention, doctors and patients may have to decide between a generic drug used off-label or a more expensive brand-name drug that does much the same thing.

Some leading prostate specialists, like Dr. Scardino, say they are recommending that men who worry about prostate cancer take finasteride.

He also ponders taking it himself. “I regularly think, Why don’t I take it? Why wouldn’t every man take it?” Dr. Scardino said. He hasn’t done so yet, partly because those years of concern about the drug took a toll.

“I think it’s the difficulty of adjusting to something that originally had a bad reputation,” Dr. Scardino explained.

Dr. Thompson has no such fears.

He is at no particular risk for prostate cancer, but, he reasons, taking finasteride is not that different than taking a statin for a slightly elevated cholesterol level.

“Imagine the marathoner with no family history of heart disease, who’s skinny, doesn’t smoke and has normal blood pressure,” Dr. Thompson says. “Should he take a statin? The amount of benefit he’ll get is not much, but his risk reduction still is 25 or 30 percent.”

Dr. Thompson knows what he will do about finasteride.

“I’m 54,” he said. “The men in the study were 55 and older. So I’ll start taking it next year.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Mixed grade on this criterion.  The story provided both relative and absolute risk reduction figures – although it gave more space and prime real estate (the beginning and end of the story) to the more impressive-sounding relative risk figures. But, with some hesitation, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By Amy Norton NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People with multiple sclerosis have long said that smoking marijuana helps ease their painful muscle cramping. And a new clinical trial suggests they are not just blowing smoke.

The study, published Monday, found that for 30 MS patients with muscle “spasticity,” a few days of marijuana smoking brought some relief.

But the big caveat, researchers say, is that it’s not clear that the downsides of pot smoking are worth it.

Some people with MS are already using medical marijuana to treat certain symptoms, including spasticity — when the muscles in the legs or arms contract painfully, in something akin to a “charley horse.”

There is some science behind the idea: The body naturally produces cannabinoids, the group of chemicals found in marijuana. And studies have suggested the cannabinoid receptors on our cells help regulate muscle spasticity.

But the evidence that pot smoking actually helps with spasticity has been anecdotal.

“We’ve heard from patients that marijuana helps their spasticity, but I think a lot us thought, ‘Well, it’s probably just making you feel good,’” said Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, the lead researcher on the new study.

“I think this study shows that yes, (marijuana) may help with spasticity, but at a cost,” said Corey-Bloom, of the University of California, San Diego.

The cost, her team found, is that smoking caused fatigue and dizziness in some users, and generally slowed down people’s mental skills soon after they used marijuana.

But it’s not clear if that would have any long-term consequences, Corey-Bloom said.

About 400,000 people in the United States have MS, a chronic disease in which the protective coating around nerve fibers starts breaking down.

The new study, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, included 30 MS patients with muscle spasticity that had failed to get better with standard medication.

Corey-Bloom’s team had each patient smoke marijuana or “placebo” joints — which looked, smelled and tasted like the real thing, but lacked the active ingredient in marijuana, known as THC.

Each patient smoked marijuana once a day for three days and used the placebo cigarette once a day on three separate days. Before and after each treatment, an independent rater assessed the patients’ muscle spasticity.

Overall, the study found, measures of spasticity dropped an average of three points —about 30 percent — on a 24-point scale when patients smoked marijuana, but didn’t change after they smoked the placebo.

The issue of treating spasticity is “certainly an important one,” said Nicholas LaRocca, vice president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society.

“Spasticity is a big problem for many people with MS, and the current medications don’t necessarily work for everyone,” said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study.

“But smoking marijuana does not appear to be a long-term solution, because of the cognitive effects,” he told Reuters Health.

People with MS are already at some risk of “cognitive changes,” LaRocca pointed out, so the potential for lasting effects from long-term marijuana smoking is a concern.

However, LaRocca said, researchers are developing cannabinoid-based medications for MS. That includes a cannabinoid mouth spray called Sativex that has been approved in the UK, Canada, Spain and New Zealand to treat MS-related spasticity.

Research into cannabinoids and spasticity should continue, LaRocca said, because medications may be able to harness the benefits of specific cannabis compounds, without the side effects linked to smoking pot.

Both LaRocca and Corey-Bloom said there were limitations to the current study.

“Blinding” people as to whether they are on marijuana or a placebo is tough since the drug creates a “high” feeling.

In this study, 17 of 30 patients were able to correctly guess whether they were using marijuana or a placebo at each of their six visits with the researchers. And the rest often guessed correctly.

“It’s pretty clear that the patients were not really blinded,” LaRocca said. “What effects that might have had on the results is unclear.”

Corey-Bloom said that should not have influenced the spasticity findings, since an independent researcher (who didn’t know whether patients were smoking marijuana or the placebo) rated spasticity using a standard scale.

But another limitation, she pointed out, is that the study looked at the effects, and side effects, of marijuana over only a few days. “We can’t say anything about long-term effects,” Corey-Bloom told Reuters Health.

For now, LaRocca recommended that people with spasticity see a doctor experienced in treating MS. And if you’re on an anti-spasticity medication and it’s not working well enough, or the side effects are too much, tell your doctor, he said.

For some people, a change in the medication dose might help.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Many times a story stops at reporting something like “brought some relief.”
This story explained exactly how the study was conducted, what the measurement scale for improvement was, and what was observed on that scale.
And then it carefully itemized limitations of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ROCHESTER, Minn. — A new type of blood test may help physicians identify which patients with and without evidence of coronary blockages are at risk for heart attacks and strokes. Even individuals with normal levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), known as the so-called “bad” cholesterol, but still at risk, seem to be identified, according to Mayo Clinic research being presented at the American College of Cardiology’s 66th Annual Scientific Session.

The test, released commercially by Mayo Medical Laboratories in August 2016, measures blood concentrations of plasma ceramides, a class of lipids that are highly linked to cardiovascular disease processes. The study found that individuals with the highest levels of blood ceramides were found to have a 3- to 4-times greater risk of having a cardiovascular event compared with those with the lowest ceramide score, regardless of their LDL cholesterol level or the presence of a blockage in the heart’s arteries.

“Our research suggests that evaluating ceramide levels in patients who are not at immediate risk for coronary artery disease events may help cardiologists decide who could benefit from proactive and preventive treatment, such as statins, or lifestyle changes to prevent a serious cardiac event down the road,” says Jeff Meeusen, Ph.D., a clinical chemist, co-director of Cardiovascular Laboratory Medicine at Mayo Clinic and the study’s lead author.

According to Dr. Meeusen, ceramides are different than cholesterol, which gathers and causes a clog in the arteries. Ceramides are more active, attracting inflammatory cells and promoting clotting.

In the study, 499 Mayo Clinic patients who were referred for coronary angiography to check for possible artery blockages were included and followed prospectively for approximately eighteen years. Patients were similar in age and with regard to blood pressure, smoking status and high-density lipoprotein (HDL), the “good” cholesterol; excluded were those who had diabetes or a previous heart attack, stroke or procedure to open narrowed coronary arteries. Researchers measured four different types of ceramides in the blood at baseline and combined the values into a 12-point scale. Patients were grouped into four risk categories according to their ceramide levels: low (0–2), intermediate (3–6), moderate (7–9) and high (10–12).

Over the eighteen years, researchers recorded occurrences of heart attack, stroke, revascularization and death. Overall, 5.1 percent of patients had a major cardiovascular event each year. But the risk of having an event became higher as ceramide level increased; for each 1-point increase in the ceramide risk score, the risk rose by 9 percent. The rate of events was double among people with the highest ceramide score compared with those with the lowest (8.1 vs. 4.1 percent, respectively).

In patients without coronary artery disease following angiography, the rate of cardiovascular events was only 3.1 percent, lower than the average overall. But when researchers examined cardiovascular disease in this population by ceramide scores, people with the highest levels of ceramides were four times more likely to have an event compared with those with the lowest (7.8 vs. 2.2 percent, respectively). A similar trend was seen among people with low LDL levels (<100 mg/dL), typically considered a good LDL target. In this group, the rate of heart attack, stroke and revascularization and death was 3.7 percent among those with a low ceramide score, but 16.4 percent in people with the highest ceramide levels.

“There is a need to identify patients at increased risk for cardiovascular events so that we can test strategies to prevent those events. This test seems to provide such information,” says Allan S. Jaffe, M.D., senior author of the study, cardiologist at Mayo Clinic and chair of the Division of Clinical Core Laboratory Services.

The trial was funded by Mayo Clinic. The new test is available to health care providers worldwide through Mayo Medical Laboratories, which offers laboratory testing and pathology services to more than 4,000 health care organizations in more than 70 countries. Mayo Medical Laboratories collaborated with some of the original researchers who established the role of ceramides in cardiovascular disease and Zora Biosciences Oy, a diagnostics discovery company based in Finland, to develop and refine the test. The present study is also the first to test its clinical utility in a U.S. population.

Co-authors are: Leslie Donato, Ph.D.; Sandra Bryant; Grant Spears; Peter Berger, M.D.; and Linnea Baudhuin, Ph.D., all of Mayo Clinic.

About Mayo Clinic

 Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization committed to clinical practice, education and research, providing expert, whole-person care to everyone who needs healing. For more information, visit http://www.mayoclinic.org/about-mayo-clinic or https://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The primary benefit of the test is that it might enable doctors to identify people who are at higher-than-normal risk for heart attacks and strokes even though they have normal levels of cholesterol and show no evidence of heart blockages. The news release does a good job of explaining the likelihood of having a cardiac event for those with low versus high levels of blood ceramides. In particular, it reports both absolute and relative risk, noting that, among individuals with low LDL (bad cholesterol) levels, cardiovascular disease occurred in 3.7% of those with low ceramide levels but in 16.4% of those with high ceramide levels.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EWING, N.J., March 14, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Nasdaq: CPXX) today announced positive results from the Phase 3 trial of VYXEOS™ (cytarabine: daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection (also known as CPX-351) in patients with high-risk (secondary) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) compared to the standard of care regimen of cytarabine and daunorubicin known as 7+3. The trial met its primary endpoint demonstrating a statistically significant improvement in overall survival. Data will be submitted for presentation at the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2016 Annual Meeting.

The median overall survival for patients treated with VYXEOS in the study was 9.56 months compared to 5.95 months for patients receiving 7+3, representing a 3.61 month improvement in favor of VYXEOS. The hazard ratio (HR) was 0.69 (p=0.005) which represents a 31 percent reduction in the risk of death versus 7+3. The percentage of patients alive 12 months after randomization was 41.5% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 27.6% on the 7+3 arm. The percentage of patients alive 24 months after randomization was 31.1% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 12.3% on the 7+3 arm.

"The overall survival advantage seen with CPX-351 compared to 7+3, along with a superior response rate and no increase in serious toxicity indicates that we'll likely have a new standard of care for treating older patients with secondary AML," said Jeffrey E. Lancet, M.D., senior member and chief of the Leukemia/Myelodysplasia Program at Moffitt Cancer Center and the principal investigator for the study. "This represents a major step forward for a very difficult-to-treat patient population."

VYXEOS also demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in induction response rate (CR+CRi of 47.7% versus 33.3%; p=0.016) and this significance was maintained for the analysis of CR alone (CR of 37.3% versus 25.6%, p=0.040).

Sixty-day all-cause mortality was 13.7% versus 21.2%, in favor of patients treated with VYXEOS.

No substantial difference in Grade 3 or higher adverse events was observed between VYXEOS and 7+3. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, hematologic adverse events were similar for overall infections, febrile neutropenia, and bleeding events. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, non-hematologic adverse events were similar across all organ systems, including cardiac, gastrointestinal, general systems, metabolic disorders, musculoskeletal, nervous system, respiratory, skin and renal.

"These findings confirm that VYXEOS provides the first opportunity we've had in decades to extend survival for patients with high-risk AML," added Gail Roboz, M.D., Professor of Medicine and Director of the Leukemia Program at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University and the New York-Presbyterian Hospital in New York. "Also, more patients in remission means more who are eligible for potentially curative therapy."

Based on these results the company expects to submit a New Drug Application (NDA) for VYXEOS with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) later this year and submit a Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) with the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the first quarter of 2017.

"The successful outcome of this Phase 3 trial represents an important advance for AML patients, their families and clinicians," said Scott Jackson, Chief Executive Officer of Celator Pharmaceuticals. "It also marks a major milestone for Celator, for VYXEOS, and for our CombiPlex® platform. We offer our sincere thanks to the patients and investigators who participated in this study and we will work closely with regulatory authorities to make this new treatment available to the AML community as soon as possible."

The clinical trial was conducted in partnership with The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society® (LLS) through its Therapy Acceleration Program (TAP), which has supported the clinical development of VYXEOS beginning in Phase 2.

Celator will host a conference call and live audio webcast on Tuesday, March 15, 2016 at 8:00am EDT to discuss the results of the Phase 3 trial. To participate in the conference call, please dial 877-303-6316 (domestic) or 650-521-5176 (international) and refer to conference ID 71930208. The live webcast of the call can be accessed in the Investors section of Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. An archived webcast will be available on Celator's website beginning approximately two hours after the event.

VYXEOS (cytarabine:daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection, also known as CPX-351, is a nano-scale co-formulation of cytarabine and daunorubicin at a synergistic 5:1 molar ration. VYXEOS represents a novel approach to developing combinations of drugs in which molar ratios of two drugs with synergistic anti-tumor activity are encapsulated in a nano-scale liposome in order to maintain the desired ratio following administration. VYXEOS was granted orphan drug status by the FDA and the European Commission for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). VYXEOS was also granted Fast Track designation for the treatment of elderly patients with secondary AML. In addition to the Phase 3 trial, Celator published results from two randomized, controlled, Phase 2 trials with VYXEOS. The first trial was conducted in newly diagnosed elderly AML patients and the second trial was conducted in patients with AML in first relapse.

The randomized, controlled, Phase 3 trial (Protocol NCT01696084), enrolled 309 patients at 39 sites in the United States and Canada, and compared VYXEOS to the conventional cytarabine and daunorubicin treatment regimen (commonly referred to as 7+3) as first-line therapy in older (60-75 years of age) patients with high-risk (secondary) AML. Patients were stratified for age (60 to 69 and 70 to 75 years of age) and AML type; treatment-related AML, AML with documented history of MDS with prior treatment with hypomethylating agent therapy, AML with documented history of MDS without prior hypomethlyating agent therapy, AML with a documented history of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMMoL), and de novo AML with a karyotype characteristic of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).

Patients were randomized 1:1 to receive either VYXEOS or 7+3. Patients could receive one or two inductions, and responding patients could receive one or two consolidations. First induction for VYXEOS was 100u/m2; days 1, 3, and 5 by 90-minute infusion and for the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 7 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1, 2, and 3 (7+3). Second induction for VYXEOS-treated patients was 100u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Only patients with documented CR or CRi were eligible to receive chemotherapy consolidation. Consolidation for VYXEOS-treated patients was 65u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a rapidly progressing cancer of the blood characterized by the uncontrolled proliferation of immature blast cells in the bone marrow. AML is generally a disease of older adults, and the median age of a patient diagnosed with AML is about 67 years. The American Cancer Society estimates that there will be 19,950 new cases of AML and 10,430 deaths from AML in the U.S. in 2016. In Europe the number of new cases is estimated to be 18,000 and in Japan the number is 5,500. The Company estimates that nearly 70 percent of AML patients are over the age of 60, and approximately 75 percent are intermediate or high risk. Furthermore, approximately half of those patients are considered suitable for intensive treatment.

Even with current treatment, overall survival for AML is poor. In patients over 60 years of age, the 5 year survival rate is less than 10%. In high-risk (secondary) AML, overall survival is lower, resulting in an acute need for new treatment options for these patients.

Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc., with locations in Ewing, N.J., and Vancouver, B.C., is an oncology-focused biopharmaceutical company that is transforming the science of combination therapy, and developing products to improve patient outcomes in cancer. Celator's proprietary technology platform, CombiPlex®, enables the rational design and rapid evaluation of optimized combinations of anti-cancer drugs, incorporating traditional chemotherapies as well as molecularly targeted agents to deliver enhanced anti-cancer activity. CombiPlex addresses several fundamental shortcomings of conventional combination regimens, as well as the challenges inherent in combination drug development, by identifying the most effective synergistic molar ratio of the drugs being combined in vitro, and fixing this ratio in a nano-scale drug delivery complex to maintain the optimized combination after administration and ensuring exposure of this ratio to the tumor. Celator's pipeline includes the lead product, VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), a nano-scale liposomal formulation of cytarabine:daunorubicin being studied for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia; CPX-1, a nano-scale liposomal formulation of irinotecan:floxuridine studied in colorectal cancer; and a preclinical stage product candidate, CPX-8, a hydrophobic docetaxel prodrug nanoparticle formulation. The Company is advancing its CombiPlex platform and broadening its application to include molecularly targeted therapies. The Company is seeking research and development collaborations with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies where its proprietary technology may provide benefit.

For more information, please visit Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. Information on ongoing trials is available at www.clinicaltrials.gov.

To the extent that statements contained in this press release are not descriptions of historical facts regarding Celator, they are forward-looking statements reflecting the current beliefs and expectations of management made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as "may," "will," "expect," "anticipate," "estimate," "intend," and similar expressions (as well as other words or expressions referencing future events, conditions or circumstances) are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements contained in this press release include, among others, statements regarding the safety, potential efficacy, therapeutic potential, and commercial potential of VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), our expectations regarding the timing of our regulatory filings, our expectations regarding our research and development programs and advancing our CombiPlex platform and the potential to establish research and development collaborations applying our proprietary technologies with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies. Forward-looking statements in this release involve substantial risks and uncertainties that could cause our development programs, future results, or achievements to differ significantly from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, the uncertainties inherent in the conduct of clinical studies, whether clinical study results obtained to date will be predictive of future results, whether the final results of our clinical studies will be supportive of regulatory approval to market VYXEOS and other matters that could affect the commercial potential of our drug candidates. Celator undertakes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements. For a further description of the risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from those expressed in these forward-looking statements, as well as risks relating to the business of the company in general, see Celator's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, subsequent reports on Form 10-Q and 8-K, and other filings by the company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release gave extensive data on median overall survival (9.56 months compared to 5.95 months for patients receiving 7+3, the standard treatment) and the “percentage of patients alive 24 months after randomization” (31.1% in the treatment arm compared to 12.3% on the 7+3 arm).
It also, helpfully, added the “sixty-day all-cause mortality” as 13.7% versus 21.2%, in favor of patients treated with the intervention drug. The release notes that the treatment gives a Number Needed to Treat (NNT) of about 7, which is very good. (NNT is a measurement of the impact of a therapy by estimating the number of patients that need to be treated in order to have an impact on one person.) The median survival doesn’t look as good. In about half of the patients, there is a four month or less increased survival. This implies that there is a group that has much longer survival. To see that there is a clinically important survival benefit (14% absolute increase) does make a difference.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Australian researchers have developed an experimental blood test they say is the first blood test capable of detecting melanoma -- an aggressive form of skin cancer -- in its early stages with a high degree of accuracy.

The test could speed up the diagnosis process, saving thousands of lives.

Scientists at Edith Cowan University in Western Australia tested blood samples for the antibodies typically created by the immune system in response to melanoma and identified them with significant accuracy.

Antibodies "are easily accessible in the blood, so it provides a fantastic test to identify an early-stage cancer," said project lead Professor Mel Ziman, leader of the university's Melanoma Research Group on Monday.

In the study , published Tuesday in the journal Oncotarget, Ziman's team screened 245 blood samples from both melanoma patients and healthy volunteers. The researchers were able to identify people with melanoma with 79% accuracy and people without a melanoma with 84% accuracy.

"In order for it to be valued by clinicians we would need to get to 90% accuracy in detection," she said. "So we are doing a clinical trial with 1000 participants to refine our test to get to this point."

If further trials are successful, Ziman estimates the test could be distributed internationally in up to five years.

Patients who returned a positive result would still need a biopsy to confirm the blood test and determine how far the cancer had developed, Ziman said.

The Australian team believe theirs would be the first to detect melanoma.

'In the wrong place with the wrong skin color'

Melanoma cancers are dangerous, abnormal growths on the surface of the skin caused by sun damage, which can spread throughout the body if left untreated.

The problem is particularly serious in Australia, where melanomas were the fourth most commonly diagnosed cancer in 2017 and cause about 1,700 deaths a year, according to the university.

"We're in the wrong place with the wrong skin color. We've had a lot of migrants from European nations, so they're fair-skinned ... and we do have a very intense sun here," Ziman said.

If detected early, skin cancers have a survival rate as high as 95%, the research team said, but it drops to just 50% if diagnosed late.

Surgery to remove the growth is the most common form of treatment.

Ziman said current methods of melanoma detection are expensive and invasive, involving a trip to a clinician, who must biopsy the lesion to discover whether it is cancerous.

For potential sufferers in remote areas, away from skin specialists, diagnosis can be especially tricky, he said, making a simple blood test an easy alternative to identify those at risk.

Over three years, the research team identified a combination of 10 types of antibodies that best signal the presence of a melanoma.

Antibodies are the products of the body's immune system, created to battle not only bacteria and viruses but abnormal cancer cells, Ziman said.

Dr. Jodie Moffat, head of early diagnosis at Cancer Research UK, agreed that a test which finds melanoma earlier could help reduce deaths from the disease, adding that "melanoma can be more than skin deep, and it's much harder to treat when diagnosed at a late stage after it has spread."

However, she stressed the fact this new test has not undergone clinical trials.

"We need to know how accurate it is, if it can save lives, and how it could work in practice. So, although a blood test to find skin cancer earlier is certainly exciting, research in this field still has hurdles to overcome," she said.

In the meantime, "people can help spot skin cancer early by knowing what's normal for their skin," said Moffat. In turn people should talk to a health professional about any "unusual or lasting changes to a mole, freckle or normal patch of skin."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provides both sensitivity and specificity for the test and notes that both need to be in excess of 90% for it to be useful.
Of course, there is an assumption that the test–if proven to be validated–would reduce deaths from melanoma due to early detection. That will take a lot more research to determine. “Early detection saves lives” is not always true.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Vitamin D, in combination with calcium, is good for your bones. You should consume modest amounts in your diet, if possible (and for most people that is quite possible), or in the form of supplements if you can't get enough via food and drink.

We know this. But somehow we've arrived at a point when some physicians are prescribing large doses of Vitamin D supplements for their patients in the hope of preventing cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, autoimmune disorders and other maladies, despite a lack of evidence that this works, according to a new commentary in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Other people are loading up on Vitamin D on their own.

"Clinical enthusiasm for supplemental vitamin D has outpaced available evidence on its effectiveness," JoAnn E. Manson and Shari S. Bassuk of the Division of Preventive Medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston wrote last week in the journal's online version.

This practice isn't totally harmless. You should be consuming 600 international units daily if you're between the ages of 1 and 70, and 800 IU each day if you're 71 or older, according to the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academcy of Sciences. (For a chart with a little more detail, see here.) These amounts are enough for 97.5 percent of U.S. and Canadian residents, according to the IOM. (Sunlight stimulates production of vitamin D for people in sunnier climes.)

Go above 4,000 IUs, unless there's a specific reason that you need that amount, and you risk kidney stones, calcification of blood vessels and possibly the very cardiovascular disease you were seeking to prevent, Manson said in an interview.

So how did we get here? "I think there's been a disconnect between the observational studies and the randomized clinical trials to date," Manson said. Over the past 15 years, those studies "have looked promising, and very often they've been reported by the media as suggesting that vitamin D has these benefits. I think there's a general perception that if some is good, more is better. I think it's important to understand that more is not necessarily better."

Manson is leading the most extensive clinical trial of vitamin D use ever, an examination of 25,875 people across the United States to determine whether vitamin D is helpful against cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, depression, infection, autoimmune disorders and other conditions. The results are expected in late 2017 or early 2018.

In the meantime, how much vitamin D should you be consuming? The recommended dietary allowance works out to three or four servings each day of "fortified" foods such as milk, yogurt, soy beverages, orange juice or cereal, plus fatty fish twice a week, according to Manson's commentary.

She also called on physicians not to overscreen patients for vitamin D deficiencies, a practice that can lead to overprescribing it.

"Large trials of other widely used supplements have sometimes found benefits," Manson wrote, "but in other cases--such as with high doses of beta carotene, vitamin E and selenium--have disproven some health claims for these supplements and identified health risks that may not have otherwise been detected."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story talks about vitamin D-rich foods and supplements (including high-dose supplements). Are there benefits? Yes, and the story addresses (some of) them. The story makes clear that vitamin D is an essential nutrient for bone health, and that if you cannot get enough vitamin D from your diet (or from exposure to sunlight), then supplements can help you reach your target vitamin D consumption goal — which is 600 international units (IUs) per day for men and women between the ages of 1 and 70. The story could also have mentioned that vitamin D is involved in a variety of other health functions, including “modulation of cell growth, neuromuscular and immune function, and reduction of inflammation,” according to the CDC.
Another strong point of the story is explaining that many of the purported health benefits of high-dose vitamin D supplementation — for example, prevention of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and cancer — have not been based on strong scientific evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — COLORADO SPRINGS, CO – Shoulder instability is most common in the young, athletic population, bringing a focus to how these injuries are best treated. Research presented today at the American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine’s (AOSSM) Annual Meeting in Colorado Springs, CO, demonstrated that surgery after a first-time shoulder dislocation lowered the re-injury risks and need for follow-up surgery when compared to those who were initially treated non-operatively and experienced a repeat dislocation prior to surgery.

The study examined 121 patients at an average of 51 months post-surgery. Of this group, 68 patients had experienced their first dislocation, while 53 had recurrent dislocations after being initially treated non-operatively. After treatment with an arthroscopic bankart repair, the postoperative dislocation rate in the first-time injury group was 29%, compared to 62% in those who did not have surgery after their initial injury. The average age of patients was 19 years old.

“Deciding between a non-operative program or going forward with surgery can be a challenging decision for medical professionals treating shoulder injuries in young athletes,” noted the study’s lead author Tyler J. Marshall, MD, from Alabama Ortho Spine and Sports in Birmingham, AL. “However, this study shows a substantial benefit for athletes undergoing surgery to prevent recurrent instability down the road.”

The research data was collected between 2003 and 2013 from eight fellowship trained surgical practices, with patient ages ranging from 16 to 30 years old. Surveys given to patients during follow-ups asked for information such as test for shoulder functionality, whether patients returned to sport, postoperative instability events, and if further surgery was required on the shoulder.

“While young athletes and parents may be wary of surgery, our study shows the advantages of this treatment approach,” commented Marshall. “Physicians should counsel those with first time injuries on these benefits moving forward.”

The American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine (AOSSM) is a global leader in orthopaedic sports medicine education, research, communication and fellowship, and includes national and international sports medicine leaders. The Society works closely with many other sports medicine specialists, including athletic trainers, physical therapists, family physicians, and others to improve the identification, prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation of sports injuries. AOSSM is also a founding partner of the STOP Sports Injuries campaign to prevent overuse and traumatic injuries in kids
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release encapsulates the differences observed: “The study examined 121 patients at an average of 51 months post-surgery,” it says. “Of this group, 68 patients had experienced their first dislocation, while 53 had recurrent dislocations after being initially treated non-operatively. After treatment with an arthroscopic bankart repair, the postoperative dislocation rate in the first-time injury group was 29%, compared to 62% in those who did not have surgery after their initial injury.”
And 7% of those with surgery after the initial dislocation vs 32% after a recurrent dislocation had to have another surgery, according to the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Despite recent debate about how well antidepressants really work in people with only mild or moderate depression, a new analysis of drug studies suggests they may have some benefit across the board.

Researchers found that more patients taking Prozac or Effexor had a substantial improvement in their symptoms than those taking a drug-free placebo pill, regardless of how severe those symptoms were to begin with.

“The idea that unless you’re very, very ill, you’re not going to benefit from treatment does not appear to stand up” when looking closely, said the study’s lead author, Robert Gibbons, from the University of Chicago.

Still, not everyone in the studies improved — on average, about five people had to be treated with one of the drugs for one person to feel better, and the benefits seemed to be diminished among some of the oldest patients.

What’s more, one researcher not involved in the study said its findings still don’t mean the drugs are any better than non-drug methods of treating depression, such as talk therapy and being more physically active.

For their analysis, Gibbons and his colleagues looked at outcomes for each individual patient in published and unpublished trials testing the effects of six weeks of treatment with antidepressants versus placebo pills. Most of those trials were funded and run by the pharmaceutical companies that manufacture Prozac and Effexor — Eli Lilly and Wyeth, respectively.

They included 12 studies of Prozac in adults and four each in elderly patients and youth, as well as 21 trials of immediate- or extended-release Effexor in adults. About 9,000 participants were included.

More adults and kids taking Prozac, known generically as fluoxetine, had at least a 50 percent improvement in scores on depression tests after six weeks compared to those assigned to take a placebo pill.

Fifty-five percent of adults on Prozac responded to treatment, compared to 34 percent in the placebo group. In youth, 30 percent on Prozac had significant symptom improvement, compared to just six percent of the comparisons.

The benefits were seen regardless of how severe patients’ symptoms were before starting treatment.

However, in the elderly the differences between the treatment and placebo groups were much smaller, and the researchers calculated that 17 older patients would have to be treated with Prozac for one to gain from it.

“Clearly the efficacy of antidepressants is age-dependent, (and) largest, most interestingly, in youth, which I don’t think would be the mainstream view in psychiatry,” Gibbons told Reuters Health.

The findings, he added, “raise other questions that need to be followed up (including), what’s going on in the elderly?”

Both types of Effexor, or venlafaxine, also seemed to help adults with mild to severe depression, with slightly more patients responding to the immediate-release dose.

Some of the study’s authors have testified for or received funding from drug companies, though the report itself was funded by national health agencies.

The researchers said they couldn’t be sure there would be similar improvements with other types of antidepressants — especially given the more limited data in kids and the elderly — or that the longer-term benefits would be as clear.

One recent study suggested that up to a fifth of patients on the antidepressant Cymbalta (duloxetine) might actually benefit more from placebo pills (see Reuters Health story of December 9, 2011.)

Irving Kirsch, who studies antidepressants and placebos at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said the new report didn’t make him more optimistic about the drugs.

If five or more patients need to be treated with an antidepressant for one to substantially improve, most don’t get much out of it, he pointed out.

“More than 80 percent of the patients are not getting a significant benefit from the drug — either they’re not getting better or they would get the same benefit with placebo,” he told Reuters Health.

“There are alternative treatments for depression that also produce about the same symptom reduction as the drugs do, but without the risk of side effects,” Kirsch added, including psychotherapy and exercise.

Still, Gibbons said that the improvement in symptoms for the average patient wasn’t insignificant.

“Definitely it doesn’t look like antidepressants are placebos,” he concluded.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story gave detailed breakdowns of percent improvement in scores on depression tests and provided an estimate of the number needed to treat in order for one to benefit.  The difference in benefits between older and younger patients was highlighted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Also, eteplirsen would be appropriate for only about 13 percent to 15 percent of Duchenne patients, those with the particular genetic mutation the drug is meant to counteract. However, a similar approach might work for some other mutations.

Duchenne, which affects as many as 15,000 Americans, mainly boys and young men, is the most severe common form of muscular dystrophy, a disease made more prominent by years of Jerry Lewis telethons. Those with the disease make barely any dystrophin, a protein necessary for muscles to function. Patients typically lose the ability to walk as teenagers and die by age 30.

While steroids, which reduce inflammation, can slow progression of the disease, they have undesirable side effects. Eteplirsen, which Sarepta says has shown no side effects so far, is vying with a similar drug being developed by GlaxoSmithKline to become the first medicine that works by directly countering the cause of the disease.

Eteplirsen could also be the first drug to reach the market for Sarepta since it was founded 32 years ago. It changed its name recently from AVI BioPharma to distance itself from its underachieving past.

Shares of Sarepta nearly tripled on Wednesday, closing at $44.93. And the stock had already roughly quadrupled since July, when Sarepta announced some interim results from the study.

The study measured how far the boys could walk in six minutes. Those who received the higher dose walked an average of 21 meters farther after 48 weeks of treatment than at the beginning of the trial, a gain of about 5 percent. The boys in the placebo group walked 68 fewer meters at the end than at the beginning, a decline of about 17 percent.

One possible reason for skepticism is that two of the boys on a lower dose of the drug rapidly lost the ability to walk, even though the level of dystrophin in their muscles increased substantially.

While the company excluded those boys from its analysis as outliers, the Food and Drug Administration might not do so. That could make it harder for the Sarepta to win approval for the drug based only on this small trial, something the company hopes to do.

“If you wait and require this company to do another two-year study, a lot of these boys are going to be in a wheelchair,” Christopher Garabedian, the Sarepta chief executive, said in an interview.

Patient groups may also put some pressure on the Food and Drug Administration to approve the drug quickly. But some also want Sarepta to make the drug available to more patients on a compassionate basis even before approval.

Ten-year-old Max Leclaire of Saxtons River, Vt., who has been receiving the highest dose in the trial, can now walk up stairs without having to pull himself up by the handrail, according to his mother, Jenn McNary. “He’s no longer riding the handicap bus to school,” she said.

But Ms. McNary said Sarepta had refused to provide the drug to Max’s 13-year-old brother, Austin, who could not be in the trial because he already could not walk.

Mr. Garabedian said Sarepta did not have the money or the manufacturing capacity to make the drug available outside of clinical trials. “That would be the quickest path to insolvency,” he said.

If eteplirsen gets to market, it would come nearly three decades after the 1986 discovery of the gene responsible for Duchenne. It would also represent a success, after decades of setbacks, for the technology eteplirsen uses, called antisense, which is a way of turning off specific genes.

Eteplirsen actually turns off just one part of the dystrophin gene, known as exon 51, which contains a mutation that in some patients stops production of dystrophin. By skipping over this exon, muscle cells can produce an imperfect form of dystrophin that nonetheless is at least partly functional.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provided just enough caveats to the positive aspect of the study results.  “The study measured how far the boys could walk in six minutes. Those who received the higher dose walked an average of 21 meters farther after 48 weeks of treatment than at the beginning of the trial, a gain of about 5 percent. The boys in the placebo group walked 68 fewer meters at the end than at the beginning, a decline of about 17 percent.  One possible reason for skepticism is that two of the boys on a lower dose of the drug rapidly lost the ability to walk, even though the level of dystrophin in their muscles increased substantially.”
The story added a key piece of information at the end, “Eteplirsen actually turns off just one part of the dystrophin gene, known as exon 51, which contains a mutation that in some patients stops production of dystrophin. By skipping over this exon, muscle cells can produce an imperfect form of dystrophin that nonetheless is at least partly functional.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, scientists have precisely identified and targeted an area of the brain which is involved in "hearing voices", experienced by many patients with schizophrenia. They have been able to show in a controlled trial that targeting this area with magnetic pulses can improve the condition in some patients. This early clinical work is presented at the ECNP conference in Paris on Tuesday 5th September, with later publication in Schizophrenia Bulletin*.

"This is the first controlled trial to precisely determine an anatomically defined brain area where high frequency magnetic pulses can improve the hearing of voices", said lead researcher, Professor Sonia Dollfus (University of Caen, CHU, France).

Schizophrenia is a serious long-term mental health problem. People with schizophrenia experience a range of symptoms, which may include delusions, muddled thoughts and hallucinations. One of the best-known is hearing voices, also known as Auditory Verbal Hallucination (AVH), which around 70% of people with schizophrenia experience at some point. These voices, may be 'heard' as having a variety of different characteristics, for example as internal or external, friendly or threatening, they may be continuously present or present only occasionally, and so on.

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) has been suggested as a possible way of treating the hearing of voices in schizophrenia. TMS uses magnetic pulses to the brain, and has been shown to be effective in several psychiatric conditions. However, there is a lack of controlled trials to show that TMS works effectively with AVH sufferers.

The French research team worked with 26 patients who received active TMS treatment, and 33 as a control group, who received sham (placebo) treatment. The researchers interviewed the patients using a standard protocol - the Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale - which revealed most of the characteristic features of the voices which they were hearing. The treated patients received a series of 20 Hz high-frequency magnetic pulses over 2 sessions a day for 2 days. Using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the pulses were targeted at a specific brain area in the temporal lobe, which is associated with language (the exact area is the crossing of the projection of the ascending branch of the left lateral sulcus and the left superior temporal sulcus)

After 2 weeks, the patients were re-evaluated. The researchers found that 34.6% of the patients being treated by TMS showed a significant response, whereas only 9.1% of patients in the sham group responded ('significant response' was defined as a more than 30% decrease in the Total Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale score).

Professor Sonia Dollfus said: "Auditory Verbal Hallucinations, or "hearing voices" can be a disturbing symptom of schizophrenia, both for patients and for those close to sufferers. This is the first controlled trial to show an improvement in these patients by targeting a specific area of the brain and using high frequency TMS. This means two things; firstly it seems that we now can say with some certainty that we have found a specific anatomical area of the brain associated with auditory verbal hallucinations in schizophrenia. Secondly, we have shown that treatment with high frequency TMS makes a difference to at least some sufferers, although there is a long way to go before we will know if TMS is the best route to treat these patients in the long-term".

Commenting, Professor Andreas Meyer-Lindenberg, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim and member of the ECNP executive board, said: "This work builds on previous studies that have shown a critical role of excessive activity of subregions of the temporal lobe in the generation of voice hallucinations in schizophrenia. To move this into treatment, controlled trial such as the one by Dollfus and coworkers are important. While response rates were moderate, TMS is a welcome addition to the therapeutic repertoire especially for patients who do not respond to medication."

NOTE: The full title of this release is "Scientists discover brain area which can be targeted for treatment in patients with schizophrenia who 'hear voices'" It has been shortened in some versions to comply with Eurekalert title limits.

*This work has been accepted in the peer-reviewed journal Schizophrenia Bulletin: The Journal of Psychoses and Related Disorders. The exact publication date has still to be determined.

Note: Around 220,000 people have been diagnosed as having schizophrenia in England and Wales (https:/ )
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release states that “researchers found that 34.6% of the patients being treated by TMS showed a significant response, whereas only 9.1% of patients in the sham group responded.” Of equal importance, the release clearly defined what “significant response” meant: “a more than 30% decrease in the Total Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale score.” In addition, the release quotes one study author’s qualification of the finding: “treatment with high frequency TMS makes a difference to at least some sufferers, although there is a long way to go before we will know if TMS is the best route to treat these patients in the long-term.” That’s good context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Taking one or two baby aspirins a day for at least five years was tied to a lower risk of colorectal cancer in a study from Denmark.

Earlier studies had suggested that aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen may help protect against colorectal cancer, but it wasn’t clear how much had to be taken, and for how long, to achieve those benefits.

Now, using data on more than 113,000 individuals, researchers have been trying to sort out the relationship between aspirin and NSAIDs, duration of treatment, and colorectal cancer rates.

In general, the risk of developing colorectal cancer varies with age, race, ethnicity and lifestyle. More than 90 percent of cases are diagnosed in people older than 50, according to the National Cancer Institute.

An online risk calculator from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (available here: 1.usa.gov/1DlscTL) indicates that in the U.S., for an average white or black woman in her late fifties, the 10-year risk of developing colorectal cancer is between 1 and 1.4 percent, and her lifetime risk is between 5 and 5.4 percent. For an average black or white male of the same age, the corresponding risks would be about 1.4 percent and 5.8 percent.

In the new study from Denmark, taking low-dose aspirin continuously for at least five years appeared to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer by 27%, and using nonaspirin NSAIDs for at least five years appeared to reduce it by 30%.

On the other hand, merely having taken aspirin did not alter the colorectal cancer risk, they reported in Annals of Internal Medicine.

“Unless low-dose aspirin is taken continuously, there is little protection against colorectal cancer,” Dr. Soren Friis from the Danish Cancer Society Research Center in Copenhagen told Reuters Health.

Nonaspirin NSAIDs were also protective against colorectal cancer with consistent long-term use, “and there was some indication that even non-continuous use of these agents may be (marginally) effective for the prevention of colorectal cancer,” Dr. Friis said.

Aspirin and NSAIDs carry their own risks, however. Long-term use can cause gastrointestinal bleeding, for example, so the potential reduction in colon cancer risk needs to be balanced against potential side effects, the authors warn.

The study had several limitations. For instance, the researchers only had data for users who obtained their aspirin or NSAIDs from doctors’ prescriptions. They didn’t include patients who made over-the-counter purchases of the medicines. Also, the researchers can’t rule out the possibility that other factors may have increased participants’ risk for colorectal cancer, such as obesity, dietary habits, alcohol use, and family history of colorectal cancer.

Dr. Friis emphasized that people should not start taking aspirin or NSAIDs on the basis of the new findings.

“Self-medication with aspirin or non-aspirin NSAIDs is strongly discouraged, due to the possibility of serious adverse events,” Dr. Friis said. “The public should not take any medication regularly without consulting with a physician.”

Dr. Gurpreet Singh Ranger from Upper River Valley Hospital, Waterville, New Brunswick and Dalhousie Medical School, in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, agreed with Dr. Friis.

“Low dose aspirin, already taken regularly by millions, reduces the risk of colorectal cancer,” he told Reuters Health by email. But “before starting to take aspirin long term, it is important to discuss the implications with your family doctor or specialist.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story cites a 27 percent decrease among low-dose aspirin users who had taken the drug for five years or more. It also notes the incidence of the disease among different populations, and even gives readers a link to a risk calculator to determine their individual risk.
Of course, we almost always prefer stories to use absolute risk reductions over the relative risk reduction reported here (technically an odds ratio — not a “risk” reduction per se). But in a case-control study such as this one, the issue can be complicated. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental drug touted as a breakthrough for treating severe postpartum depression is showing some promising results in a small clinical trial.

Sage Therapeutics, based in Cambridge, Mass., reported on Tuesday that 7 of the 10 women who took the drug in the trial experienced significant improvement in their depression within 60 hours of the injection. That effect was maintained for 30 days.

Among the 11 women who took the placebo, just one experienced remission within 60 hours.

Interestingly, none of the patients who took the drug reported psychiatric side effects, such as abnormal dreams, insomnia, and anxiety — but 5 of the 11 women on the placebo reported such symptoms. A few patients in each group experienced dizziness or a sedative effect.

Sage’s drug is designed to change the traffic patterns in the brain. There’s a natural push and pull between neurotransmitters called NMDA receptors and the GABA receptors that regulate their flow in the brain. In cases of severe depression, that equilibrium gets out of whack, and Sage’s drug is meant to restore it, modulating those GABA receptors to allow NMDA to do its job.

The data could represent a “paradigm shift in how the disease is thought about,” CEO Jeff Jonas said in a conference call.

But before anyone shifts anything, Sage will need more data. The early results are “promising and exciting,” said Dr. Allison Baker, a psychiatrist at Massachusetts General Hospital’s Center for Women’s Mental Health, but “we need to see replication of this data over a much wider range in terms of numbers.”

The study is small and has not been peer-reviewed; Sage disclosed the results in a press release. The company has not submitted study data to federal regulators and isn’t at this point seeking approval of the drug, known as SAGE-547, for postpartum depression. Its next steps: expanding the trial to enroll more women and to determine optimum doses.

“I think it’s incumbent upon us … to find a lower dose that might be just as useful,” especially for nursing mothers, Jonas said.

Women in the trial were asked not to breastfeed for the first 10 days after receiving the injection. The drug has a “very, very short half-life” in the body, Jonas said, meaning that it can be metabolized quickly.

The company is also testing SAGE-547 as a treatment for a rare form of epilepsy. It’s in late-stage trials on that front. It’s also working on an oral form of the drug.

Though preliminary, the early results on postpartum depression are tantalizing. One of the drug’s most promising features: It appears to work quickly — some women in the study started experiencing relief after 24 hours. By contrast, traditional antidepressants can take weeks to begin working. The only other treatment for postpartum depression is talk therapy.

SAGE-547’s apparent speed is what’s getting the most attention in the psychiatric community, Baker said. In the early days of motherhood, women ideally build competency and confidence in their parenting. Dealing with postpartum depression derails that process, and it’s linked to increased rates of anxiety and mood disorders among children, she said.

“If we could essentially nip those within 60 hours or even 24 hours and then keep that at bay for at least 30 days, that’s pretty compelling when you think of the alternative,” Baker said.

A serious mood disorder that affects as many as 1 in 7 women after childbirth, postpartum depression can lead to panic attacks, inconsolable sadness, and deep feelings of inadequacy. Some women have thoughts of harming their baby or themselves.

Jonas, a Harvard-trained psychiatrist, has long experience working with treatments for mental illnesses such as depression. He wrote the book “Everything You Need To Know About Prozac” in the early 1990s, in part to counter fear-mongering about the antidepressant.

This story has been updated with additional information.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We will give the story a satisfactory rating because it specifies that 7 of 10 patients given SAGE-547 reported significant improvement in their depression within 60 hours, which persisted for up to 30 days.
However, the story did not tell readers that the depression questionnaire used in this study, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D), has been criticized as placing greater emphasis on sleep than on suicidal thoughts, so that the scores of some patients may improve even if their thoughts of suicide increase.
Readers should have been told that the form of the drug used in this trial is given as an IV solution and that it will not be known if a pill can produce similar results until separate trials are completed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There was a time when the optimal exercise speed was however fast you had to run to get away from a saber-tooth tiger. Even today, in much of the developing world, people exercise through activities such as farming and fetching water that are necessary for survival.

However, in the developed Western world, where exercise tends to be an extracurricular activity, there is apparently tremendous interest in just how fast you should move in order to improve your health. Consider, for example, the many posts on The New York Times’ Well blog on the topic (walking versus running, the “right dose of exercise,” “walk hard, walk easy”), all of which focus on the relative benefits of walking versus jogging versus running.

So is it better to walk? To walk fast? To run slow? To run fast? On its face, this question is poorly posed, since it says nothing about our goals or our constraints. Am I aiming to lose weight? To live longer? To win road races? Am I willing to exercise for three hours a day? Twenty minutes? Almost never? Clearly, these considerations matter when trying to determine the optimal speed. Here is how I would think about asking the question instead: What is the easiest way to reduce my chance of death?

To analyze the impact of walking or running, researchers need a way to describe the effort exerted. The ideal measure would combine the length of time spent exercising with the amount of energy expended — basically, we want to figure out a way to credit people who walk at half the speed for twice as long the same amount as those who walk faster for less time.

The way researchers do this is with a measurement known as MET — metabolic equivalent of task — which gives a numeric value to various activities depending on their energy intensity. By multiplying an activity’s METs by the time you engage in it, you can get an overall measure of how much energy you expend.

The goal here is to use these METs and their relationship to health to analyze the value of walking compared with jogging or running. At least in this article, I won’t say anything about other kinds of exercise — no yoga or SoulCycle — though these have their own MET measures.

Let’s first look at the results from two papers — here and here — that relate energy expenditures from walking (in MET hours per day) to the risk of death.

Doing this analysis is a little complicated. You can’t look at the relationship between exercise and the chance of ever dying, because ultimately everyone dies. Instead, these studies look at whether exercise changes the risk of death at a given time. But since the people in the studies are of different ages, researchers can’t just look to see whether they have, say, a 2 percentage point lower risk of death in a given year, since that lower risk would mean a lot more for someone who is 30 than for someone who is 90. Results in these two papers — and basically all the others we’ll look at here — therefore report their results in “hazard ratios.” A hazard rate of 0.90, for example, means a 10 percent reduction in the risk of death. If there is a 10 in 1,000 chance you’ll die in the next year without exercise, this means by exercising you’d reduce that chance to 9 in 1,000.

This research shows that those who walk have a lower risk of mortality relative to people in the comparison group, who don’t walk for exercise at all (they probably do still walk some, just not for exercise). This risk of death is lower even with a very minimal energy expenditure. The lowest-energy-expenditure group in each study is walking at about 3 mph for 20 to 40 minutes per day. In other words, a mile or two of walking. In exchange, their risk of death goes down by 10 percent.

Walking a bit farther — say, 2 to 3 miles at 3 mph — gets you an additional death reduction of about 30 percent. But walking more than that, or more than an hour a day at this speed, is no better.

Other studies of walking find similar magnitudes. A large meta-analysis found that, on average, walking 1 to 3 miles at about a 20-minute-mile pace results in a reduction in death risk of about 10 percent.

Many of these studies do not separate out speed and duration, but to the extent they do, it seems like walking faster may be better than walking slower. Here is one study that shows large mortality reductions for fast walking even for short periods, and here is another showing that very slow walking has fewer benefits than faster walking.

At first glance, it may seem obvious that the harder you exercise, the better. If walking faster is more energy-intensive than walking slower, and running is more energy-intensive than walking, it seems like the health benefits of running would be even greater. In some sense, you’d hope so, since most of us find running more difficult than walking.

Broadly, over some range, this seems to be right. The chart below shows results for two studies of runners that, again, relate METs to hazard rates of death. Running — even slowly, like 5 mph — is far more energy-intensive than walking. An energy expenditure of 1.19 METs per day (the lowest-energy-expenditure group in the second study here) means about 20 minutes of running a 12-minute mile, three times a week.

Slow running like this appears to have a much larger impact on mortality than walking. A hazard rate of 0.48 — compared with a sedentary group — suggests a much larger reduction in the risk of death than a hazard rate of 0.90. What is a bit surprising about this chart is that running faster or farther doesn’t seem to reduce death rates any more than running slowly and, in fact, in both cases is slightly worse.

In one of these studies it looks like running very intensely (faster than an eight-minute mile, more than four hours a week) increases your risk of death relative to not running at all. But a closer look at the data suggests that this is probably just a statistical artifact: This intense running group contains only 36 people and two deaths, versus hundreds of people in the more casual running groups.

Even if we dismiss the possibility that running harder is worse, it is probably useful to note that running harder or farther doesn’t seem to be better. I have occasionally felt guilty about my thrice-weekly 25-minute runs, especially in comparison to my brother, who runs a 2:45 marathon and once attempted the Leadville Trail 100. It is comforting to know that I can still outlive him.

One general problem with all of this research is that none of these studies is randomized. People who exercise are different from those who do not, and those who exercise more are different from those who exercise less. This should, as usual, give us some pause in trumpeting the virtues of exercise. However, I’d argue that the comparisons the studies make among runners are still valid.

To be more concrete: In most of these studies, the more intense runners are healthier (for example: less likely to smoke and thinner) than the less-intense runners. We may tend to attribute the health of this group to their running habits. The fact that even with this bias we see no large benefit — indeed, seemingly no benefit at all — to running more rather than running less reinforces the value of moderate running.

If we take this research at face value, we learn a few things. First, some exercise reduces your risk of death. Second, the optimal walking/jogging exercise is light to moderate jogging. The optimal speed is between 5 and 7 mph, and if you do 25 minutes about three times a week, you’re all set. Nothing in the data suggests that running more — farther, or faster — will do more to lower your risk of death.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The sole benefit discussed in the story is percent reduction in risk of death in a given year. The story explains this clearly, so it gets a satisfactory. It would have been more interesting — but significantly more complicated — if it had discussed the ways in which cardiovascular exercise reduces the risk of death. Which health risks are addressed here? Heart disease? Hypertension? Also, the story doesn’t look at some of the other benefits of running or jogging, such as possible quality of life benefits. Most runners, for example, actually enjoy running. Still, that wasn’t the focal point of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Novartis is considering trying so-called risk-sharing with some health plans, meaning it might charge more if the drug really does keep people out of the hospital and less if it doesn’t. But such talks, while encouraging, are still in the early stages, a Novartis spokesman said.

Timothy Anderson, pharmaceutical analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, said in a recent note that Entresto was “likely to become a mega-brand over time” but that the initial uptake was “likely to be on the slower side given the entrenched nature of off-patent ACE inhibitors.” He said it was highly unusual that there were no major competitors for Entresto on the way, giving it a “long runway.”

In a clinical trial with more than 8,400 participants, patients were randomly assigned to take either Entresto or enalapril, an ACE inhibitor. Patients in both groups of the study could also take other drugs, such as beta blockers, as their doctors saw fit.

After about 27 months, 21.8 percent of those taking Entresto had either died from cardiovascular causes or had been hospitalized for worsening heart failure, compared with 26.5 percent for those taking enalapril. That represented a relative risk reduction of 20 percent using a measure known as the hazard ratio.

Novartis said that about 2.2 million Americans would be eligible for the drug, which was approved for patients with so-called Class II to Class IV chronic heart failure with so-called reduced ejection fraction. Novartis is sponsoring another study to see if the drug is effective for those with preserved ejection fraction, which accounts for half of heart failure cases.

The F.D.A. said that the main side effects were low blood pressure, high blood potassium levels and kidney impairment. It said there were also cases of angioedema, an allergic reaction that usually results in swelling of the lips or face but can be life threatening if swelling interferes with breathing. Blacks and those with a previous history of the condition were at increased risk, it said.

Entresto is a combination of two drugs, one of which is valsartan, the active ingredient in the blockbuster drug that Novartis sells as Diovan but which now faces generic competition. The other ingredient, sacubitril, inhibits an enzyme known as neprilysin, a new mechanism of action for a heart failure drug.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story gets a hesitant satisfactory score here. Now, we know that reporters rarely, if ever, write the headlines. But somebody at the Times must take responsibility for the confusion caused by this headline, which states that the drug is “Said to Cut Death Risk by 20%.” This starts the story off on an uncertain note, since it’s not clear who said this or where this information is coming from. In the second paragraph, the story cites results from a clinical trial showing “a 20 percent reduction in the risk of death from cardiovascular causes or hospitalization for worsening heart failure.” So, it seems that the drug is not cutting the risk of death by 20 percent, but the risk of death or hospitalization for worsening heart failure. Then again, if you go to the study itself, you learn that there was indeed a 20% reduction in the outcome of “death from cardiovascular causes,” although this doesn’t seem to be the figure that the headline is referring to, since it’s not mentioned in the text. In terms of overall death from any cause — the outcome that most closely resembles the “death risk” mentioned in the headline — the study shows that there was a 16% reduction.
But that’s not the whole story. Much lower down in the article, we learn that this was actually a relative risk reduction — patients in the clinical trial who took Entresto were 20 percent less likely to die or be hospitalized than patients who took a competing drug called enalapril. This sort of risk reduction is not the same as absolute risk reduction, which provides a more meaningful view of the benefit. The story does get credit for eventually providing the absolute risk of hospitalization/mortality in both groups (21.8 percent of those taking Entresto vs. 26.5 percent for those taking enalapril, or  a 4.7% difference), but putting this information far down in the story, after a confusing headline, is less than ideal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Though too early to call it a cure, the procedure has enabled the young people, who have Type I diabetes, to live insulin-free so far, some for as long as three years. The treatment involves stem cell transplants from the patients' own blood.

"It's the first time in the history of Type 1 diabetes where people have gone with no treatment whatsoever ... no medications at all, with normal blood sugars," said study co-author Dr. Richard Burt of Northwestern University's medical school in Chicago.

While the procedure can be potentially life-threatening, none of the 15 patients in the study died or suffered lasting side effects. But it didn't work for two of them.

For now, the new treatment does not apply to the nearly 20 million Americans with Type 2 diabetes, reports CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook. But diabetics are hopeful they'll some day be free of a lifetime of pinpricks and injections.

Larger, more rigorous studies are needed to determine if stem cell transplants could become standard treatment for people with the disease once called juvenile diabetes. It is less common than Type 2 diabetes, which is associated with obesity.

The hazards of stem cell transplantation also raise questions about whether the study should have included children. One patient was as young as 14.

Dr. Lainie Ross, a medical ethicist at the University of Chicago, said the researchers should have studied adults first before exposing young teens to the potential harms of stem cell transplant, which include infertility and late-onset cancers.

In addition, Ross said that the study should have had a comparison group to make sure the treatment was indeed better than standard diabetes care.

Burt, who wrote the study protocol, said the research was done in Brazil because U.S. doctors were not interested in the approach. The study was approved by ethics committees in Brazil, he said, adding that he personally believes it was appropriate to do the research in children as well as adults, as long as the Brazilian ethics panels approved.

Burt and other diabetes experts called the results an important step forward.

"It's the threshold of a very promising time for the field," said Dr. Jay Skyler of the Diabetes Research Institute at the University of Miami.

Skyler wrote an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association, which published the study, saying the results are likely to stimulate research that may lead to methods of preventing or reversing Type I diabetes.

"These are exciting results. They look impressive," said Dr. Gordon Weir of Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does quantify benefits, e.g. 13 out of 15 patients were able to stop taking insulin.  And even though these results look promising at first glance, the story provides cautionary statements that these are just preliminary results.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PITTSBURGH, June 2, 2016 - Surgery to remove the primary tumor in women diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer, followed by the standard combination of therapies, adds months to the patients' lives, compared with standard therapy alone, an international clinical trial led by a University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute (UPCI) professor revealed.

The results of the phase III randomized, controlled trial will be presented Saturday at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) annual meeting in Chicago. The study was selected for the society's "Best of ASCO," an effort to condense the research "most relevant and significant to oncology" into a two-day program to increase global access to cutting-edge science.

"Our findings will change the standard of care for women newly diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer," said principal investigator Atilla Soran, M.D., M.P.H., clinical professor of surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, and breast surgical oncologist with UPMC CancerCenter. "We've shown that surgery to remove the primary tumor--either through lumpectomy or mastectomy--followed by standard therapy, is beneficial over no surgery."

Dr. Soran began the trial in 2007, ultimately recruiting a total of 274 women newly diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer from 25 institutions. Half the women received standard therapy, which avoids surgery and consists of a combination of chemotherapy, hormonal therapy and targeted therapy, while the other half first had surgery to remove their primary breast tumor, followed by the standard therapy.

At about 40 months after diagnosis, the women who received the surgery plus standard therapy lived an average of nine months longer than their counterparts who received standard therapy alone. Nearly 42 percent of the women who received surgery lived to five years after diagnosis, compared with less than 25 percent of the women who did not receive surgery.

The trial also showed that surgery in younger women with less aggressive cancers resulted in longer average survival than in women with more aggressive cancers that had spread to the liver or lungs.

"Our thinking is similar to how you might approach a battle against two enemies," said Dr. Soran. "First you quickly dispatch one army--the primary tumor--leaving you to concentrate all your efforts on battling the second army--any remaining cancer."

This research was primarily funded by the Turkish Federation of Societies for Breast Diseases. The study received scientific advisement from UPMC and assistance with statistical analysis from epidemiologists at the University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health.

As the only NCI-designated comprehensive cancer center in western Pennsylvania, UPCI is a recognized leader in providing innovative cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis, and treatment; bio-medical research; compassionate patient care and support; and community-based outreach services. Investigators at UPCI, a partner with UPMC CancerCenter, are world-renowned for their work in clinical and basic cancer research.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does quantify the benefits, but we have concerns with how the release states: “At about 40 months after diagnosis, the women who received the surgery plus standard therapy lived an average of nine months longer than their counterparts…” This is a difficult sentence to follow since 40 months was the median survival (with a range of 20-51 months). The sentence might be interpreted by some readers that most women lived to at least 40 months, which was not the case.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — ARLINGTON, Va., March 1, 2017 – Results from a new prospective clinical trial indicate that high-dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy administered in a single, 19 Gray (Gy) treatment may be a safe and effective alternative to longer courses of HDR treatment for men with localized prostate cancer. The study is available online in the International Journal of Radiation Oncology ● Biology ● Physics, the flagship journal of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO).

With brachytherapy, also known as internal radiation therapy (RT), implants are surgically inserted in or near cancerous tissue to deliver a curative radiation dose directly to the tumor while limiting exposure for surrounding healthy tissue. Reducing this exposure is of particular concern for treating tumors in the prostate, which is surrounded by multiple critical structures. In contrast to low-dose-rate (LDR) brachytherapy, where radioactive seed implants are placed permanently in the body and gradually deposit low levels of radiation over a period of months, HDR treatments deposit the dose in one treatment, after which the radioactive implant is removed from the patient.

Typically, HDR brachytherapy is administered in four to as many as nine treatment sessions, which generally requires multiple invasive procedures to insert the implants. While the number of sessions can be streamlined by increasing the dose given in each session, data on the safety and tolerability of highly escalated brachytherapy doses are still relatively new and therefore limited. In this study, researchers found that patients who received a single fraction of 19 Gy HDR brachytherapy experienced similar clinical outcomes as with LDR brachytherapy, but with the convenience of a single visit.

“It is becoming apparent that patients may be treated definitively for their prostate cancer in as little as a single day with a minimally invasive outpatient procedure,” said lead study author Daniel J. Krauss, MD, a radiation oncologist at Oakland University’s William Beaumont School of Medicine in Royal Oak, Michigan. “We found that patients generally can resume normal activities the following day with typical side effects.”

The study, which appeared in the Red Journal’s January 2017 issue, presented the results of a nonrandomized, prospective clinical trial of 58 patients with low- or intermediate-risk (non-metastatic) prostate cancer, with a median follow-up period of 2.9 years. All patients received a single, 19 Gy fraction of HDR brachytherapy. The median patient age was 63 years (range 43-73), and 91 percent of the patients presented with stage T1 disease.

At an average of nearly three years following treatment, cancer control rates were favorable and the toxicity profile was highly favorable. Three patients experienced recurrence or progression, yielding an estimated three-year cumulative biochemical control rate of 93 percent. Within the six months following HDR therapy, seven patients (12.1%) experienced grade 2 urinary side effects, most commonly frequency/urgency (6.9%). No patients experienced short-term grade 3+ urinary toxicity or grade 2+ gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity. Rates were similarly modest for long-term side effects. Six patients (10.3%) experienced chronic grade 2 urinary toxicity and one patient (1.7%) experienced grade 3 chronic GI toxicity that subsequently resolved. No patients experienced long-term grade 3+ urinary toxicity or grade 4 GI toxicity.

“This study illustrates that a potentially curative dose of radiation may be delivered safely to the prostate entirely in a single administration,” said Dr. Krauss. “Giving the entire dose in a single treatment theoretically could have had a greater negative impact on the normal tissues in close proximity to the prostate—meaning the bladder, urethra and rectum—but this was not found to be the case. Toxicity rates were extremely low, with essentially no major complications encountered in this initial group of 58 patients.”

While findings highlight the potential tolerability of a single fraction of HDR brachytherapy for localized prostate cancer, the article also emphasizes the need for additional follow-up to compare long-term cancer control rates with conventional treatment approaches, which generally administer larger cumulative doses than the 19 Gy dose used in this trial.

“As the follow-up interval lengthens, 19 Gy dosing in a single fraction may or may not be sufficient to result in cure rates comparable to historical standards. One thing that this study has made clear, however, is that the extremely low toxicity and complication rates leave room to escalate the single fraction dose in subsequent trials,” said Dr. Krauss. “While additional study and longer follow-up are necessary to confirm the optimal dose for single-fraction HDR brachytherapy, we are optimistic that the single-treatment approach can eventually become a standard practice for prostate cancer treatment.”

For more information or a copy of the full study, contact ASTRO’s media relations team at press@astro.org. For the study abstract, visit http://www.redjournal.org/article/S0360-3016(16)33096-6/abstract. For more information about Red Journal, visit www.redjournal.org.

ABOUT ASTROASTRO is the premier radiation oncology society in the world, with more than 10,000 members who are physicians, nurses, biologists, physicists, radiation therapists, dosimetrists and other health care professionals who specialize in treating patients with radiation therapies. As the leading organization in radiation oncology, the Society is dedicated to improving patient care through professional education and training, support for clinical practice and health policy standards, advancement of science and research, and advocacy. ASTRO publishes three medical journals, International Journal of Radiation Oncology
• Biology
• Physics (www.redjournal.org), Practical Radiation Oncology (www.practicalradonc.org) and Advances in Radiation Oncology (www.advancesradonc.org); developed and maintains an extensive patient website, RT Answers (www.rtanswers.org); and created the Radiation Oncology Institute (www.roinstitute.org), a nonprofit foundation to support research and education efforts around the world that enhance and confirm the critical role of radiation therapy in improving cancer treatment. To learn more about ASTRO, visit www.astro.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The main benefit focused on a vaguely described “biochemical progression,” which means that there was some evidence that prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels increased.  PSA is a protein produced by both cancerous and noncancerous tissue in the prostate. Determining PSA progression is more complicated following radiation because it takes time for the PSA level to stabilize (unlike following surgery to remove the prostate) before you can determine whether the PSA is rising.  Biochemical progression is also a surrogate measure and does not imply that the cancer is–or will–clinically progress.
The researchers did acknowledge that the actual benefits are unknown, saying that “as the follow-up interval lengthens, 19 Gy dosing in a single fraction may or may not be sufficient to result in cure rates comparable to historical standards.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a step toward developing a blood test that would detect eight common cancers, possibly even before symptoms appear.

As they report Thursday in the journal Science, they're hoping their idea would eventually lead to a $500 test that can screen for cancer and identify people with the disease when it's in its earliest stages and more treatable.

But they have a long way to go.

There have been many attempts over the decades to develop blood tests to screen for cancers. Some look for proteins in the blood that appear with cancer. Others more recently have focused on DNA from tumors. But these methods alone don't give reliable results.

So Nickolas Papadopoulos, a professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, collaborated with many colleagues at the medical school to develop a new approach. It combines two methods into one test.

Their experimental test, dubbed CancerSEEK, focuses on eight major cancers: lung, breast, colon, pancreas, liver, stomach, ovary and esophagus.

"We selected those eight cancers based on how frequent they are, also [because] a lot of them do not have any screening modality right now," Papadopoulos says.

The researchers looked at 1,005 people who had been diagnosed with these cancers. The blood test found signs of cancer in about 70 percent of them.

They also looked at 812 people without cancer diagnoses and found just seven of them — less than 1 percent — apparently had a false reading that found cancer. A low false-positive rate is critical for any test that could be used widely to screen people for cancer.

Of course, the ultimate goal of this test is to find cancer in people who haven't already been diagnosed. And that percentage could well be lower than the 70 percent average. For example, the test was successful only about 40 percent of the time in the patients the researchers studied with the earliest stage 1 cancers.

Though 40 percent success would be far from ideal, "we still think this is a very important milestone in detecting cancers in asymptomatic people," Papadopoulos says. "That could save their life."

"I am incredibly excited by this new paper," says Joshua Schiffman, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Huntsman Cancer Center at the University of Utah who was not involved in the study. "This is the paper that's going to set the field in motion."

But Schiffman points out that there are many issues to work out – even assuming the test proves reliable among people who have not been previously diagnosed with cancer. For instance, if the success rate is around 40 percent at detecting cancer, that means it misses cancers more often than it finds it.

"The thing we worry about quite often is ... if we have a test result that is negative we don't want to give false reassurance to the patient," he says. He is concerned that patients will think to themselves, "Even though I have this weird stomach pain that won't go away, I know it's not cancer. I'm not going to go to the doctor because the CancerSEEK test told me it was negative," Schiffman says. "And that would be a terrible thing."

Another problem is that the test results find signs of cancer, but often fail to pinpoint which part of the body is affected. "That's a tremendous problem that has to be overcome," he says.

"We've come about one step in a thousand-mile journey," says Vinay Prasad, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Oregon Health and Science University who was not involved in the study.

First, he notes, the Hopkins team will need to demonstrate that the test will be useful in patients without symptoms. Then the researchers will need to show that the rate of false alarms remains very low, otherwise people will be sent on needless and expensive medical odysseys.

And for the test to be useful, "you've got to find cancer that's going to otherwise be lethal, and not cancer that would otherwise be destined to do nothing," Prasad says.

That's been a huge problem with previous cancer screening tests, especially for prostate cancer and breast cancer, and has led to pointless and potentially dangerous treatments, he says.

An effective screening test would hold lots of potential for cancer patients, Prasad says.

"We want this to be true, we hope that this is true, but we have learned through 30, 40, 50 years of cancer screening that we have to do the right studies at the outset to know that it's true," Prasad says.

The scientists at Hopkins have already launched their next study, which could involve tens of thousands of apparently healthy volunteers who are enrolled in the Geisinger Health Plan in Pennsylvania. Their experience will help answer the next big question, which is whether CancerSEEK will pick up cancer in people who don't have symptoms.

If that multiyear experiment succeeds, the researchers will still have to demonstrate that the test improves and extends the lives of cancer patients.

Papadopoulos is less concerned that the test could detect cancers that might not in fact benefit from treatment.

"In a personal level, I do want to know," he says. "That doesn't mean I have to go and have a surgery. However, I still think this is very useful information, knowing that something is happening and follow it up."

As for the cost of the test, Papadopoulos says the research team has tried hard to make it affordable. They're hoping to make it economical, so that each test could cost about $500. But he says Johns Hopkins holds the patent and has not licensed it as yet to a company that would ultimately set the price.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story makes the two key results of the test quite clear. First, that the 1,005 people tested already had been diagnosed with one of eight common cancers, and the blood test was able to detect cancer in about 70 percent of them. Second, the test was also given to 812 people without cancer and only a false reading for cancer less than 1 percent of the time.
Including the additional finding that the test was only able to detect cancer in about 40 percent of the patients with early cancer (ie. stage I) was a thoughtful way of introducing the relevant issue of falsely negative tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PROVIDENCE, R.I. [Brown University] -- New results from a clinical trial involving more than 900 military veterans at high risk for keratinocyte carcinoma skin cancer provides evidence that using the generic skin cream fluorouacil 5 percent for two to four weeks may reduce the risk of a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) needing surgery by 75 percent within a year.

The finding that less than one month's use of fluorouacil 5% (5-FU) appeared to prevent cancer for up to a year is encouraging, said lead author Dr. Martin A. Weinstock, a professor of dermatology in the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University and chief of dermatology at the Providence Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

The dose is the same as dermatologists currently employ to treat actinic keratosis. In a 2015 study, Weinstock and co-authors showed the up to four-week regimen of 5-FU had a multi-year preventive benefit in reducing the number of actinic keratosis (AK) and the need for treatment. Earlier this year, they also showed that the medicine prevents new AKs from emerging for two to three years.

Meanwhile, current means for preventing new carcinomas in high-risk patients -- sunscreen or oral medications -- cease to work as soon as they are no longer used. But in the new study, 5-FU appeared to provide prolonged protection after discontinuation and could be combined with sunscreen, Weinstock said.

In the absence of such a long-lasting prevention option, he said, the typical approach to caring for patients with a history of prior carcinomas is to monitor for the next cancer and then remove it surgically -- an effective but imposing strategy often called "wait and cut."

"People don't appreciate having stuff cut on their face a lot," said Weinstock, who led the trial funded by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and conducted at a dozen V.A. hospitals around the country. "They do it if there is a cancer there, but we want to take a proactive approach where we can give them something to reduce their risk of getting new cancers."

The new results are published in JAMA Dermatology.

Between 2009 and 2013, the Veterans Affairs Keratinocyte Carcinoma Chemoprevention Trial randomly assigned 932 veterans who each had at least two prior basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) or SCCs to either receive the 5-FU cream or a cream just like it but without the active ingredient as an experimental control. All of the veterans were instructed to apply their cream twice a day to their face and ears for up to four weeks. They also received a 30 SPF sunscreen and received education about skin cancer, sunscreen and sun safety.

The two groups were both almost exclusively white and male, and they averaged 71 years of age. The experimental and control groups were very similar along all other measured characteristics, including their self- reported degree of prior sun exposure and sunburn. Veterans typically have spent a large amount of time in the sun during their years of service.

Both groups went to their V.A. center twice a year for two to four years for follow-up exams with a dermatologist. Neither the veterans nor the examining dermatologists knew who received 5-FU and who received the placebo.

After the first year, 20 of the 464 veterans in the control group developed a squamous cell carcinoma that required surgery, but only five of the 468 veterans who got 5-FU did, a statistically significant 75 percent reduction in the risk, according to the study. For the subsequent three years, there was no longer a significant difference between the two groups in the number of patients who required surgical treatment for an SCC.

For BCCs, there was an 11 percent reduced risk after the first year among the group that received 5-FU, but that difference was not statistically significant. In the second year, BCC cases requiring surgery rose in the 5-FU group, but in years three and four, and by the end of the study, there was no significant overall difference in risk of developing a BCC requiring surgical treatment. After four years, 298 of all study the participants had developed at least one BCC, and 108 had developed at least one SCC.

The study did show a significant decrease in the risk of needing Mohs surgery to treat a BCC in the first year. Mohs surgery is more effective but also more elaborate and expensive than a conventional procedure, Weinstock said. In the study's first year, 36 BCCs were treated with Mohs surgery in 27 participants in the control group, but only 17 BCCs were treated with the procedure among 14 patients in the 5-FU group.

"This suggests that using the 5-FU can reduce the resources needed to treat these carcinomas," Weinstock said.

The cream does have common side effects including reddened, more sensitive and often crusty skin, effects that resolve when the application of the cream stops, Weinstock acknowledged. After the study's first six months, 21 percent of the 5-FU group rated the side effects as "severe," and 40 percent rated them as "moderate."

But after six months and again at the end of the four-year trial, 87 percent of participants in the 5-FU group said they'd be willing to repeat the treatment if it proved effective in reducing skin cancer.

In his clinical work, Weinstock said that for particularly high-risk patients, he has recommended 5-FU treatment. Based on the study results, it could be that patients need to renew their regimen with the cream every year.

"The most remarkable thing about this study is that now we have something to use that doesn't lose its effectiveness when you stop using it," Weinstock said. "But this is the first study of its type. I'm hopeful there will be other studies that show other sorts of regimens that last longer and do a better job over time as science progresses. This is an important first step."

He and colleagues are planning further studies, including one to determine the cost-effectiveness of 5-FU treatment.

In addition to Weinstock, the new study has many authors from the VAKCC trial including at each of the study's 12 sites: Boston; Bay Pines, Fla.; Chicago, Ill.; Palo Alto, Calif.; Atlanta; Loma Linda Calif.; Minneapolis; Nashville; Denver; Durham, N.C.; Philadelphia; and Miami.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states:  “After the first year, 20 of the 464 veterans in the control group developed a squamous cell carcinoma that required surgery, but only five of the 468 veterans who got 5-FU did, a statistically significant 75 percent reduction in the risk, according to the study. For the subsequent three years, there was no longer a significant difference between the two groups in the number of patients who required surgical treatment for an SCC.
There were six outcomes measured and only the difference in squamous cell carcinomas at one year was statistically significant while the other five were not. This suggests that the one statistically significant difference could have been caused by chance alone or that there truly is a difference but only in this one period of time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Washington, DC -- Men can take birth control shots to prevent pregnancy in their female partners, according to a new study published in the Endocrine Society's Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism.

Researchers are still working to perfect the combination of hormonal contraceptives to reduce the risk of mild to moderate side effects, including depression and other mood disorders.

While women can choose from a number of birth control methods, men have few options to control their own fertility. Available methods for men include condoms, vasectomies and withdrawal.

Better birth control options are needed for men. In 2012, 40 percent of all pregnancies worldwide were unintended, according to the Guttmacher Institute.

"The study found it is possible to have a hormonal contraceptive for men that reduces the risk of unplanned pregnancies in the partners of men who use it," said one of the study's authors, Mario Philip Reyes Festin, MD, of the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland. "Our findings confirmed the efficacy of this contraceptive method previously seen in small studies."

The prospective Phase II single arm, multi-center study tested the safety and effectiveness of injectable contraceptives in 320 healthy men ages 18 to 45. The participants had all been in monogamous relationships with female partners between the ages of 18 and 38 for at least a year. The men underwent testing to ensure they had a normal sperm count at the start of the study.

The men received injections of 200 milligrams of a long-acting progestogen called norethisterone enanthate (NET-EN) and 1,000 milligrams of a long-acting androgen called testosterone undecanoate (TU) for up to 26 weeks to suppress their sperm counts. Healthcare professionals gave the men two injections every eight weeks. Participants initially provided semen samples after eight and 12 weeks in the suppression phase and then every 2 weeks until they met the criteria for the next phase. During this time, the couples were instructed to use other non-hormonal birth control methods.

Once a participant's sperm count was lowered to less than 1 million/ml in two consecutive tests, the couple was asked to rely on the injections for birth control. During this period known as the efficacy phase of the study, the men continued to receive injections every eight weeks for up to 56 weeks. Participants provided semen samples every eight weeks to ensure their sperm counts stayed low. Once the participants stopped receiving the injections, they were monitored to see how quickly their sperm counts recovered.

The hormones were effective in reducing the sperm count to 1 million/ml or less within 24 weeks in 274 of the participants. The contraceptive method was effective in nearly 96 percent of continuing users. Only four pregnancies occurred among the men's partners during the efficacy phase of the study.

Researchers stopped enrolling new participants in the study in 2011 due to the rate of adverse events, particularly depression and other mood disorders, reported by the participants. The men reported side effects including injection site pain, muscle pain, increased libido and acne. Twenty men dropped out of the study due to side effects.

Despite the adverse effects, more than 75 percent of participants reported being willing to use this method of contraception at the conclusion of the trial.

Of the 1,491 reported adverse events, nearly 39 percent were found to be unrelated to the contraceptive injections. These included one death by suicide which was assessed not to be related to the use of the drug. Serious adverse events that were assessed as probably or possibly related to the study included one case of depression, one intentional overdose of acetaminophen, and a man who experienced an abnormally fast and irregular heartbeat after he stopped receiving the injections.

"More research is needed to advance this concept to the point that it can be made widely available to men as a method of contraception," Festin said. "Although the injections were effective in reducing the rate of pregnancy, the combination of hormones needs to be studied more to consider a good balance between efficacy and safety."

The study, "Efficacy and Safety of an Injectable Combination Hormonal Contraceptive for Men," will be published online at http://press. , ahead of print.

Other authors of the study include: Hermann M. Behre of Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg in Halle, Germany; Michael Zitzmann of the University of Münster in Münster, Germany; Richard A. Anderson of The University of Edinburgh in Edinburgh, United Kingdom; David J. Handelsman of the University of Sydney and Concord Hospital in Sydney, Australia; Silvia W. Lestari of the University of Indonesia in Jakarta, Indonesia; Robert I. McLachlan of Monash Medical Centre in Melbourne, Australia; M. Cristina Meriggiola of the University of Bologna in Bologna, Italy; Man Mohan Misro of the National Institute of Health & Family Welfare in New Dehli, India; Gabriela Noe of the Instituto Chileno de Medicina Reproductiva in Santiago, Chile; Frederick C. W. Wu of Manchester Royal Infirmary in Manchester, U.K.; Ndema A. Habib and Kirsten M. Vogelsong of the World Health Organization of Geneva, Switzerland; and Marianne M. Callahan, Kim A. Linton and Doug S. Colvard of CONRAD, East Virginia Medical School, a reproductive health organization based in Arlington, VA.

The research was co-sponsored and funded by UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Program of Research, Development, and Research Training in Human Reproduction in Geneva, Switzerland, and CONRAD (using funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the U.S. Agency for International Development). The injectable hormones were provided by Schering AG, which has since merged with Bayer Pharma AG.

For more information on men's health, visit the Endocrine Society's centennial website.

Endocrinologists are at the core of solving the most pressing health problems of our time, from diabetes and obesity to infertility, bone health, and hormone-related cancers. The Endocrine Society is the world's oldest and largest organization of scientists devoted to hormone research and physicians who care for people with hormone-related conditions.

The Society, which is celebrating its centennial in 2016, has more than 18,000 members, including scientists, physicians, educators, nurses and students in 122 countries. To learn more about the Society and the field of endocrinology, visit our site at http://www. . Follow us on Twitter at @TheEndoSociety and @EndoMedia.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that hormone shots were effective at reducing sperm count to less than 1 million/mil within 24 weeks in 274 participants and was effective in nearly 96 percent of continuing users, with four pregnancies occurring among the men’s partners during the efficacy phase of the study. It also stated that more than 75 percent of participants reporting being willing to use this method of contraception at the conclusion of the trial.
That’s the plus side. One omission from the release was the absence of a control group. Without a control group it’s not possible to accurately calculate the effectiveness. The study reported four pregnancies among the men taking the injection. How many pregnancies would be expected for a similar group not getting the shots? The news release doesn’t say.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new paper in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute finds that testing for cervical cancer using HPV testing in addition to the Pap smear is unlikely to detect cancer cases that wouldn't be found using HPV testing alone.

The main goal of cervical screening programs is to detect and treat precancer before cancer develops. Cytology-based screening, known as the Pap test or Pap smear, is used to detect abnormal cells. The Pap test can also find noncancerous conditions, such as infections and inflammation.

Cervical cancer screening guidelines have changed dramatically over the last 15 years, following introduction of testing for the dozen high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) types that cause virtually all cervical cancer and its precursors. Despite more research into HPV, and the introduction of preventive HPV vaccines, screening will remain important and comprise many millions of tests annually for decades to come. But improved screening methods have also introduced some confusion, even controversy.

HPV testing is more sensitive than the Pap test for detecting precancer. The HPV test captures the known cancer causing viruses, but there are gynecologists who believe that there may be unknown cancer causing viruses and so continue to do the Pap smear (plus HPV testing).

However, reports of rare HPV-negative, Pap-test-positive cancers are motivating continued use of both tests (cotesting) despite increased testing costs. An HPV test, in which doctors test a cervicovaginal specimen for the presence of the nucleic acids of carcinogenic types of HPV, is more sensitive than the Pap test (a microscopic examination of exfoliated cells) for detection of precancers. Thus, if a single screening method were chosen to complement HPV vaccination, primary HPV testing likely would gradually supplant the Pap test.

In the US, an interim guidance issued by a committee of experts from several clinical societies recommended primary HPV testing every three years, the same as the Pap test. Alternatively, current guidelines recommend cotesting but, in recognition of the additional reassurance provided by this approach compared with the Pap test alone, the screening interval is extended to every five years. Draft guidelines from the US Preventive Services Task Force recently recommended either primary HPV testing every five years or the Pap test every three years for women 30 to 64, and did not recommend cotesting.

The accumulated evidence supports inclusion of HPV testing in screening; thus, the main choice moving forward is between cotesting and primary HPV testing alone.

Researchers were searching for realistic performance data to quantify the additional benefit of the Pap test component of cotesting, as the costs of intensive screening of all women using two screening tests are substantial.

In January 2003, just prior to US FDA approval of HPV and Pap test cotesting in mid-2003 and interim guidelines in 2004, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, a large integrated health care organization, introduced three-year cotesting in women aged 30 years and older. Kaiser Permanente has now screened over a million women by cotesting. This remains the most extensive experience of HPV testing incorporated into routine screening in the world.

Researchers here quantified the detection of cervical precancer and cancer by cotesting compared with HPV testing alone at Kaiser Permanente, where 1,208,710 women have undergone triennial cervical cotesting since 2003. Screening histories preceding cervical cancers (n=623) and precancers (n=5,369) were examined to assess the relative contribution of the Pap test and HPV test components in identifying cases.

The analysis found that HPV testing identified more women subsequently diagnosed with cancer and precancer than the Pap test. HPV testing was statistically significantly more likely to be positive for cancer at any time point, except within 12 months. HPV-negative/ Pap test-positive results preceded only small fractions of cases of precancer (3.5%) and cancer (5.9%); these cancers were more likely to be regional or distant stage than other cases.

Given the rarity of cancers among screened women, the contribution of the Pap test to screening translated to earlier detection of at most five cases per million women per year. Two-thirds (67.9%) of women found to have cancer up to 10 years of follow-up at Kaiser Permanente were detected by the first cotest performed.

The researchers conclude that the added sensitivity of cotesting versus HPV alone for detection of treatable cancer affected extremely few women.?

The paper "Relative Performance of HPV and Cytology Components of Cotesting in Cervical Screening" is available at: https:/

To request a copy of the study, please contact: Daniel Luzer

 daniel.luzer@oup.com
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release is comparing two different screening methods, which both have benefits, to using either one of them alone.
We were especially pleased that the release included a clear description of the benefit using absolute, rather than just a relative, risk number.
“Given the rarity of cancers among screened women, the contribution of the Pap test to screening translated to earlier detection of at most five cases per million women per year. Two-thirds (67%) of women found to have cancer up to 10 years of follow-up at Kaiser Permanente were detected by the first cotest performed.”
Besides this number, the release included specific numbers for benefits of each test.
“HPV-negative/Pap test-positive results preceded only small fractions of cases of precancer (3.6%) and cancer (5.9%); these cancers were more likely to be regional or distant stage than other cases.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philadelphia, PA, June 2, 2016 - Basal cell carcinoma is one of the most common cancers and its incidence is increasing worldwide, putting a significant burden on health services. Topical treatments are available for superficial basal cell carcinoma (BCC) but there has a lack of long-term follow-up data to guide treatment decisions. A three-year randomized controlled clinical trial has found that two topical creams are effective in most primary, low-risk superficial BCC, comparing favorably with photodynamic therapy (PDT), as reported by investigators in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.

More than 80% of all skin cancers are BCC, arising from the basal cells (i.e., small, round cells found in the lower layer of the epidermis). There are over two million cases a year in the U.S. and the lifetime risk of developing a BCC before the age of 85 years is one in five people. The prognosis is excellent, but it can cause significant disfigurement by invading surrounding tissues.

While most types of BCC require surgery, superficial BCC can be treated topically with noninvasive treatments such as PDT, imiquimod cream, fluorouracil cream, cryosurgery or electrodessication and curettage.

Investigators in the Netherlands report the results of a three-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial that compared three noninvasive treatments that included imiquimod and fluorouracil cream. "The main advantages of noninvasive treatments are good cosmetic outcome, preservation of surrounding tissue, and potential for home application of either creams," explained lead investigator Marieke Roozeboom of the Department of Dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Center in the Netherlands. "Throughout the last two decades there has been a growing interest in these non-surgical therapies, which offer the possibility of avoiding surgery and reducing demands on busy medical practices."

However, prior to this study there has been a lack of randomized controlled trials with a long-term follow-up that compare the effectiveness of noninvasive treatments. Consequently, there is no consensus in international BCC guidelines on the first choice of noninvasive therapy for superficial BCC.

A total of 601 patients with a superficial BCC participated in this study: 202 patients were treated with methylaminolevulinate photodynamic therapy (MAL-PDT), 198 with imiquimod cream, and 201 with fluorouracil cream. The three study groups had a similar distribution of baseline characteristics, with the exception of tumor size.

Around 80% of patients with superficial BCC were tumor free after imiquimod treatment after three years. The clearance rate was 68% for patients treated with fluorouracil and 58% for individuals receiving PDT.

"Based on our findings, both imiquimod and fluorouracil are effective noninvasive treatments in most primary, low-risk superficial BCC, but the data provide no definite evidence for superiority of imiquimod to fluorouracil," commented Dr. Roozeboom. "Both creams have an equal cosmetic outcome and risk of local adverse events. Fluorouracil has the advantage of being less expensive than imiquimod. However, between one- and three-year follow-up, more recurrences were diagnosed in the fluorouracil group compared with the imiquimod group."

"When choosing a treatment for an individual patient with a superficial BCC, other factors like age, compliance, and patient preferences should always be taken into account. For example, we have found that in superficial BCC on the lower extremities in older patients, PDT should be prescribed rather than imiquimod. Our evidence indicates that a personalized treatment approach is necessary," added Dr. Roozeboom.

"Three year follow-up results of photodynamic therapy versus imiquimod versus fluorouracil for treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: a single blind, noninferiority, randomized controlled trial," by Marieke H. Roozeboom, MD, Aimee H.M.M. Arits, PhD, Klara Mosterd, PhD, Anja Sommer, PhD, Brigitte A.B. Essers, PhD, Michette J.M. de Rooij, PhD, Patricia J.F. Quaedvlieg, PhD, Peter M. Steijlen, PhD, Patty J. Nelemans, PhD, and Nicole W.J. Kelleners-Smeets, PhD (doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2016.03.043), published online in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology by Elsevier.

Full text of this article is available to credentialed journalists upon request. Contact George Woodward at 1-215-605-3050 or g.woodward@elsevier.com to obtain copies. Journalists who wish to speak with the authors should contact Marieke H. Roozeboom at 31-433-877 295 or mh.roozeboom@mumc.nl.

About the Journal of Investigative Dermatology

Journal of Investigative Dermatology (JID), with an Impact Factor of 7.216, is the leading journal in dermatology*. The journal publishes reports describing original research on all aspects of cutaneous biology and skin disease. Topics include biochemistry, biophysics, carcinogenesis, cell regulation, clinical research, development, embryology, epidemiology and other population-based research, extracellular matrix, genetics, immunology, melanocyte biology, microbiology, molecular and cell biology, pathology, percutaneous absorption, pharmacology, photobiology, physiology, skin structure, and wound healing. http://www. ,org *2014 Journal Citations Report published by Thomson Reuters ©2015

Elsevier is a world-leading provider of information solutions that enhance the performance of science, health, and technology professionals, empowering them to make better decisions, deliver better care, and sometimes make groundbreaking discoveries that advance the boundaries of knowledge and human progress. Elsevier provides web-based, digital solutions -- among them ScienceDirect, Scopus, Elsevier Research Intelligence and ClinicalKey -- and publishes over 2,500 journals, including The Lancet and Cell, and more than 33,000 book titles, including a number of iconic reference works. Elsevier is part of RELX Group, a world-leading provider of information and analytics for professional and business customers across industries. http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release gives us lots of data — a total of 601 patients with a superficial BCC participated in this study: 202 patients were treated with methylaminolevulinate photodynamic therapy (MAL-PDT), 198 with imiquimod cream, and 201 with fluorouracil cream.
And then it gives us the results: “Around 80% of patients with superficial BCC were tumor free after imiquimod treatment after three years. The clearance rate was 68% for patients treated with fluorouracil and 58% for individuals receiving PDT.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The cancer drug that former president Jimmy Carter says made his melanoma seemingly disappear has helped about 40 percent of similar patients survive for as long as three years, oncologists said Wednesday.

The drug, called Keytruda, takes a new approach to treating cancer by stopping tumor cells from cloaking themselves against the normal, healthy immune system response.

New data about to be released to a meeting of cancer specialists shows that 40 percent of the patients who have been taking the drug are still alive three years later. That compares to about 5 percent of patients given the standard therapy, interleukin, the American Society for Clinical Oncology (ASCO) says.

That means 60 percent of patients are not living that long — but it’s still far more than the usual 11-month survival with advanced melanoma.

“It is definitely a huge benefit over what we have seen in the past,” said ASCO president Dr. Julie Vose, a specialist in blood cancers at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.

Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer. It will be diagnosed in more than 76,000 Americans this year, according to the American Cancer Society, and it will kill 10,000.

Rates are rising, in part because tanning became fashionable. Melanoma is easy to cure when caught early, but it is often hard to tell if a mole or freckle has turned cancerous. Carter, for example, was only diagnosed once the tumors had spread to his brain, last fall.

That’s Stage IV cancer and it’s almost always deadly at that stage. But Carter has remained well enough to continue teaching his weekly Sunday school classes and said this past Sunday he’d just traveled to London.

He says there’s no trace of his cancer now.

“In the past, patients with this type of melanoma — he has metastases to the brain — you don’t even see responses to therapy,” Vose told NBC News. “This is something really different than what we have seen in the past.”

Other people are having similar experiences.

For the trial, Caroline Robert of Gustave Roussy and Paris-Sud University in France and colleagues treated 655 patients with advanced melanoma.

"These are patients whose disease cannot be surgically removed, cannot be cured by surgery and usually the majority of these patients have disease that involved vital organs," said Dr. Stephen Hodi, a melanoma specialist at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute who worked on the study.

Seventy-five percent of them had already been given other cancer treatments, including Yervoy, known generically as ipilimumab.

On average, the patients lived two years and 40 percent of them are still alive three years later. About 15 percent of these patients have what’s called a complete remission, meaning there is no trace of their tumors. That doesn’t mean a cure — it’s too soon to say that — but it does mean months or years of cancer-free life that they otherwise could not have hoped for.

And 61 of the patients, or 9 percent, have stopped taking the drug after their tumors went away. Virtually all of them are still in remission.

“This is huge in the melanoma community,” said Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.

“It's difficult to know at what point you call it a cure. For the patient, though, it means they are cancer-free and for some of those patients, it is likely that their cancer never will come back,” Turnham told NBC News.

“When this study was started the average life expectancy of someone with advanced melanoma was 11 months and now we're seeing that a large percentage of people are living at least three years.”

Keytruda — known generically as pembrolizumab — targets the activity of genes called PD-1 (anti-programmed-death-receptor-1) and PD-L1. The interaction between the two genes lets some tumors escape detection and destruction by immune system cells.

PD-1 stops immune cells from attacking normal healthy cells by mistake. Tumor cells make PD-L1 turn on PD-1 when immune cells approach. Keytruda, an engineered immune protein called a monoclonal antibody, disrupts this signal and lets the immune cells attack the tumor cell.

The drug works far better in patients whose tumors express more PD-1, meaning they have a lot of PD-1 activity, so the drug will optimally be used jointly with a test for PD-1. There are side-effects, including fatigue, itchiness and rash. It was bad enough for 8 percent of patients that they stopped taking it.

The Food and Drug Administration gave Keytruda accelerated approval for melanoma in 2014. It's got breakthrough therapy designation for Hodgkin's lymphoma and colon cancer and got accelerated approval for lung cancer.

“In a matter of a few years, these therapies have truly transformed the outlook for patients with melanoma and many other hard-to-treat cancers,” said Dr. Don Dizon, an oncologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and a spokesman for ASCO.

Keytruda's being tested in other cancer types now.

Earlier Wednesday, the FDA gave accelerated approval to a drug that works in a similar way.

It approved Tecentriq, known generically as atezolizumab, for use in patients with advanced bladder cancer.

Like Keytruda, Tecentriq is a monoclonal antibody. It goes straight to PD-L1, so its target is slightly different.

FDA’s approval was made on the basis of a trial that showed 12 percent of patients with advanced bladder cancer who had high levels of PD-L1 activity saw their tumors disappear, compared to 5.5 percent of patients on other treatments. Another 14 percent had a partial response, meaning their tumors shrank a little, compared to 9.4 percent on standard treatment.

The drugs must be infused and they are pricey. Keytruda costs about $12,500 a month, or $150,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’re given the total study population of 655 people with advanced melanoma, and how the average patient lived 2 years. The story also notes a 3-year survival of 40%, which the headline teases, and notes a 15% “complete remission” result. We’re also glad the story was frank about the fact that 60% of patients didn’t live three years.
The story does a nice job putting those numbers into perspective by quoting Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation, who notes people with a similar diagnosis typically only live 11 months.
Although no study can account for all variables, a doubling of lifespan with limited side effects is worth writing home about.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hoping to reduce her thighs and midsection without the risks and inconvenience of liposuction, she paid $2,300 for six treatments from a chiropractor in the Denver area. Even though she continued to diet and work out, she had no change in her thighs, belly and hips. Her doctor offered her three more sessions at no cost. Still, no change.

Since most aesthetic medicine is elective, and not covered by insurance, marketing plays a major role in capturing the minds and wallets of consumers. The concern is that promoting innovations for indications that the Food and Drug Administration hasn’t approved will fuel patient expectations that clinical data may not substantiate.

Zeltiq Aesthetics, based in Pleasanton, Calif., is a cautious wallflower that aims to get the data behind its device approved by the F.D.A. before it makes too rowdy an entrance to the party. Its slogan is “More Science. Less Fat.”

Meanwhile, Erchonia Medical, based in McKinney, Tex., has aggressively marketed its Zerona laser as “the first non-invasive body contouring procedure to effectively remove excess fat” even though it has yet to receive F.D.A. clearance to promote this use. (In general, the F.D.A. must sanction a medical device for a specific use before a company can market that use. But doctors are free to use devices off label. )

Nonetheless, a brochure for Zerona states patients can collectively “lose up to 9 inches without the pain or down time of surgery.” Nationwide, medical spas, chiropractors, cosmetic surgeons, plastic surgeons and dermatologists now offer Zerona for $1,700 to $3,800 for six sessions. Part of the reason the device has made inroads during these strapped times is that doctors don’t buy it outright, but pay per use.

So how is Zerona supposed to work? The low-level laser causes “fat to seep out of a cell, almost like a balloon being struck by a needle,” said Ryan Maloney, medical director for Erchonia Medical. The fat enters the lymphatic system, and is eventually used as energy, Dr. Maloney said.

Zeltiq uses controlled cooling to target and eliminate fat cells, a process called selective cryolipolysis. Skin isn’t damaged, but subcutaneous fat, which is more sensitive to targeted cold, begins a two-month death march soon after exposure to Zeltiq.

Doctors on the advisory board for Zeltiq Aesthetics have put the word out about it on television news segments. But at this stage, the company itself has been careful not to promote its device directly to consumers since its F.D.A. clearances for, say, pain reduction during dermatologic treatments don’t encompass fat reduction. Gordie Nye, the chief executive, sent an e-mail message declining to be interviewed for this article.

The company has clinical data that has been submitted to the F.D.A. for approval, according to a few doctors who were principal investigators. Data relayed at a meeting of the American Society of Dermatologic Surgery showed a 22 percent reduction of the fat layer as measured by ultrasound.

Erchonia Medical has published the results of its clinical trial in Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. Thirty-five patients in the treatment group lost an average of 3.5 inches total in hips, thighs and their midsection according to the company’s clinical trial. The company has promoted Zerona as “a new body-sculpting procedure designed to remove fat and contour the body without invasive surgery.” But the F.D.A. has not sanctioned marketing this use. It has cleared the Zerona laser for pain reduction 24 hours after breast augmentation or as a way to decrease the pain associated with recovering from liposuction.

In general, Karen Riley, a spokeswoman for the F.D.A., said “it is considered off-label promotion if you are marketing to the public a use that has not been cleared.” Steven Shanks, the president of Erchonia Medical, said, “Since we use the exact same power for liposuction and breast augmentation, we self-certified the device.” He said that in January 2009, the company had applied for a 510K clearance — which is based on the notion that an older device is substantially equivalent to a new one — and had yet to receive it. (Such a delay is atypical, Ms. Riley said, adding, “most 510Ks are cleared within six months.”)

Last month, Dr. Robert B. Seltzer, a dermatologist in Pasadena, Calif., ran an advertisement in The Los Angeles Times for an informational seminar that called Zerona “the holy grail.” In a phone interview, however, he said, “I’m not 100 percent convinced” and planned to return his Zerona if he didn’t continue seeing results in his patients. (So far 5 out of 6 have been pleased.)

After reviewing Erchonia Medical’s clinical study, Dr. Brian M. Kinney, a plastic surgeon in Los Angeles, said, “I can’t prove that it works.” His concerns are that the tape measure method of gauging circumferential changes “isn’t consistently reliable.” What’s more, study participants and the placebo group were assessed only two weeks after their last treatment, not long enough to measure adequately whether results last.

Dr. Kinney doesn’t have a Zerona or a Zeltiq cooling device, though in the case of the latter, he said, “it is well documented that freezing fat tissue aggressively enough can lead to fat necrosis,” or, fat dying, over a few months.

Patient selection for any body contouring procedure is crucial, said Dr. Jeffrey M. Kenkel, vice chairman of plastic surgery at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. Dr. Kenkel, who recently replicated results of Zerona’s clinical trial in 12 of his patients, doesn’t offer Zerona to obese patients, or to ones who have had surgery in the area they want treated. “It’s critical to be evaluated by a doctor,” he said.

Success is also dependent on diet and exercise, he said. If you’re sedentary and not eating healthy food, he said, then once fat is leaked after Zerona treatments, “your body will just store it again.”

How the body rids itself of fat, and how quickly, after any noninvasive body slimming procedure is unclear, said Dr. Lawrence S. Bass, a plastic surgeon in Manhattan who started using a Zeltiq device last July. That includes, he said, forthcoming devices like UltraShape and LipoSonix, which employ ultrasound waves to single out fat. It’s a “sticking point with the F.D.A. with all these things,” he said. Dr. Bass was not a clinical investigator for Zeltiq, but he said, “I’m convinced both on the science and clinical experience, it’s able to eliminate fat noninvasively.”

Nadine Tosk, a publicist for Zeltiq, explained that the rollout of the device was “very limited right now.” Dr. Jeffrey Dover, a dermatologist in Chestnut Hill, Mass., who advises Zeltiq and participated in its clinical trial, said a few board-certified plastic surgeons and dermatologists were “handpicked” because “we know they do good work.” Restraint is key, he said, because a doctor could apply Zeltiq to “the same spot” in the same day, which isn’t how it’s meant to be used. Hourlong treatments are best spaced out by two months, said Dr. Dover, who charges $700 per spot.

That said, a doctor with a Zeltiq device isn’t hard for patients to find. More than five dozen “Zeltiq specialists” can be found by ZIP code at body-contouring.com, which is a patient guide not sponsored by manufacturers of body-slimming devices. Dr. Jason N. Pozner, a plastic surgeon in Boca Raton, Fla., appears topless in a YouTube.com video that shows his left flank being suctioned and cooled as he reads his Kindle. (His partner, Dr. David J. Goldberg, was an investigator for Zeltiq.)

Ms. Bonvouloir hasn’t given up on Zerona. Recently, she paid $2,100 for six treatments at Parker Day Spa in Parker, Colo. This time, each session is followed by a massage that supposedly speeds the release of fat. “I still have three more sessions,” Ms. Bonvouloir wrote in an e-mail message. “Again, they are convinced I will lose some inches. I’d like to know when!!!”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story duly reports that unpublished research showed Zeltiq resulted in 22 percent body fat loss in targeted areas. It reports that published, funded research showed patients lost an average of 3.5 inches after six sessions of Zerona laser work. 
Given the thin body of research, this is adequate reporting of benefits. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET), WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2016

Also available at the For the Media website, the commentary “A Call for Frailty Screening in the Preoperative Setting,” by Anne M. Suskind, M.D., M.S., and Emily Finlayson, M.D., M.S., of the University of California, San Francisco.

To place an electronic embedded link to this study in your story: This link will be live at the embargo time: http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamasurgery/fullarticle/10.1001/jamasurg.2016.4219

In a study published online by JAMA Surgery, Daniel E. Hall, M.D., M.Div., M.H.Sc., of the Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System and University of Pittsburgh, and colleagues examined the effect of a Frailty Screening Initiative (FSI) on death and complications by comparing the surgical outcomes of patients treated before and after implementation of the FSI.

As the U.S. population ages, the number of operations performed on elderly patients will likely increase. Frailty predicts postoperative mortality and illness more than age alone, thus presenting opportunities to identify the highest-risk surgical patients and provide tailored clinical care to improve their outcomes. This study included 9,153 patients (average age, 60 years) from a Veterans Affairs medical center who presented for major, elective, noncardiac surgery. Preoperative frailty was assessed with the Risk Analysis Index (RAI; a 14-item questionnaire), and the records of all frail patients (as determined by a certain RAI score) were flagged for administrative review by the chief of surgery (or designee) before the scheduled operation. On the basis of this review, clinicians from surgery, anesthesia, critical care, and palliative care were notified of the patient’s frailty and associated surgical risks; if indicated, perioperative plans were modified based on team input.

The researchers found that overall 30-day mortality decreased from 1.6 percent (84 of 5,275 patients) to 0.7 percent (26 of 3,878 patients) after FSI implementation. Improvement was greatest among frail patients (12.2 percent to 3.8 percent), although mortality rates also decreased among the robust patients (1.2 percent to 0.3 percent). The magnitude of improvement among frail patients increased at 180 and 365 days.

“The ultimate cause of the survival benefit is likely multifactorial, including changes in preoperative decision making, intraoperative management, and postoperative rescue,” the authors write.

“This study reveals the feasibility of facility-wide frailty screening in elective surgical populations. It also suggests the potential to improve postoperative survival among the frail through systematic administrative screening, review, and optimization of perioperative plans. The absolute reduction in 180-day mortality among frail patients was more than 19 percent, with improvement remaining robust even after controlling for age, frailty, and predicted mortality.”

: This investigation was supported by a grant from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, Office of Research and Development, Health Services Research and Development. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, etc.

For more information, contact JAMA Network Media Relations at 312-464-JAMA (5262) or email mediarelations@jamanetwork.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This is a very strong point for the release. It states clearly that absolute reductions were seen before and after the intervention:  i.e.:  “overall 30-day mortality decreased from 1.6 percent (84 of 5,275 patients) to 0.7 percent (26 of 3,878 patients) after FSI implementation. Improvement was greatest among frail patients (12.2 percent to 3.8 percent), although mortality rates also decreased among the robust patients (1.2 percent to 0.3 percent).”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The stunning results found that angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Researchers from Canada and the United States followed more than 2,200 patients who had symptoms of heart disease but were considered stable, reports CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook. Half of these low-risk patients received stents and medication. The other half were given only medication: drugs to lower cholesterol, control blood pressure and prevent clotting.

To the surprise of the researchers, both groups fared about the same: approximately 19 percent had a heart attack or died within seven years, adds LaPook.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevents heart attacks and gives lasting relief of chest pain.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

About 40 percent of patients in the study had a prior heart attack more than three months previously.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation.

Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4½ years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does give the rate of heart attack or death as 19% within 7 years for both the stent and the medication group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Sept. 11, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new device meant to help surgeons determine in the operating room if they have removed all cancerous breast cancer tissue may help reduce repeat surgeries after lumpectomy without compromising cosmetic effects, according to a new study.

The device, called MarginProbe, emits an electric field and senses a return signal from the tissue examined. Cancerous tissue provides a different electromagnetic signature than normal tissue, the researchers explained.

"This can potentially decrease having to go back to the operating room and with no real effect on your [cosmetic] outcome," said study leader Dr. Susan Boolbol, chief of breast surgery at Beth Israel Medical Center, in New York City.

The study of nearly 500 patients undergoing breast-conserving surgery found little difference in the volume of tissue removed when the device was used compared to traditional detection methods.

"The reality is, most of the time we leave the operating room and we don't know if we have a clear margin [with all cancer removed] or not," Boolbol said. Doctors wait for the pathology report to find that out, which can take a week or two. With the new device, the wait time is about five minutes.

"Everything still goes through pathology," Boolbol said. But the MarginProbe is another tool that might help reduce the odds of needing a subsequent surgery, she said.

Boolbol is scheduled to present the findings Thursday at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's breast cancer symposium in San Francisco.

In June, the radiation-free device won the blessing of a U.S. Food and Drug Administration advisory panel. The FDA usually follows the advisory panel's recommendations, so device approval is anticipated.

For the study, Boolbol and her colleagues randomly assigned 495 breast cancer patients to receive the MarginProbe after lumpectomy or not receive it. Of those, 161 had early cancer known as ductal carcinoma in situ. The others had invasive cancers.

Where the device detected cancer cells near the edge or surface of the sample examined, surgeons removed additional tissue in the same procedure.

Typically, about 40 percent of lumpectomy patients need another surgery because of the difficulty distinguishing between healthy and cancerous cells in tissue around the tumor.

"We looked at whether we could lower the [repeat surgery] rate by using this device," Boolbol said. The patients were followed for two months to see if they needed a repeat surgery. For those with ductal carcinoma in situ, 13 percent of the probe group needed a repeat surgery, compared to 37 percent of the control group.

Among women with invasive breast cancer, 17 percent in the device group and 33 percent in the comparison group required more surgery.

Looking at the volume of tissue excised, the researchers said not much more tissue was removed when the device was used compared to tissue removed in the initial and subsequent surgeries among the control-group patients, Boolbol said.

Dr. Laura Kruper, director of the Cooper Finkel Women's Health Center and co-director of the breast cancer program at City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center in Duarte, Calif., said the device looks promising. However, she thinks more research is needed.

"I would like to see it [used] in a larger population," she said. If the results are repeated in larger studies, it could be a welcome addition to doctors' techniques, she said.

The expected cost of the MarginProbe in the United States, if approved, is not yet known, said Michael Graffeo, a spokesman for its maker, Dune Medical Devices. In Europe, where the device is available, each probe (one per patient) sells for about 600 euros or $760, he said. This is much less than the cost of re-operation, he noted.

The device is also being studied for use with prostate cancer, the company said.

Data and conclusions presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

To learn more about breast cancer surgery, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The piece notes that patients were followed for two months after their lumpectomy.  And the story did an adequate job in describing benefits, clearly presenting the proportion of patients in each group who required a second surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 22, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- In women who have had breast cancer, annual mammograms help detect second breast cancers, but they're not as effective in women who have never had the disease, new research suggests.

"Screening mammography does work well in women with a history of breast cancer, so they should continue to get their annual screening mammogram," said Diana Miglioretti, senior investigator at Group Health Research Institute in Seattle and a co-author of the new research. "But they also need to remain vigilant because they are at increased risk of cancers not detected on mammography that show up between mammograms."

In their study, published in the Feb. 23 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, Miglioretti and her colleagues found that false positives and interval cancers were both higher in women with a history of breast cancer than in those without such history. False positives are an initial finding of cancer that turns out to be benign based on additional testing. Interval cancers are those found between mammograms, either through additional tests or symptoms.

The researchers evaluated 12 years of data from 58,870 screening mammograms in 19,078 women with early-stage breast cancer and an equal number of mammograms in another 55,315 women who had never had breast cancer. The women were matched on such factors as age and breast density, a risk factor for cancer, with higher density increasing risk.

Within a year of the screening, 655 cancers were found in women with a breast cancer history and 342 in those without.

Mammograms had detected 76.5 percent of the cancers in women who had never had breast cancer and 65.4 percent in those who had previously had the disease. As for false positives, 1 percent of the women without a history of breast cancer were referred for biopsy but ended up being cancer-free, compared with 1.7 percent of those with a breast cancer history.

The interval cancer rate was 3.6 per 1,000 screenings in those with a history and 1.4 per 1,000 in those without, the investigators found.

Women with a history of breast cancer were also more likely to be called back for additional imaging or biopsies: 18 percent called back, compared with 8.3 percent of the others.

"I think it's mostly positive news," Miglioretti said. "Of the ones that are missed, most of them are early stage." It points to the need, she said, for women to remain vigilant about screening after their breast cancer treatment -- and to report any symptoms to their doctor immediately.

Dr. William Audeh, medical director of the Samuel Oschin Cancer Center and the Wasserman Breast Cancer Risk Reduction Program at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, described the findings as "not at all surprising." He reviewed the study but was not involved in it.

After surgery and radiation, he said, a woman's breasts have changed, and there is a greater chance that a radiologist will think that something is abnormal simply because of the changes. "That helps explain the false positives," Audeh said.

And though mammography did not catch all cancers in the women with a breast cancer history, the study still points out the value of the test, he said.

Robert Smith, director of cancer screening for the American Cancer Society, agreed.

"Despite poorer performance compared with women without a prior history of breast cancer, overall screening mammography was effective at detecting the majority of breast cancer in women with a [history] at an early favorable stage, with the majority of tumors being diagnosed as ductal carcinoma in situ or stage 1," Smith said.

A trend among cancer specialists, Audeh said, is to tailor follow-up for a woman who has had breast cancer. For those who have dense breasts and are younger than 50, for example, "we can alternate mammograms with breast MRIs," with one of the tests every six months, he said.

WomensHealth.gov has more on mammograms.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: By quantifying the benefits of screening mammography for women with a personal history of breast cancer in absolute numbers, the story presents this information accurately and in a useful, understandable way for women with breast cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Weekly yoga classes relieve symptoms of low back pain about as well as intense, regular stretching sessions, a new study shows.

The research found that yoga and stretching were equally effective in easing chronic back pain and improving function, but participants had to practice each regularly to see benefits. The subjects in both groups took weekly 75-minute classes and practiced yoga or deep stretching at home for about 20 minutes at a time at least three days a week.

The study is the largest and most thorough to date to look at whether yoga has an effect on chronic low back pain, a problem that affects millions and has no surefire long-term remedy. A number of earlier studies suggested that regular yoga classes might benefit back pain sufferers, though most were limited by small sample sizes, short study periods and other flaws.

The latest study, published in The Archives of Internal Medicine, involved more than 200 people who were followed for up to 26 weeks.

“This is good news for yoga,” said Karen J. Sherman, lead author of the study and senior scientific investigator at Group Health Research Institute in Seattle. “The smaller studies which hinted that yoga might be helpful all had problems one way or another. This is a much larger study, and the findings are robust.”

About four out of five people experience low back pain at some point in their lives, prompting Americans to spend $50 billion a year on medications, physical therapy and related costs. Exercise, and in particular strength-training routines that develop muscles of the trunk and core, can help reduce pain and improve function, though many people avoid them for fear of doing further harm.

To find out whether the movements and static poses associated with yoga could make a difference, as earlier research had suggested, Dr. Sherman and her colleagues recruited 228 people with chronic low back pain in the Seattle area. Their mean age was in the late 40s to 50, and they were randomly assigned to one of three groups. One group took weekly yoga classes over 12 weeks, which typically included breathing exercises, 5 to 11 postures and guided deep relaxation. Another group went to weekly stretching classes built around aerobic exercises, deep stretches and strengthening exercises focused on the trunk and leg muscles. Both groups were given handouts and instructional CDs and DVDs and asked to practice 20 minutes at home on days when there was no class. Those in the third group served as “self-care” controls and received a book containing advice on back exercises and ways to reduce pain.

After 12 weeks, those in the yoga group were, over all, significantly less bothered by symptoms than the control group, and they reported better function and less difficulty in mundane daily activities like walking up stairs and bending down to put on socks. The improvements remained when the researchers checked with them 26 weeks after the start of the study. Those in the stretching group saw just as much benefit as the people taking yoga. More than half of the subjects in each group improved on measurements of function by at least 50 percent, compared with less than a quarter of the controls.

“Compared with self-care, yoga and stretching class participants were significantly more likely to rate their back pain as better, much better or completely gone at all follow-up times,” the study noted. “More participants in the yoga and stretching groups were very satisfied with their overall care for back pain.”

Dr. Sherman said that like many other therapies for low back pain, yoga probably would not work for everyone. For those who want to try, a weekly class and a few 20-minute sessions at home might be a good starting point, she said.

“Does everybody need to practice at least 20 minutes a day three times a week? It probably depends on your back pain,” she said. “At a certain point in time you learn what your back needs.”

As an alternative to yoga, stretching may be a viable option. Dr. Sherman recommended taking an intensive stretching class, then establishing a routine at home. But she cautioned that her study looked specifically at deep stretching that is far more involved than the brief, light stretches most people do before or after a workout.

“It’s not like stretching each leg for 30 seconds,” she said. “It’s much more intensive. You might spend two minutes stretching each leg before moving on and stretching other parts of the body, so you’re really getting in there.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The journalist adequately framed and quantified the benefits in terms of both primary and secondary outcome measures.



 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Patients with the most lethal form of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) – based on genetic profiles of their cancers – typically survive for only four to six months after diagnosis, even with aggressive chemotherapy. But new research indicates that such patients, paradoxically, may live longer if they receive a milder chemotherapy drug.

Treatment with the less intensive drug, decitabine, is not a cure. But surprisingly, AML patients whose leukemia cells carried mutations in a nefarious cancer gene called TP53 consistently achieved remission after treatment with decitabine. Their median survival was just over a year.

The study, by a team of scientists at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, is published Nov. 24 in The New England Journal of Medicine.

In AML, treatment involves intensive chemotherapy to try to kill the patient’s leukemia cells and put the cancer into remission. If successful, a follow-up bone-marrow transplant can offer a possible cure, but this course of treatment is recommended only for patients with a high risk of relapse because the procedure can cause severe complications, even death.

“What’s really unique here is that all the patients in the study with TP53 mutations had a response to decitabine and achieved an initial remission,” said the study’s senior author, Timothy J. Ley, MD, the Lewis T. and Rosalind B. Apple Professor of Medicine, noting that in AML, TP53 mutations have been correlated with an extremely poor prognosis. “With standard aggressive chemotherapy, we only see about 20 to 30 percent of these patients achieving remission, which is the critical first step to have a chance to cure patients with additional therapies.

“The findings need to be validated in a larger trial,” Ley added, “but they do suggest that TP53 mutations can reliably predict responses to decitabine, potentially prolonging survival in this ultra high-risk group of patients and providing a bridge to transplantation in some patients who might not otherwise be candidates.”

In an accompanying editorial, Elihu Estey, MD, an AML expert at the University of Washington Medical Center and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, noted that AML is not one disease but many, each driven by different genetic mutations. The results of the current trial, he said, point to the inevitable need to replace large cancer clinical trials evaluating homogeneous drug treatments with smaller trials that involve subgroups of patients, with treatments targeted to their specific mutations.

The current study involved 116 patients treated with decitabine at the Siteman Cancer Center at Washington University School of Medicine and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, and at the University of Chicago. The patients either had AML – a cancer of the bone marrow – or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), a group of blood cancers that often progresses to AML. This year, an estimated 20,000 people living in the U.S. will be diagnosed with AML, and at least 11,000 deaths will be attributed to the disease.

Decitabine often is given to older patients with AML or MDS because it is less toxic than standard chemotherapies. But fewer than half of patients who get the drug achieve an initial remission, so the researchers wanted to determine whether specific mutations in the patients’ cancer cells could predict their responses to treatment.

To find out, they sequenced all the genes in patients’ cancer cells or analyzed select cancer genes. They also conducted standard tests to look for broken, missing or rearranged chromosomes. Then, the researchers correlated these molecular markers with treatment response to identify subgroups of patients likely to benefit from decitabine.

Among the patients in the study, 46 percent achieved a remission with decitabine. But, remarkably, all 21 patients whose leukemia cells carried TP53 mutations went into remission.

Patients also were likely to respond to decitabine if they were deemed to have an “unfavorable risk” prognosis based on extensive chromosomal rearrangements in their cancer cells; many of these patients also had TP53 mutations. Indeed, 66 percent of patients with an unfavorable risk achieved remission, compared with 34 percent of patients who had more favorable prognoses.

“The challenge with using decitabine has been knowing which patients are most likely to respond,” said co-author Amanda Cashen, MD, an associate professor of medicine who led an earlier clinical trial of decitabine in older patients with AML. “The value of this study is the comprehensive mutational analysis that helps us figure out which patients are likely to benefit. This information opens the door to using decitabine in a more targeted fashion to treat not just older patients, but also younger patients who carry TP53 mutations.”

First author John Welch, MD, PhD, an assistant professor of medicine, added: “It’s important to note that patients with an extremely poor prognosis in this relatively small study had the same survival outcomes as patients facing a better prognosis, which is encouraging. We don’t yet understand why patients with TP53 mutations consistently respond to decitabine, and more work is needed to understand that phenomenon.”

Responses to decitabine are usually short-lived, however, with remissions typically lasting for about a year. Decitabine does not completely clear all the leukemia cells that carry TP53 mutations, and these cells invariably become resistant to the drug, leading to relapse.

“Remissions with decitabine typically don’t last long, and no one was cured with this drug,” Ley explained. “But patients who responded to decitabine live longer than what you would expect with aggressive chemotherapy, and that can mean something. Some people live a year or two and with a good quality of life, because the chemotherapy is not too toxic.”

Roughly 10 percent of AML patients carry TP53 mutations in their leukemia cells. Among patients in the study with such mutations, median survival was 12.7 months – which is not significantly different from the 15.4 months’ survival seen in patients without the mutations – and is longer than the typical four- to six-month survival observed in such patients treated with more aggressive therapies.

Decitabine was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a treatment for MDS, but oncologists often prescribe it off-label as a treatment for AML, particularly in older patients. AML typically strikes in a person’s mid-60s; the average age of people in the current study was 74.

“We’re now planning a larger trial to evaluate decitabine in AML patients of all ages who carry TP53 mutations,” Welch said. “It’s exciting to think we may have a therapy that has the potential to improve response rates in this group of high-risk patients.”

The research is supported by an AML-SPORE grant and the Genomics of AML Program Project grant, both from the National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers P50 CA171963 and P01 CA101937.

Welch J, Petti A, Miller C, Fronick C, O’Laughlin M, Fulton R, Wilson R, Baty J, Duncavage E, Tandon B, Lee Y-S, Wartman L, Uy G, Ghobadi A, Tomasson M, Pusic I, Romee R, Fehniger T, Stockerl-Goldstein K, Vig R, Oh S, Abboud C, Cashen A, Schroeder M, Jacoby M, Heath S, Luber K, Janke M, Hantel A, Khan N, Sukanova M, Knoebel R, Stock W, Graubert T, Walter M, Westervelt P, Link D, DiPersio J and Ley T. TP53 and decitabine in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. The New England Journal of Medicine. Nov. 24, 2016.

Washington University School of Medicine‘s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.

Siteman Cancer Center, ranked among the top cancer treatment centers by U.S. News & World Report, also is one of only a few cancer centers in the U.S. to receive the highest rating of the National Cancer Institute (NCI). Comprising the cancer research, prevention and treatment programs of Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, Siteman is Missouri’s only NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center and the state’s only member of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release describes the benefit of the preliminary trial in sufficient depth and with appropriate cautions. It relates that each of the 21 patients with TP53 mutations had a remission, compared to 46 percent of the entire trial group of 116 that achieved some remission following treatment. According to the release, standard treatment typically induces remission in about 20 to 30 percent of patients with TP53 mutations.  While the numbers look good from this trial, the researchers note that larger studies need to be done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For hours on a recent morning at the , Dr. Andrew Lowy painstakingly performed the therapy on a patient.

After slicing the man’s belly wide open, he thrust his gloved hands deep inside, and examined various organs, looking for . He then lifted the small intestine out of the body to sift it through his fingers.

As he found tumors, he snipped them out. “You can see how this is coming off like wallpaper,” Dr. Lowy said as he stripped out part of the lining of the man’s abdominal cavity.

After about two hours of poking and cutting, Dr. Lowy began the so-called shake and bake. The machine pumped heated chemotherapy directly into the abdominal cavity for 90 minutes while nurses gently jiggled the man’s bloated belly to disperse the drug to every nook and cranny.

The treatment is formally called cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, or Hipec.

Recent converts include University Hospitals Case Medical Center in Cleveland, in the , and even Massachusetts General. The is looking at it, according to people in the field. Advocates predict that the number of procedures could grow to 10,000 a year from about 1,500 now.

The therapy has even been featured on an episode of the TV series “Grey’s Anatomy.”

But Dr. Ryan, a gastrointestinal oncologist, suggested in an interview that the procedure was being extended to because “you can’t make a living doing this procedure in appendix cancer patients.”

He debated the procedure publicly at the recent annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. While some patients did seem to live much longer than expected, he said that they had been carefully selected and might have fared well even without the therapy.

Proponents say that if cancer has spread into the abdominal cavity but not elsewhere, then lives can be prolonged by removing all the visible and killing what’s missed with Hipec.

By contrast, said Dr. Paul Sugarbaker, a surgeon at Washington Hospital Center and the leading proponent of Hipec, “there are no long-term survivors with systemic chemotherapy — zero.”

Dr. Sugarbaker, who opposed Dr. Ryan in the debate, said that it has long been known that cancerous cells are unable to withstand as much heat as healthy cells. And putting the chemotherapy on top of tumors should be more effective than systematically delivering it through the bloodstream.

One randomized trial done more than a decade ago involving 105 patients in the did show a striking benefit. The median survival of those getting surgery and Hipec, plus intravenous chemotherapy, was 22.3 months, almost double the 12.6 months for those getting only the intravenous chemotherapy. But 8 percent who got the surgery and Hipec died from the treatment itself. And critics say that since that trial was conducted, new drugs have come to market that allow patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to live two years with intravenous chemotherapy alone.

A new trial in the has been temporarily suspended so that researchers can find a way to recruit patients. After nearly a year only one patient had enrolled, because people were reluctant to chance winding up in the control group, according to one of the investigators.

While proponents contend that the risk of dying from the surgery has been reduced since the Dutch trial, the procedure still lasts eight hours or more and full recovery can take three to six months. “It’s maximally invasive,” said Dr. Sugarbaker, who often removes the “spare parts” — organs a patient can live without, like the spleen, the gall bladder, the ovaries and the uterus.

The cost of the surgery and Hipec, including hospitalization, ranges from $20,000 to more than $100,000, doctors said. While and insurers generally pay for the operation, the heated treatment may not be covered. But doctors added it may be if it is described merely as chemotherapy. Some patients, like Ms. Borges, who is a fitness devotee, recover well and say the procedure staved off a death sentence.

But Dr. Alan Venook, a colon cancer specialist at the , said that a couple of patients referred by him had “died miserable deaths. One lost much of her abdominal wall to infection and just died in misery.”

Another risk is that the surgery may be done unnecessarily. CT scans cannot pick up many of the small tumors, so it is often unclear how much cancer is inside until the patient is opened.

In June, Dr. Lowy sliced open a woman and saw, to his horror, that she had more tumors than he could remove. Taking out only some would not improve her chances of survival, so he closed the incision, and she is now starting intravenous chemotherapy.

Things with the male patient, Andy S., went better. A 41-year-old father of two from near , Mr. S. agreed to let a reporter observe the surgery, but asked that his full name not be published because he did not want his cancer history to surface through searches.

Mr. S. had eventually diagnosed as . But the appendix was found to be cancerous. Such cancers typically spew mucus containing tumor cells into the abdominal cavity. So he signed up for surgery and Hipec with Dr. Lowy.

“I’ve had to say my goodbyes to everybody,” Mr. S. said the day before the operation. “I had to talk to my priest. I had to do all these things I never thought I’d have to do at 41. I wouldn’t wish it on my worst enemy, but I have to go through with it.”

Dr. Lowy explored the entire cavity from the diaphragm to the pelvis. He found mucus in several spots that he sopped up with a cloth and also tiny tumors the size of a pencil eraser that had implanted in several spots. He snipped those out and sewed up the wounds. He removed the right side of the man’s colon and the omentum, a fatty structure.

Then two Y-shaped tubes hooked to the Hipec machine were inserted into the abdominal cavity, one to deliver the chemotherapy and the other to bring the drug back to the machine to be reheated. The incision was sewn up around the tubes so the chemotherapy would not leak.

The man’s belly was filled with three liters of saline fluid and the chemotherapy, a generic drug called mitomycin C, heated to 42 degrees Celsius, or nearly 108 degrees Fahrenheit. Any hotter could have caused injuries. Bloated with liquid, the man’s torso resembled a water bed.

After 90 minutes, the fluid was drained and the incision reopened for a final check before the patient was stitched up. The procedure took six hours.

“We got all of the visible disease, and he didn’t have a lot of visible disease,” Dr. Lowy said with satisfaction.

Mr. S. left the hospital eight days later, happy to have undergone the treatment. “I want to have the best chance I can have to never see this again,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story explained:
“One randomized trial done more than a decade ago involving 105 patients in the Netherlands did show a striking benefit. The median survival of those getting surgery and Hipec, plus intravenous chemotherapy, was 22.3 months, almost double the 12.6 months for those getting only the intravenous chemotherapy”
That being said, the story also included the proviso that newer drugs are now available that have been shown to increase survival.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two highly effective contraceptives—the intrauterine device (IUD) and the implant—actually last much longer than they are currently recommended, according to new research.

In a new study published in the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology, researchers discovered that the hormonal IUD and the implant are highly effective a year after they are currently approved for use.

MORE: The IUD Answer: Why The Best Form of Birth Control is the One No One Uses

The researchers followed 237 women who were using an implant like Implanon and Nexplanon and 263 women using the Mirena hormonal IUD. The implants are currently approved for three years, and the hormonal IUD used in the study is approved for five. (There is also a non-hormonal IUD that is approved for 12 years, but it was not included in the current study.)

All the women were between the ages of 18 and 45 and their contraceptives were within six months of expiring before they enrolled in the study. The women were informed of the pregnancy risk associated with using their device longer than recommended, and the researchers called them for followup every 6 months for 36 months or until the women had their device removed.

By the end of the trial period, none of the women using the implant were pregnant and there was one pregnancy among the women using the IUD. Still, the failure rate was similar to the failure rate of the IUD when used during the five-year period (which is under 1%). The study is still ongoing, and the researchers plan to recruit up to 800 women and ultimately test whether the IUDs and implants were effective for up to three years after their current FDA-approved duration.

The benefit of being able to use the implant and IUD for a longer period of time is that it could reduce costs for individuals and insurance. The longer use also makes the IUD and implant more convenient for women, since maintenance is reduced.

Though the data is preliminary, the researchers say they believe that the hormonal IUD and the implant can both be used for an additional year longer than the FDA recommends. That doesn’t mean you should extend your own use of the contraceptives without talking to your doctor. The study is still continuing, and it could be quite a long time before any changes to clinical recommendations are considered.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefit of effective contraception during the study is explained. The story notes that “By the end of the trial period, none of the women using the implant were pregnant and there was one pregnancy among the women using the IUD.” The story mentions that additional benefits of using the device for a longer period include cost reduction and convenience.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- Marcia Gilbert has spent most of her life in Charlotte, North Carolina, but for the end of summer, she decided to make a special trip.

Gilbert, 56, spent the weekend before Labor Day in New York City. She roamed from Chinatown to the Upper East Side, went sightseeing in Central Park and painted the town with her husband of 33 years, their two 20-something children and assorted friends.

One evening, they found themselves at Del Posto, a chic Italian restaurant. Glancing at her watch, over the sparkle of conversation, wine glasses and half-eaten dessert, Gilbert marveled at the time: just a few minutes to midnight.

"It was awfully late for me," she laughed as she told the story. "It was just a great moment to know that I was holding up enough to be there, to feel great and make memories."

Late-night hours, any hours, are especially precious to Gilbert, who could have been forgiven for feeling just a bit weary. For 15 years, she's been fighting breast cancer.

After years of ups and downs, Gilbert is doing well and gives most of the credit to her most recent medicine: bevacizumab, better known by its brand name, Avastin. But gratitude is tinged with worry, because the Food and Drug Administration is considering the unusual step of revoking its approval of Avastin as a treatment for metastatic breast cancer.

"It's disheartening, and it's a scary thought," says Gilbert. "Until just recently, I didn't know it was so precarious."

Avastin, which works by cutting off a tumor's blood supply, was first approved as a cancer treatment in 2004 as a therapy for colon cancer. Since then, it has also been approved as a treatment for certain types of lung, kidney and brain cancer.

In 2008, the FDA granted Avastin what's known as accelerated approval as a therapy for metastatic breast cancer. The move was based on preliminary studies that found the drug increased the time that patients went without symptoms getting worse. As a condition of the approval, the company that makes Avastin -- Genentech -- agreed to conduct more extensive research.

The results of those two larger trials, known as RIBBON-1 and AVADO, were made public this year, and to some, they were disappointing. In RIBBON-1, time without symptoms getting worse, known as progression-free survival, or PFS, improved by less than three months.

In AVADO, it improved by just 24 days. In neither study did patients actually live longer, and there was a high rate of side effects, including high blood pressure and internal bleeding.

In July, an FDA advisory panel voted 12-1 to recommend revoking the preliminary approval. The FDA promises a final decision by September 17.

Gilbert had just passed her 40th birthday when she felt a lump in her breast. It was cancer.

She had it removed, went through a round of radiation and chemotherapy, and was symptom-free for the next nine years.

"I almost describe it as the little c," is how she tells it today. "When I got the recurrence, it was the Big C. It was a real surprise when it came back again."

This time, the signal was pain underneath her armpit. Tests revealed several small tumors in the bone.

Doctors told Gilbert she'd be lucky to be alive in five years, but with chemotherapy and radiation, she fought off the cancer, again. A year later, she watched her daughter Neely perform her senior dance recital, and not long after, walk across the stage to collect her high school diploma.

"All those things you take for granted," Gilbert says. "I was just so blessed to see her graduate."

But chemotherapy took a toll. At one point, Gilbert was hospitalized several days with a low white blood cell count and high fevers.

A few years later, she felt chest pains, and doctors thought she was having a heart attack. As it turned out, Gilbert had no heart damage, but there were days she was so exhausted she couldn't leave the house.

Late last spring, tests at Duke University found signs of cancer in her liver. Dr. Kimberly Blackwell, a breast cancer specialist at Duke, put her on Avastin, along with Navelbine, another chemotherapy drug. Gilbert says the combination stopped her illness in its tracks.

Because Avastin is approved to treat other cancers, losing the breast cancer indication would not, technically, remove it from a doctor's toolkit. But here's the catch: Avastin costs more than $8,000 a month. At that price, insurance coverage is crucial, and patients and doctors fear that an FDA reversal will lead to most insurers no longer signing the checks.

Susan Pisano, a spokeswoman for the Association of Health Insurance Plans, the largest trade group, said insurers would wait for guidance from the FDA, but adds, "If the FDA pulls back its approval for this particular indication, it would trigger a review of plan policies. Policies get reviewed whenever there is additional information."

The issue has split advocates for breast cancer patients. Susan G. Komen For the Cure, the largest group, issued a statement in support of Avastin and has helped to circulate a petition asking that it still be made available. But Fran Visco of the National Breast Cancer Coalition says Avastin should not have been approved in the first place.

"There was a delay in progression of the tumor, but it had no effect on quality of life, or survival," Visco says. "I favor a strong FDA. We need some oversight body to say whether something is effective. You can't rely on industry to do that, or individual physicians."

Visco says the new studies on Avastin, AVADO and RIBBON-1, should settle the issue.

"It's got no impact on survival, and there are troubling side effects. We're supposed to be excited about a delay in tumor progression, for a month? That's sad."

But Blackwell, the Duke oncologist, says the medicine can be used safely as long as patients are carefully monitored. Marcia Gilbert has had no significant side effects since starting on Avastin. If it's not available, Blackwell says, "I'm going to have to give older drugs with the exact same toxicity. And they've never been shown to improve overall survival, either."

Blackwell says the FDA risks setting the bar too high. "If the [Avastin] label is not upheld, it sets a new standard. We're not going to see another first-line drug for another 10 years, at least."

Another breast cancer specialist, Dr. Edith Perez, deputy director of the Mayo Clinic Cancer Center in Jacksonville, Florida, says many chemotherapy drugs, such as Gemzar -- which is substantially less expensive than Avastin -- have previously been approved without showing they can lengthen survival.

The issue has been taken up by critics of the health care overhaul signed into law last year. In late July, Sen. David Vitter, R-Louisiana, wrote a letter to the FDA saying that there are no new safety concerns and that "the [FDA advisory] committee's concerns appear to have been based on cost-effectiveness." Vitter went on to say that removing the breast cancer indication would be "cost-rationing."

The FDA says it does not consider cost when evaluating the safety or effectiveness of a drug. But some physicians, including Perez, say the issue is getting harder to ignore. In cancer care, many drugs are used "off-label," for therapies beyond those formally reviewed by the FDA.

"When they're less expensive, those drugs get approved by insurers," Perez says. When they cost more, "I'm spending more and more time justifying even treatments that do have regulatory approval."

In some states, insurers may not have the last word. Gilbert has a policy from Blue Cross/Blue Shield of North Carolina. According to Dr. John Fong, the company's vice president and senior medical director, a state law requires that insurers pay for cancer treatment that is listed in certain catalogs of acceptable treatments, compiled by government agencies or professional organizations.

Of course, given the debate over Avastin, those lists could become another source of controversy.

Asked whether she has a Plan B, if insurance no longer pays for Avastin, Gilbert's voice gets a little quiet. "I've learned with cancer to take it one day at a time, and not look too far ahead. I'm not going to think about it until I have to."

The morning after her midnight meal, Gilbert was on the pavement again, window-shopping with daughter Neely in Soho and Chinatown. Gilbert glows when she talks about the adventure.

"Years ago, on some of the different chemos, I wouldn't have had the energy to spend a weekend there. I just wouldn't have had the stamina."

By e-mail, she adds, "How do you put a dollar value on that?"
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Twelve years ago, a car wreck took away Nathan Copeland's ability to control his hands or sense what his fingers were touching.

A few months ago, researchers at the University of Pittsburgh and the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center gave Copeland a new way to reach out and feel the world around him. It's a mind-controlled robotic arm that has pressure sensors in each fingertip that send signals directly to Copeland's brain.

The scientists published details of their work online Thursday in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

"It's a really weird sensation," Copeland, now 30, says in a video made shortly after he first tried the system. "Sometimes it feels, kind of, like electrical and sometimes it's more of a pressure." But he also describes many of the sensations coming from his robotic hand as "natural."

When Copeland touches an object with the robotic hand, he can tell which finger the sensation is coming from and whether an object feels hard or soft, says Robert Gaunt, a bioengineer and assistant professor in the Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation at the University of Pittsburgh.

"But we're really not at the point where we could, say, get him to feel the difference between silk and burlap," Gaunt says.

The success represents an advance that is "absolutely critical in terms of making prosthetics useful," says Mike McLoughlin, an engineer at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory.

McLoughlin is part of a team at Hopkins that developed the Modular Prosthetic Limb that Copeland is using. The research at both Hopkins and in Pittsburgh is supported by the government's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.

For several years now, people have been able to control robotic arms using thoughts alone. But they have relied entirely on vision to know whether the arm is going in the right direction or grasping an object with the proper amount of force.

That makes it very challenging to perform simple tasks like grasping a foam coffee cup without crushing it, McLoughlin says.

"Without sensory feedback, somebody would have to actually have to look at the prosthetic, look at the cup, start to close the hand, (and) visually see the cup is starting to deform," he says.

Restoring Copeland's sense of touch was a painstaking process, but the Pittsburgh team knew it was possible.

"His hand has been disconnected from his brain because of his spinal cord injury," Gaunt says. "But the brain hasn't lost its ability to feel."

So the team began looking for a way to send touch sensations directly to Copeland's brain. The first step was to monitor his brain activity using a technique called magnetoencephalography.

"We were able to see the parts of his brain that became active when he was watching videos of a hand being touched," Gaunt says.

Next, the researchers placed tiny electrodes in Copeland's brain that could stimulate the areas corresponding to each finger. Then they waited for the brain to heal, as it adjusted to the presence of the electrodes.

It was several weeks before the team was able to send the first tiny pulse of electricity to Copeland's brain. "When it finally happened, he just very calmly said, 'Yep, I felt it on my index finger,' " Gaunt recalls. "But in the background I was breathing a sigh of relief and other people were cheering."

Of course, mind-controlled robots are still years away from consumer applications, McLoughlin says. At the moment, they are still too expensive, too bulky and too finicky to be used outside a laboratory setting. And there's no good way to control them without implanting electrodes in the brain.

Still, the ability to receive touch sensation from a robotic arm has the potential to help not only thousands of people who are paralyzed, but also people with a wide range of physical disabilities, McLoughlin says. For example, robots that provide sensory feedback could eventually help a disabled person cook a meal or clean up things at home.

"We're on the verge of something here that's going to transform lives," he says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story doesn’t overstate the benefits to this one patient. It explains that the benefits seen here–the sense of “touch” provided to this paralyzed individual through a brain-computer interface–does not replicate what most of us might think of as a complete sense of touch. For example, one quote says “we’re really not at the point where we could, say, get him to feel the difference between silk and burlap.” We did feel the headline strays over the line a bit, by claiming “implant restores sense of touch.”
What is needed here is more qualification that this is just one patient, and given the variability in spinal cord injuries, it’s really unknown how this will play out for other people. We also took issue with the ending quote of the story that states we’re “on the verge of something here that’s going to transform lives.” This needs to be hedged with the reality of the slow pace of the scientific and medical research process.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study, published Thursday in The , looked at what happened in before and after 1996, when the country began rolling out mammograms for women ages 50 to 69 along with special breast cancer teams to treat all women with breast cancer.

The study is not perfect. The ideal study would randomly assign women to have mammograms or not. But, cancer experts said, no one would do such a study today when mammograms are generally agreed to prevent breast cancer deaths. In the study, which is continuing, women were followed for a maximum of 8.9 years. It is possible that benefits may emerge later.

Nonetheless, the new study is “very credible,” said Dr. Barnett Kramer, associate director for disease prevention at the .

“This is the first time researchers used real populations to compare the effects of treatment and mammography in the modern era of treatment,” Dr. Kramer said. “It shows the relative impacts of screening versus therapy in an era in which therapy has been improving.”

Dr. Otis Brawley of the said in a statement that the investigators used “careful methodology.” The society, Dr. Brawley said, “believes that the total body of the science supports the fact that regular mammography is an important part of a woman’s .”

Dr. Carol Lee, a radiologist at and chairwoman of the breast imaging commission of the American College of Radiology, said the new study affirmed that mammography saves lives.

“Mortality from breast cancer is decreasing, and I have to believe that screening mammography has played a part,” Dr. Lee said.

In their study, the investigators analyzed data from all 40,075 Norwegian women who had received a diagnosis of breast cancer from 1986 to 2005, a time when treatment was changing markedly.

In that period, 4,791 women died. And, starting in 1996, Norway began offering mammograms to women ages 50 to 69 and assigning multidisciplinary treatment teams to all women with breast cancer, similar to the teams at many major medical centers in the . The question was, Did the program of mammograms and optimal new treatment with coordinated teams of surgeons, pathologists, oncologists, radiologists and nurses lower the breast cancer death rate?

The investigators found that women 50 to 69 who had mammograms and were treated by the special teams had a 10 percent lower breast cancer death rate than similar women who had had neither.

They also found, though, that the death rate fell by 8 percent in women over 70 who had the new treatment teams but had not been invited to have mammograms. And Dr. Kramer said he knew of no evidence that breast cancer was more easily treated in women over 70 than in women ages 50 to 69.

That means, Dr. H. Gilbert Welch of Dartmouth wrote in an additional analysis in an accompanying editorial, that mammography could have reduced the breast cancer death rate by as little as 2 percent, an amount so small that it is not really different from zero.

Two percent is an estimate, Dr. Welch said. But, he said, whatever the effect of mammograms is, “all the signals here are that it is much smaller than we believed.”

Dr. Laura Esserman, a professor of surgery and radiology at the in , said it tells her that “if you get the same treatment and the outcome is the same if you find it earlier or later, then you don’t make a difference when you find it early.”

And screening has a cost, Dr. Welch said. Screening 2,500 50-year-olds for a decade would identify 1,000 women with at least one suspicious mammogram resulting in follow-up tests. Five hundred would have biopsies. And 5 to 15 of those women would be treated for cancers that, if left alone, would have grown so slowly they would never have been noticed.

When the study was planned, the scientists expected that screening would be even more effective than it was in studies from decades ago. After all, mammography had improved and, in Norway, each mammogram was independently read by two radiologists, which should make it less likely that cancers would be missed. The researchers expected mammograms to reduce the breast cancer death rate by a third.

“We were surprised,” said Dr. Mette Kalager, the lead author of the paper who is a breast surgeon at University and a visiting scientist at the Harvard School of Public Health.

Marvin Zelen, a statistician at the Harvard School of Public Health and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, who was a member of the research team said even though the mammography benefit is small, if he were a woman he would get screened.

“It all depends on how you approach risk,” Dr. Zelen said. His approach, he says, is “minimax” — he wants to minimize the maximum risk — which, in this case, is dying of a cancer.

Dr. Kalager came to the opposite conclusion. She worries about the small chance of benefit in light of the larger chance of finding and treating a cancer that did not need to be treated.

“Since I’m a breast cancer surgeon, I know what being treated is like,” she says. The decision to be screened, she says, “is a matter of personal preference. Is it worth it to risk becoming a patient without it being necessary?”

Many women may still want mammograms, she says, and that is fine.

“I think we have to respect what women want to do.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 


This story uses several different statistics and expert perspectives to explain what the researchers found in their examination of the effects of mammography screening. It not only include the relative risk reduction (10 percent) and an absolute risk reduction statistic (among women in their 50s, a decade of screening would boost the likelihood of avoiding a fatal breast cancer from 995.6 out of 1,000 to 996 out of 1,000), but it also offered comments from different experts about how they would personally value effects of that size. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A combination of two drugs delays progression of advanced, aggressive breast cancer by an average of nine months - working in all subsets of the most common type of breast cancer.

The combination - of a first-in-class targeted drug called palbociclib, and the hormone drug fulvestrant - slowed cancer growth in around two thirds of women with advanced forms of the most common type of breast cancer.

The combination allowed many women with metastatic hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative cancer to delay the start of chemotherapy, which is the traditional treatment option in these patients once hormone drugs have stopped working.

The international study, led in the UK by Dr Nicholas Turner, from The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, updates the results of a major phase III trial published last year.

The results confirm the prior benefit observed with palbociclib, and show that palbociclib works regardless of how sensitive patients' cancer was to earlier hormone therapy.

The new research, published today (Thursday) in The Lancet Oncology, shows that even women with specific genetic changes conveying resistance to hormone therapy can benefit from the new drug combination.

Hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative cancer accounts for around 75 per cent of cases of breast cancer.

In the trial, researchers from 144 research centres in 17 countries followed 521 women allocated to receive either palbociclib and fulvestrant, or a dummy pill and fulvestrant. The trial was funded by Pfizer.

Women in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group took a median of 9.5 months to progress, as measured by CT and MRI scans, compared with 4.6 months in the placebo group.

Some 67 per cent of the 347 women in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group showed clinical benefit - either a reduction in tumour size or control of disease for at least six months - compared with 40 per cent of the 174 women in the placebo plus fulvestrant group.

Some 19 per cent in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group had a decrease in tumour size compared with 9 per cent in the placebo plus fulvestrant group.

The study also aimed to assess whether cancers with particular genetic traits responded less well or better to the combination than others.

Mutations to the gene PIK3CA represent the most common genetic event in breast cancer, and mutations in the gene are associated with a shorter response to hormone therapy.

The research showed that using 'liquid biopsies' that measure cancer DNA circulating in the blood to detect PIK3CA, and tests for blood hormone levels, the palbociclib combination worked in all types of hormone-receptor positive, HER2 negative breast cancer.

Palbociclib is a first-in-class drug - with a different mechanism of action to other approved drugs - which simultaneously blocks two proteins called CDK4 and CDK6 in cancer cells. It causes less severe side-effects than traditional chemotherapy.

In the trial, severe side-effects caused by the combination were rare. Many women (81 per cent on the palbociclib arm) had a drop in their white blood cell count, but this rarely led to serious symptoms.

Study co-lead author Dr Nicolas Turner, Team Leader in Molecular Oncology at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and Consultant Medical Oncologist at The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, said:

"Our research underlines the effectiveness of palbociclib with fulvestrant in metastatic breast cancer and, importantly, demonstrates its benefit in all types of hormone-receptor positive breast cancer. We hope our results lead to the adoption of this drug combination in breast cancer, where it delays the need to start chemotherapy by an average of nine months.

"Our study also sends a powerful message that in combining new drugs in innovative trials we can find better options for women with advanced breast cancer. Chemotherapy can add several months to life but it comes at a cost of often life-limiting side effects, and we need alternative treatments that are better tolerated to treat patients with advanced breast cancer."

Professor Paul Workman, Chief Executive of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, said:

"If we're going to drive further improvements in survival from cancer, it's essential that we find ways of prolonging life in people whose cancers have evolved and become resistant to treatment. This trial is an exciting example of one of the most promising approaches to overcoming drug resistance, by combining drugs with different mechanisms of action to block off cancer's escape routes. It's very encouraging to see such substantial delays to cancer progression."

For more information please contact Henry French on 020 7153 5582 or henry.french@icr.ac.uk. For enquiries out of hours, please call 07595 963 613.

The Institute of Cancer Research, London, is one of the world's most influential cancer research institutes.

Scientists and clinicians at The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) are working every day to make a real impact on cancer patients' lives. Through its unique partnership with The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and 'bench-to-bedside' approach, the ICR is able to create and deliver results in a way that other institutions cannot. Together the two organisations are rated in the top four cancer centres globally.

The ICR has an outstanding record of achievement dating back more than 100 years. It provided the first convincing evidence that DNA damage is the basic cause of cancer, laying the foundation for the now universally accepted idea that cancer is a genetic disease. Today it leads the world at isolating cancer-related genes and discovering new targeted drugs for personalised cancer treatment.

As a college of the University of London, the ICR provides postgraduate higher education of international distinction. It has charitable status and relies on support from partner organisations, charities and the general public.

The ICR's mission is to make the discoveries that defeat cancer. For more information visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release clearly lays out the advantages of the drug combination over the alternative of fulvestrant with placebo. The primary endpoint of time to progression is reported accurately. The benefits are summed up with these statements:
“Some 67 per cent of the 347 women in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group showed clinical benefit – either a reduction in tumour size or control of disease for at least six months – compared with 40 per cent of the 174 women in the placebo plus fulvestrant group.”
“Some 19 per cent in the palbociclib plus fulvestrant group had a decrease in tumour size compared with 9 per cent in the placebo plus fulvestrant group.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: Lumpectomy plus radiation was associated with a small clinical benefit in reduced risk of breast cancer death compared with lumpectomy or mastectomy alone in women with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), a noninvasive early form of breast cancer.

Why The Research Is Interesting: Patients with DCIS are often treated with radiation after lumpectomy, although it has remained unclear whether this can reduce the risk of dying from breast cancer.

Who and When: More than 140,000 U.S. women who had DCIS between 1998 and 2014; this study compared lumpectomy plus radiation vs. lumpectomy alone, lumpectomy vs. mastectomy, and lumpectomy plus radiation vs. mastectomy

What (Study Measures and Outcomes): Use of radiation and/or extent of surgery (exposures); breast cancer mortality rates within 15 years (outcomes)

How (Study Design): This was an observational study. Researchers were not intervening for purposes of the study and cannot control all the natural differences that could explain the study findings.

Authors: Steven A. Narod, M.D., of Women's College Research Institute, in Ontario, Canada, and co-authors

Results: A small improvement in breast cancer survival was associated with radiation plus lumpectomy for DCIS. The absolute risk reduction was 0.27 percent, making it necessary to treat 370 women to save one life. Patients who had lumpectomy plus radiation had more local recurrences than the mastectomy patients but had fewer deaths.

Study Limitations: Some data were missing; investigators didn't have information on tamoxifen use; treatments in the study population weren't randomly assigned; and the possibility remains that the decision to undergo radiotherapy was associated with other favorable prognostic factors.

Related Material: The invited commentary, "Systemic Effects of Radiotherapy in Ductal Carcinoma In Situ," by Mira Goldberg, M.D., and Timothy J. Whelan, B.M., B.Ch., of McMaster University, Ontario, Canada, also is available on the For The Media website.

To Learn More: The full study is available on the For The Media website.

The article contains conflict of interest disclosures. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Links will be live at the embargo time http://jamanetwork.

About JAMA Network Open: JAMA Network Open is the new online-only open access general medical journal from the JAMA Network. Every Friday, the journal publishes peer-reviewed clinical research and commentary in more than 40 medical and health subject areas. Every article is free online from the day of publication.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The summary gives an absolute risk reduction percentage of 0.27% for patients who received radiation compared to those who did not. It also includes the number needed to treat (370) to save one patient. This is good detail, but we would also have liked more context on the controversies of DCIS treatment. A HealthNewsReview.org podcast provides a deeper look here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Finding ways to fight the flu just got a tad more ribbeting -- that is, if you ask some researchers who have turned their attention to frogs.

A new study suggests that mucus from the skin of certain frogs can be harnessed to obliterate flu viruses.

Some frog mucus contains antimicrobial peptides, which are immune system molecules that can neutralize bacteria, viruses, and fungi.

However, the flu-killing power of such peptides has been demonstrated only under a microscope and in lab mice. More research is needed to determine just how effective a peptide can be in helping humans beat the flu.

"We have identified a potentially new treatment for H1N1 human influenza virus, which is a peptide that comes from the skin of a frog from southern India," said Joshy Jacob , an associate professor in the Emory University School of Medicine's microbiology and immunology department, who led the study.

"This peptide works by directly killing the virus, and it is specific for all influenza viruses that have a H1 type of hemagglutinin," Jacob said.

'It makes the virus particle fall apart'

The researchers observed how the peptides interacted with influenza viruses under a microscope and in mice.

"In this paper we screened 32 peptides, and the surprise was that four out of 32 had activity against the virus," Jacob said.

"Out of the four, we found one of them (urumin) was non-toxic to human cells," he said. "So, we tested it against viruses that came from the 1930s until the current ones, and it kills all of the H1s. It doesn't touch H3. It's very, very specific."

The researchers aren't quite sure why urumin only targets H1 viruses, but Jacob said that H1 viruses might be anatomically similar to an amphibian pathogen that the frog mucus is intended to destroy. If there is a similarity, it may explain why H1 viruses are vulnerable to urumin's wrath.

"The frog makes this peptide for its own survival. It never gets influenza," Jacob said, adding that the peptide fights the flu virus by destroying an important part of the hemagglutinin.

To explain how the peptide works, Jacob likened hemagglutinin to a billboard sign.

"You have the message and then you have the little stem that holds it up. The message can change but the stem is the same, and this peptide targets the stem of the hemagglutinin, that's why it's very efficient," he said.

The urumin peptide could be a novel treatment since it targets the hemagglutinin, unlike current drugs on the market which target other parts of the virus, resulting in less impact, Jacob said.

"It just blows it up. It makes the virus particle fall apart," he said.

Gregory Chinchar, a professor in the University of Mississippi Medical Center's department of microbiology and immunology, said that he was surprised that the peptide targeted the hemagglutinin on the flu virus. He was not involved in the new study.

"I don't think people thought that they work that way before," Chinchar said about the peptide. "They thought that they would be more targeted to membranes, but the data looks like they target the H1 protein specifically and that data looks pretty firm."

"The milk stayed good, just like you refrigerated it," Jacob said about the age-old Russian practice.

"In 2012, scientists took that particular frog and wanted to know why is it, why do these frogs keep milk fresh? It turned out that when you shock a frog or when you stimulate them or stress them, they secrete these short peptides into their surroundings," he said. "A majority of the peptides were antibacterial and some of them kill the things that make milk go bad."

"Amphibians, especially certain groups of frogs, produce and store large amounts of antimicrobial peptides in specialized granular glands in the skin," said Louise Rollins-Smith, associate professor of pathology, microbiology, and immunology at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. "When the skin is injured or the frog is alarmed, they release large amounts of the peptides to protect the skin."

"The peptide described in the Immunity report is somewhat unusual because of the apparent specificity," Rollins-Smith said about how urumin specifically targets H1 viruses.

"If further studies show that it has a low level of cytotoxicity and it can protect in other animal models of influenza, it could be developed as a potential treatment for influenza," she said. Cytoxicity refers to being toxic to cells in the body.

"As an amphibian biologist concerned about the loss of amphibian species around the globe, it is important to note that they may hold important secrets useful for human medicine and they should be preserved," she said.

Ferrets are next, then possibly humans

A challenge to possibly using frog mucus as a flu-fighting treatment in humans is figuring out how to get the urumin peptide to attach to flu virus cells in the human body, Jacob said.

In the new study, the peptide was delivered to mice through their noses, where flu viruses were also delivered.

"I need to come up with a strategy to deliver it systemically as well; maybe an injectable, which goes in the bloodstream and kills influenza viruses," Jacob mused.

If those studies prove to be successful, human testing could be next.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This was a tough call. The story reports that the peptide killed all of the H1 versions of the influenza A virus that it encountered in laboratory settings. And the text sends up a cautionary flag early in the story that the peptide has not yet been tested in human beings. In fact, the next step appears to be testing in ferrets.
But, it doesn’t really say much about the mice research. How did they determine that it worked? Did it clear infections? We were somewhat unclear on that aspect of the story.
Again, though, because the story didn’t oversell the findings, we’re leaning toward Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study published late last month in The New England Journal of Medicine is raising provocative questions about how best to treat a torn anterior cruciate ligament. For the study, researchers from Lund University in Sweden recruited 121 young adults who had injured their A.C.L.’s. The volunteers, between 18 and 35, were physically active, and many were competitive athletes. They agreed, rather bravely, to be randomly assigned to one of two groups and accept radically different treatments for their torn A.C.L.’s. The first group began physical therapy and then underwent surgical reconstruction of the ligament, considered by many people to be the best option for injured athletes. The second group received only physical therapy, with the option to have the operation later. Twenty-three subjects of that group did eventually have the operation. (For those fortunate enough not to be personally familiar with A.C.L. surgery, reconstruction involves replacing the injured ligament with tissue from elsewhere in your own leg or from a cadaver.)

Over two years, the injured knees were assessed using a comprehensive numerical score that rated pain, function during activity and other measures. At the time of the original injury, the knee also had been scored. At the end of the two years, both groups showed considerable improvement. The scores for the surgically repaired knees had risen by 39.2 points. The scores for the more conservatively treated knees also had risen, by 39.4 points. In other words, the outcomes were virtually identical. Despite a widespread belief that surgery leads to a stronger knee, the results showed that surgically reconstructing the A.C.L. as soon as possible after the tear “was not superior” to more conservative treatment, the study’s authors wrote. The findings suggest, the authors concluded, that “more than half the A.C.L. reconstructions” currently being conducted on injured knees “could be avoided without adversely affecting outcomes.”

This possibility should reverberate across playing fields nationwide, where, at the moment, preseason high school, collegiate and adult-league sports practices are under way, with a concomitant surge in A.C.L. tears. By one estimate, as many as 1 in every 556 fit, active people will tear an A.C.L. — particularly if they participate in sports that involve frequent pivoting and landing, like soccer, football, tennis, skiing and basketball. At the same time, the urge to treat the injury with surgery appears to be growing. The “belief among most surgeons and patients is that surgery is a ‘must,’ at least if you aim to go back into an active lifestyle,” the Swedish authors of the study e-mailed in response to questions.

Part of the reason for A.C.L. surgery’s popularity is that by most measures, it works. In the current study, most of the group members who had reconstructive surgery reported that their injured knees felt healthy after two years and that they had returned to activity — not, in most cases, at the same level as before their injuries, but they were active. Significantly, their knees also were notably more “stable” than the joints that hadn’t been surgically fixed. Stability is, in theory, desirable. A stable knee rarely gives way.

But in practice, the importance of stability after A.C.L. treatment is “controversial,” The New England Journal study’s authors, Richard Frobell, Ph.D., and Stefan Lohmander, M.D., Ph.D., of Lund University, wrote in their e-mail. In an important 2009 study published in The British Journal of Sports Medicine, researchers retrospectively compared outcomes after 10 years in competitive athletes who had surgery or had opted for conservative treatment of their torn A.C.L.’s. The surgically repaired knees were notably more stable. But they weren’t fundamentally healthier. The surgically reconstructed knees and the conservatively treated joints experienced similar (and high) levels of early onset knee arthritis, a common occurrence after an A.C.L. tear. The treatments were almost identical, too, in terms of whether the athletes could return to sports and whether they reported subsequent knee problems.

Why, then, undergo A.C.L. reconstruction, an operation that can be expensive and, like all surgical procedures, carries risks? Several top-flight orthopedic surgeons I contacted say that they remain convinced that surgery leads to a better long-term outcome for certain patients, particularly if they want to return to pivoting sports. “The reason to have the surgery is to preserve” other parts of the knee from injury during activity, says Dr. Warren Dunn, an assistant professor of orthopedics and rehabilitation at Vanderbilt University who has extensively studied A.C.L. tears. He points out that in The New England Journal of Medicine study, only 8 percent of the patients in the first surgical group subsequently tore a meniscus, a fragile pillow of cartilage that can rip if a knee gives way. Twenty-five percent of those in the physical therapy group eventually tore their meniscuses.

What these numbers mean for anyone who tears an A.C.L. or is the parent of a young athlete in that situation is that they should have a long, frank conversation with an orthopedic surgeon and possibly also a nonsurgical sports-medicine specialist about options. “We recommend surgery based on activity level and sports,” Dr. Dunn says. “Most subjects can do in-line activities” like running or biking “without an A.C.L.” He adds, “On the other hand, we believe that A.C.L.-deficient subjects that do return” to sports involving cutting, pivoting or planting the leg “can consequently injure the meniscus” or other cartilage in the knee and would benefit from a replacement A.C.L.

The authors of the study are less sure. “On the basis of our study results, we’d tell patients” that “there is no apparent downside of starting a good rehab program and waiting with the surgery decision to see if it is needed or not,” the authors wrote to me.

The ultimate lesson of The New England Journal study is almost certainly that more science on the subject is needed. “We definitely know only parts of the long-term outcome” after different A.C.L. treatments, says Dr. Duncan Meuffels, an assistant professor of orthopedic surgery at Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam and lead author of The British Journal of Sports Medicine study.

But large-scale, randomized controlled studies, the gold standard of medical research, may be difficult to orchestrate, in part because people with shredded A.C.L.’s can balk at being denied surgery. In The New England Journal study, some of those assigned to physical therapy wound up requesting surgery, although they weren’t experiencing any knee problems. For them, it seems, “the desire to undergo surgery was based on expectations rather than symptoms,” the authors told me. It may be years, unfortunately, before we know if such expectations are justified or if unreconstructed injured knees can be fine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: (As noted, some of the measures in these studies can be considered either benefits or harms, depending on how you look at it.) 
This piece provides the absolute changes for each treatment group, and then tells us the key outcome: the results weren’t statistically different and demonstrated non-superiority. The piece reports the relative proportions of each group who tore their meniscuses. Qualitatively, it tells us about stability outcomes. The controversy surrounding the importance of these measurements is explored and sometimes implied; it would’ve been clearest for the author to explain (or wonder aloud) the meaning of increased mensical tears and instability in light of equivalent scores on the primary outcome. This story mentions that in the 2009 retrospective study, all subjects eventually developed similar and high levels of early-onset arthritis. 
The piece also provides some analysis of other outcomes, such as two "almost identical" results in the 2009 study. While quantified results are scant overall in this piece, that seems justified given that the comparisons between results often showed no statistical differences, which is clearly the important message. Of importance was the story’s exploration of the controversy surrounding the meaning of outcomes in stability and meniscus tears.
As mentioned in our introduction, this study raises the question of treating all ACL injuries as if patients are pro athletes. On that note, in an environment where we see pros jump at surgical therapy, one facet of the decision that would’ve been nice to raise is the recovery time. What are the outcomes, expectations, and/or trade-offs for getting back on the court sooner? The piece reports study outcomes 2 years after surgery. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Could Worms In Your Gut Cure Your Allergies?

When you first meet Moises Velasquez-Manoff, the first thing you notice is his hair — or the lack of it.

"At age 11, I developed this condition, called alopecia areata, where I lost my hair," says Velasquez-Manoff, a science writer in Berkeley, Calif. "It started in patches, but eventually I lost it all."

A few years ago Velasquez-Manoff was working on a book about autoimmune diseases, like allergies, asthma, Crohn's disease and alopecia. He talked to many people who were using an unlikely tool to treat their problems: parasitic worms that live in your gut — permanently.

The worms were getting rave reviews. "People were saying, 'I had absolutely zero symptoms. And my disease went into remission!'" Velasquez-Manoff says.

So he started to wonder: Could these worms cure his alopecia? Maybe his hay fever, too?

He went down to Mexico, bought 30 hookworms and let the larvae infect him.

Hookworm larvae are microscopic. But they have little spikes that puncture the skin and allow the larvae to burrow inside you. Then the critters head straight for a capillary.

"They basically ride your bloodstream back through your heart, into your lungs," where they hang out for a while, Velasquez-Manoff says.

Then the larvae crawl out of the lung through your stomach and into the small intestine — where they bite onto the intestinal wall and start sucking blood — a few drops a day.

At that point, the worms do something amazing: They suppress the immune system, says P'ng Loke, an immunologist at the New York University School of Medicine.

"That's the really fascinating thing," he says. You see, the worms don't shut down the immune system completely — just enough so that the immune cells won't attack the worm.

But this can help with something else. It can keep the immune system from getting out of control and attacking the body.

"If you think about it, the worst thing that you want is an immune system that's out of control," Loke says.

Why? Because that's when you get autoimmune problems. So the hypothesis is that intestinal worms could possibly reverse these problems, by damping down the immune system.

The idea was so promising, that back in 2011 a pharmaceutical company decided to test it in clinical trials. Coronado Biosciences put together about six large studies.

The first study to finish was a big one in Europe that looked to see if pig whipworms helped with Crohn's disease.

The bottom line: "The proportion of patients who improved with the worms was no different than the proportion of patients who were improved with placebo," says Dr. Stephen Hanauer at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, who was involved with one trial.

The whipworms were so ineffective at stopping Crohn's disease that Coronado canceled its other trials. The company's stock plummeted. And eventually the company changed its name and focus.

Other trials with worms haven't gone so well either, says Hanauer. "The controlled trials, thus far, in a variety of different diseases including childhood allergies and asthma have not been positive."

It's unclear why the worms haven't worked in these trials, Loke says. It could be that the whipworm larvae weren't prepared correctly. Or that the worms work for some people but not others. It may depend on a person's genes.

Back in Berkeley, Velasquez-Manoff thought he might one of the lucky ones.

A little while after he took the hookworms, his hay fever disappeared.

"Like just gone, gone, gone," he says.

"Then I had like, little bit of peach fuzzy hair growing here and there on my body," Velasquez-Manoff says.

But then the tide turned. "Suddenly it's like one day, the whole thing reversed."

His hay fever came back. The hair didn't grow anymore.

And having worms in his body wasn't pleasant. At first, he had diarrhea and cramps. That got better. But even months later, he still felt kind of bad.

"I never got back to feeling completely normal for that year [that the worms were inside]," Velasquez-Manoff says.

He says the benefits of the worms definitely didn't outweigh the bad side effects. And he would never try treating his alopecia or hay fever with them again.

"The way I thought of it was, would I give this to my kids? And the answer is pretty easily and obviously: Hell no," Velasquez-Manoff says. "I wouldn't want them to feel this way."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: There don’t appear to be quantifiable benefits associated with this treatment because it hasn’t been well studied in humans, and we are told this much: “The controlled trials, thus far, in a variety of different diseases including childhood allergies and asthma have not been positive.” Also, the patient interviewed experienced a negative result. With no proof of benefit and plenty of risks to ingesting parasitic worms, we’re left to wonder why this story emerged and was run on NPR with a headline that hinted there was potential for this treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finally, the world might be catching a break when it comes to drug-resistant gonorrhea.

A new study suggests that a vaccine that protects against a strain of meningitis may also ward off the sexually transmitted infection.

The research, conducted in New Zealand, found that the gonorrhea rate among teens and young adults there who had received a meningitis B vaccine during an emergency campaign in the early 2000s was significantly lower than the rate seen in people of the same age who weren’t vaccinated.

Researchers in Quebec say they saw the same phenomenon after a meningitis outbreak there, and previously published data from Cuba and Norway also hint of the vaccine’s unexpected benefit.

“It’s quite probably real,” said Helen Petousis-Harris, lead author of the New Zealand article and head of immunization research and vaccinology at the University of Auckland.

The findings are observational. Clinical trials will need to be conducted to see if the effect researchers have observed is actually due to the meningococcal B vaccine. But confirmation would be good news for the prevention and control of gonorrhea.

The last remaining drugs to cure this sexually transmitted infection are showing signs they may only have a few more years of usefulness left.

“While it is still very early days, these findings represent a positive step in the search for a vaccine against this common and distressing disease that is increasingly resistant to antibiotic treatment,” said Robin Gaitens, a spokeswoman for GSK, which owns the product that contains this meningitis component.

Why would a vaccine designed to protect against a strain of bacteria that causes meningitis also prevent gonorrhea infection? Some biology is useful here.

Meningitis is a condition — inflammation of the membranes that surround the brain and the spinal cord — that can be triggered by some viruses and several types of bacteria.

One of the latter is Neisseria meningitidis, sometimes known as meningococcal disease. It is the only form of bacterial meningitis that triggers epidemics.

Despite the fact that gonorrhea and meningitis are quite different from one another, the bacteria that cause Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis are actually related.

Meningococcal disease is rare but very dangerous. It can kill, and quickly. People who survive the infection can suffer permanent brain damage or may lose one or several limbs.

Because of the severity of the consequences, health officials often mount emergency vaccination campaigns in response to outbreaks of Neisseria meningitidis.

There are vaccines for several Neisseria meningitidis strains, but designing a vaccine to protect against the B strain was a particularly difficult nut to crack. As a consequence, the vaccine component that was made to protect against B targets a different part of the bacterium, Petousis-Harris said.

That may explain why the B vaccine appears to offer some protection against Neisseria gonorrhea. Meningococcal vaccines that protect against the other strains do not seem to have the same effect.

“A lot of these vaccines have been used widely globally,” Petousis-Harris said. “And what’s happened with gonorrhea? Nothing. Gonorrhea carries on its merry little way.”

New Zealand had a very bad meningococcal outbreak in the early 2000s caused by the B strain. A special vaccine that only protected against that strain was made; it was used between 2004 and 2008.

Petousis-Harris and her colleagues looked later to see if gonorrhea rates had changed after that meningococcal vaccination campaign. They found people who were vaccinated were 31 percent less likely to be infected with gonorrhea than those who hadn’t received the meningococcal B vaccine.

The study, published Monday in the Lancet, was funded by GSK and Auckland Uniservices, the commercialization arm of the University of Auckland.

The single-component vaccine used by New Zealand is no longer made. But the same component is one of several in the Bexsero vaccine, which was used in Quebec when the government decided to vaccinate against meningococcal B disease in a part of the province with a high relative rate of cases a few years ago.

Dr. Jean Longtin, head of the province’s public health laboratory, said he and some colleagues decided to look at whether the vaccination campaign was having an impact on gonorrhea rates in that area after reading about an early observation from Norway.

“In Quebec we saw the exact same effect as New Zealand,” said Longtin, who said his group is still analyzing its findings. “Gonorrhea rates have been going down in the vaccine group whereas in the non-vaccine group it’s following the rest of the province.”

It is not clear how long the protection — if it’s real — will actually last. But even a few years of protection could help significantly reduce the spread of gonorrhea, experts argue.

“Mathematical modeling has shown that even a vaccine of moderate efficacy and duration could have a substantial effect on the transmission and prevalence of gonorrhea, if coverage in the population is high and protection lasts during the highest risk period,” Kate Seib, of Australia’s Institute for Glycomics, wrote in a commentary that accompanied the study.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story just passes the bar, giving actual numbers far down in the story. It states researchers “found people who were vaccinated were 31 percent less likely to be infected with gonorrhea than those who hadn’t received the meningococcal B vaccine.”
We would have liked to see that data higher in the story. Instead, the story states in the third paragraph that the gonorrhea rate was “significantly lower” among those who were vaccinated. The story doesn’t give the overall risk of getting gonorrhea, so it’s hard to tell whether a 31 percent drop amounts to a significant benefit for individuals.
The study itself states that the findings provide preliminary evidence of “moderate” cross-protection, and we think that should have been given more discussion so people get a better sense of how little is known about the efficacy compared to other vaccines.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For centuries, shamans and healers have been using psychedelics in sacramental rituals in the belief that the substances have healing qualities and can lead to meaningful spiritual experiences. It turns out contemporary science may back these ancient claims.

A new study conducted by the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Public Health found that participants who took naturalistic doses of "classic" psychedelics – magic mushrooms, DMT, mescaline and LSD – had significantly decreased the likelihood of having suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts and psychological distress.

The study, published recently in the Journal of Pharmacology, analyzed data from an annual survey conducted by the National Survey on Drug Use and Health that measures substance abuse in relation to mental illness. The data were compiled between 2008 and 2012, and drew from the experiences of 190,000 adults. Participants answered pre-recorded questions about their individual use of classic psychedelics, and the data was collected in person.

Of those surveyed, 13.6%, or about 27,235 people, reported having used classic psychedelics. The results showed that those who had taken these substances in their lifetime had a 19% less likelihood of exhibiting psychological distress in the past month, and their reports of suicidal thoughts in the past year were likely to be 14% lower. What’s more, that same group reported a 36% lower probability of suicide attempts in the past year.

The National Alliance on Mental Illness estimates that 30,000 people in the U.S. die from suicide each year, and worldwide that number is 1 million. While treatment for mental health disorders has improved markedly in the past century, the suicide rate remains stagnant.

Only two population studies to date, this one included, specifically address the relationship between mental illness and psychedelics. In 2011, individuals with advanced-stage cancer were given single doses of psilocybin and were found to have reduced long-term incidences of depression and anxiety.

In recent years, some scientists, such as this study’s lead researcher, Peter S. Hendricks, have been pioneering innovative treatments to help decrease the suicide rate. Hendricks is a clinical psychologist by trade, but his interest in the use of psychedelics was piqued by working with people who struggled with addiction, particularly lifelong cigarette smokers. He says he became "demoralized" by patients who had little luck quitting with the intervention programs he and his team developed. Hendricks says psychedelics can possibly help patients shift their priorities, or lead to drastic changes in perspective or even spiritual experiences that will help them improve their mental states.

"Those who are addicted to, say, smoking or using cocaine, aren't doing so because they believe it's their purpose in life; in fact, often that behavior can conflict with whatever they believe their overall purpose might be. So when you administer a psychedelic, you re-prioritize their values such that whatever their grander purpose might be takes priority," Hendricks said in an interview with Newsweek.

The UAB isn't the first study to flirt with this idea. A smoking-cessation trial in the fall found that lifelong smokers who took several controlled doses of psilocybin demonstrated tobacco abstinence rates of up to 80% in the long term. The heightened connectivity to spirituality has also been demonstrated to curb suicidal thoughts and attempts.

A lack of resources and funding is a hindrance to continuing studies, however, as psychedelics are still classified as schedule 1 narcotics in the U.S. and criminal offenses accompany their possession. While skeptics may question the idea of using psychedelics as treatment for psychological distress, Hendricks emphasizes that he does not advocate for rampant recreational use of psychedelics, or widespread legalization. He believes the data support the idea of demoting psychedelics to schedule 3 or 4, and that they can be used in controlled therapy situations.

The study does have shortcomings: For one, the data relied on people self-reporting their habits, so there is a possibility of error there. Additionally, the effects of psychedelics on the developing brain are still largely unknown, meaning they could pose a threat to people with a predisposition to schizophrenia. The scientists recognize, too, that it's still unknown if classic psychedelics concretely led to a drop in psychological distress and suicidality; perhaps those who participated in the study and had reported using psychedelics in the past had personalities that made them less susceptible to distress and suicidality in the first place.

Culturally, psychedelics bear quite a bit of baggage: Timothy Leary’s call to “turn on, tune in and drop out” became a countercultural slogan in the 1960s, and proved damaging to potential research on utilizing the drug to improve mental health for more than three decades. Perhaps this study will be a turning point in how our culture regards psychedelics and mental health. "I know scientists are supposed to be objective and dispassionate," Hendricks says. "But I'm excited and hopeful. I've seen the data -- it seems to me that psychedelics hold tremendous therapeutic potential."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story cites “about 27,235 people” who said they had used “classic” psychedelics, which it identifies as magic mushrooms, DMT, mescaline and LSD. And it lists the reduction in the odds that these people had exhibited psychological distress in the prior month (-19%) or suicidal thoughts (-14%) or suicidal attempts (-36%) during the prior year. But it does not give total numbers of individuals for any of those categories.
As a side note, we’d point out that the study technically reported on the “odds” and not the “probability” of exhibiting suicidal thoughts or attempts (the latter being language used in the story). A small point, to be sure, but we think these details matter.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHAMPAIGN, Ill. - A new surgical tool that uses light to make sure surgeons removing cancerous tumors "got it all" was found to correlate well with traditional pathologists' diagnoses in a clinical study, showing that the tool could soon enable reliable, real-time guidance for surgeons.

The interdisciplinary research team led by Stephen Boppart, a University of Illinois professor of electrical and computer engineering and of bioengineering, performed the study on 35 patients with breast cancers at the Carle Foundation Hospital in Urbana, Illinois. The results appear in the journal Cancer Research.

One difficult but crucial determination for surgeons and tissue pathologists is figuring out where a tumor ends. A solid tumor may be easily identifiable, but the tissue around the main body of the tumor, known as the margin, may contain cancerous cells as well. Because of this, excess tissue surrounding the tumor is typically removed, but the question lingers of whether any cancer cells remain to re-emerge later as tumors.

"In almost all solid-tumor surgeries, there's a question of margins," said Dr. Boppart, who also is a medical doctor. "Typically, surgeons will remove the tissue mass that contains the tumor and will send it to the lab. The pathologist will process, section and stain the tissue, then examine the thin sections on microscope slides. They look at the structure of the cells and other features of the tissue. The diagnosis is made based on subjective interpretation and often other pathologists are consulted. This is what we call the gold standard for diagnosis."

The new device is a hand-held probe based on a technology called optical coherence tomography (OCT) that uses light to image tissue in real time. Cancer cells and normal tissue scatter light differently because they have different microstructural and molecular features, Boppart said, so OCT gives physicians a way to quantitatively measure the cellular feature of a tumor. Surgeons can pass the OCT wand over a section of tissue and see a video on a screen, with no special chemical stains or lengthy tissue processing required.

"In many cases, you can't tell the difference between cancer cells and normal tissue with the naked eye, but with OCT they're very different," said Boppart, who also is affiliated with the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology at the U. of I.

In the clinical study, surgeons treated patients according to the standard surgical procedure, but OCT data were collected from the margin of the tumor cavity and the margin of the removed tissue mass during surgery so that the results could be compared later. The study found that the OCT device analysis identified the differences between normal and cancerous tissue with 92 percent sensitivity and 92 percent specificity. They also found that the way that OCT spotted cancer in the removed tissue was closely correlated with the results from the postoperative pathology reports, which often came days later.

"For the first time, this study demonstrates the use of OCT for imaging tumor margins within the tumor cavity, in the patient, during surgery," Boppart said. "It is likely better to check to see if any residual tumor cells might be left behind, rather than checking the tissue mass that was taken out. Then, the surgeon can intervene immediately."

The researchers will continue clinical studies with the OCT device, looking at other types of solid-state tumors. Diagnostic Photonics, a start-up company Boppart co-founded that also collaborated on the study, is commercializing the OCT probe technology for broader use.

"Ultimately, new technological innovations like this in medicine and surgery are going to improve our health care and save lives. That's when this work will be most rewarding," Boppart said.

The National Institutes of Health supported this work.

The paper "Real-time imaging of the resection bed using a handheld probe to reduce incidence of microscopic positive margins in cancer surgery" is available online at http://cancerres. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release describes the accuracy of the device as follows:
The study found that the OCT device analysis identified the differences between normal and cancerous tissue with 92 percent sensitivity and 92 percent specificity. They also found that the way that OCT spotted cancer in the removed tissue was closely correlated with the results from the postoperative pathology reports, which often came days later.
It also quotes the study author who says:
“For the first time, this study demonstrates the use of OCT for imaging tumor margins within the tumor cavity, in the patient, during surgery,” Boppart said. “It is likely better to check to see if any residual tumor cells might be left behind, rather than checking the tissue mass that was taken out. Then, the surgeon can intervene immediately.”
We’re inclined to give the benefit of the doubt given the story’s good-faith attempt to use some numbers to describe the device’s accuracy. However, we think the study itself had many details, not communicated in the release, that would have added to the release’s credibility, understandability, and potential impact. It would have been very useful to know more about how many of the 35 women participating in the study had mastectomies, for example, how many had invasive cancers, in situ cancers, or ductal cancers; and how large a range the tumors covered.
For the sake of background, we’d add that breast cancer surgeons used to go after wider margins (i.e. more healthy tissue at the edge of the removed tumor) than they do today. There is a large body of evidence that demonstrates that wider margins do not translate to better outcomes, and the SSO-ASTRO margin guideline statement is now fairly well accepted, noting that “no ink on tumor” is sufficient in many cases of invasive cancer; of course this may not apply to all cases. As more physicians adopt the 2014 guidelines, the utility of these devices may be called into question.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Giving babies and toddlers antibiotics when doctors are certain they have ear infections can help speed up their recovery, supporting current treatment guidelines for children between the ages of 6 months and 23 months.

However, antibiotics do come with significant side effects including diarrhea, rashes, yeast infections and vomiting. Overuse of drugs also contributes to antibiotic resistance, so careful selection of who should take antibiotics is necessary according to 2 studies published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.

According to one of the studies, ear infection, or acute otitis media, is the most frequently diagnosed illness in children in the United States, and most children with these ear infections are routinely given antibiotics.

But just 2 months ago, a new study confirmed practice guidelines from 2004, which recommend that children older than 2 with a confirmed diagnosis of an acute ear infection do not need to be given antibiotics because the drugs do not significantly speed up recovery.

The foundation for the "watchful waiting" treatment recommendation instead of taking drugs is based on this and previous studies that did not have very many children under age 2 in the clinical trials. This made concluding that the same treatment works in the youngest age group very difficult.

These 2 new studies were designed to provide the research to fill the gap, and clarify treatment recommendations for babies and toddlers. The children in these latest trials had their ear infections confirmed by experts (otoscopists). Researchers found that the youngsters who received a placebo did not recover as quickly as those getting the amoxicillin-clavulanate, an antibiotic that has been shown to be effective for earaches.

However the differences were not huge. In the United States study, 80% of the children on antibiotics felt better on the seventh day of treatment; 74% of the children taking a placebo also felt better on the seventh day.

Dr. Jerome Klein, a pediatric infectious disease specialist from Boston University's Medical School, says in an accompanying editorial that these two studies resolve the controversy over giving antibiotics versus watchful waiting in kids with confirmed ear infections.

"More young children with a certain diagnosis of acute otitis media recover more quickly when they are treated with an appropriate antimicrobial agent," Klein wrote.

Dr. Richard Rosenfeld, who is a professor and chairman of otolaryngology at SUNY Downstate and Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn, New York, has been charged with reviewing the 2004 American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines for treating ear infections. He, too, has been eagerly awaiting the results of these 2 studies.

One of the strengths of both studies, Rosenfeld said, is that the researchers took the time to make a solid diagnosis. Only children who really had ear infections were included in the trials. But Rosenfeld doesn't see the results as black and white as Klein.

"Medicine is about gray zones and balancing the risks and benefits," Rosenfeld says. "Parents and doctors need to understand what the benefits and what the downside of treatments are."

"If you received a placebo and you have a 74% chance of having symptoms go away or improvement [of illness]" – compared with the 80% in the antibiotic group ... "as a parent, how impressed are you about a 6% difference?" In treatment outcomes for pain, there was no difference, he notes.

In both studies, children taking the real drugs had more side effects. The study authors caution about the overuse of these drugs and the risk of antibiotic resistance. The Finnish noted that limiting use of antibiotics may reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and increase the chance the future use of antibiotic will be effective.

Rosenfeld says it's never wrong to prescribe an antibiotic for a well-diagnosed ear infection. "If the child has high fever, severe ear pain, the child is really miserable, has a fever or draining from the ear or double ear infection and is under 2 years old, then prescribing antibiotic is probably the right thing to do."

But waiting to take the antibiotic isn't a bad idea either. He says he frequently writes a prescription for parents but tells them to hold off from filling it for 3 days. If the child still has symptoms 3 days later, then they should get the antibiotic and start giving it to their child. If you do that, 2 out of 3 parents don't fill out the prescription."

Which is why he says what to do is still not clear-cut. He also points out that if antibiotics don't relieve a child's pain, pain medications will.

Rosenfeld believes these latest studies reinforce an important message: "It's an opportunity for a conversation with your pediatrician." Parents need to weigh the benefits of what antibiotics can do in terms of killing the bacteria (if the ear infection is caused by a bacteria and not a virus) and the side effects their child may have to endure, as well as the possibility that exposing bacteria to antimicrobials may make the drugs less effective in the future.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Although a bit more detail would have been useful on the findings from both studies, the story does provide an account of the absolute rate of symptom relief after 7 days for antibiotic (80%) and placebo-treated (74%) patients, which is the expectation for this criterion. It also provides valuable expert commentary on how parents can put these benefits into context vs. the risk of harm and the likelihood of spontaneous recovery in children who don’t receive antibiotics.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Would a life without onions, garlic, apples and most bread be worth living?

For growing numbers of people suffering from digestive ills, the answer is "yes," at least for a while.

They are trying something called the low-FODMAP diet, an experimental eating plan developed in Australia and now getting some scientific backing and commercial buzz in the United States. The diet is aimed primarily at people with irritable bowel syndrome, a common condition in which abdominal pain and irregular bowel habits — with diarrhea, constipation or both — can wax and wane for years.

Followers are asked to eliminate, and then try to reintroduce, a long list of foods containing certain carbohydrates that might trigger gas, bloating, pain and diarrhea. FODMAP is an acronym for those carbohydrates: fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols.

The theory is that FODMAPs, found in many fruits, vegetables, grains, dairy foods and sweeteners, are poorly digested by susceptible people. The undigested carbohydrates can draw extra fluid into the digestive tract and end up in the colon, where they are “feasted upon” and fermented by gut microbes, leading to all sorts of misery, says Lauren Van Dam, a registered dietitian at the University of Michigan.

If giving up some foods might lessen that misery, many people are game, she says. “We have some patients that are literally housebound because they are worried they are going to have an accident or because they have terrible pain,” Van Dam says.

Barbara DeLancey, a 63-year-old registered nurse from Ann Arbor, says she was crippled by 10-times-a-day diarrhea when she agreed to try the diet a year ago. “I was resistant at first because it seemed so restrictive,” she says. She got teary-eyed at the grocery store, seeing all the food she could not have.

But eventually she learned she could tolerate and add back some favorites, including garlic and apples. She credits the diet, along with medication, with a big reduction in her symptoms, but says “it has not been a miracle cure.”

The diet has generated enough interest to prompt some food companies to introduce low-FODMAP products — hoping for a market surpassing that for gluten-free foods, according to some industry reports.

In 2014, IBS treatment guidelines from the American College of Gastroenterology said the diet showed promise, but that the quality of evidence was “very low."

Since then, several studies have strengthened the case for the diet, says guideline co-author Brian Lacy, a professor of medicine and chief of gastroenterology at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, N.H. Still, one study from Sweden showed no advantage over a less-restrictive dietary approach that eliminates fewer foods and stresses changes such as smaller, more frequent meals.

"The data are not overwhelming,” Lacy says. “But I think it’s a reasonable thing to try.”

The largest study so far, with 92 patients, was conducted at University of Michigan. It found that 52% of low-FODMAP patients and 41% of patients on a less-restrictive diet reported “adequate relief.” The difference was not statistically significant, says study co-author William Chey, a professor of gastroenterology. But low-FODMAP patients did get significantly better relief from pain and bloating and greater gains in mood, body image and overall quality of life, he says.

Medications, probiotics, fiber supplements and other approaches still have roles in treating IBS, and no one approach works for all patients, Chey and Lacy say.

It’s not known if the diet leads to any nutritional deficiencies or keeps working in the long run — especially for patients who get little support from doctors or dietitians.

“Physicians are largely administering the diet by giving patients sheets of paper with foods to exclude,” Chey says. Ideally, all would be referred to dietitians, Chey and Lacy agree. But few dietitians are trained in the diet, and insurers typically do not cover the visits, Lacy notes.

When patients do make their way to Kate Scarlata, a Boston area registered dietitian who specializes in the diet, the first thing she tells them is that it “is a dietary experiment. It’s a short-term learning diet.”

Van Dam does the same — explaining that after a few weeks she will help clients reintroduce foods one carbohydrate category at a time.

“Most are able to identify some high-FODMAP foods they can tolerate very well and some they can tolerate a little, but not in high portions every day,” she says. “Our goal is for them to be on the most varied, nutritious diet possible.”

The trickiest part is avoiding onions and garlic, the dietitians say. They teach clients strategies such as using (safe) garlic-infused oils, avoiding restaurant sauces and soups and topping salads with oil and vinegar.

High- and low-FODMAP food lists are updated frequently at websites and apps run by the University of Michigan and Monash University in Australia.

Here is a sampling from the Michigan site. (Note: the site receives funding from Nestle Health Science, which is marketing low-FODMAP products).

Foods to avoid

 Dairy: Milk, ice cream, yogurt, cottage and ricotta cheeses (except for lactose-free versions)

 Fruits: Apples, peaches, pears, watermelon, cherries, figs

 Vegetables: Garlic, onions, leeks, asparagus, cauliflower or large servings (more than ½ cup) of broccoli and Brussels sprouts

 Grains: Wheat (except in sourdough bread), rye, barley

 Legumes and nuts: Cashews, kidney beans, soy beans and soy milk

 Sweeteners: Honey, fructose, xylitol, agave syrup

Foods to include 

 Dairy and dairy substitutes: Kefir, almond milk, coconut milk

 Fruits: Bananas, blueberries, grapes, oranges, strawberries

 Vegetables: Carrots, green beans, bell peppers, potatoes, tomatoes

 Grains: Rice, oats, gluten-free bread (but check labels for high-FODMAP ingredients)

 Legumes and nuts: Peanuts, pecans, walnuts

 Sweeteners: Cane sugar, aspartame, stevia
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story looks at the big picture here, and it does do a pretty good job quantifying the benefits, when relevant. For example, one recent study in the United States gets detailed attention in the story. In it, patients on the low-FODMAP diet perceived better relief from pain and bloating than did patients on a less restrictive diet. We’re told both the percentage of subjects who reported “adequate relief,” hovered around 40-50% for both diets. The story quickly follows that by explaining there was no statistically significant difference.
The story also highlights another study in which the low-FODMAP diet fared no better than another, less restrictive diet. “The data are not overwhelming,” notes one scientist. And the story, while mentioning that the 2014 American College of Gastroenterology guidelines stated that the diet showed promise, also quotes the organization as indicating that the quality of the evidence is “very low.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new low dose three in one pill to treat hypertension could transform the way high blood pressure is treated around the world.

A trial led by The George Institute for Global Health revealed that most patients - 70 per cent - reached blood pressure targets with the 'Triple Pill', compared to just over half receiving normal care.

With high blood pressure the leading cause of disease burden worldwide, it's expected the findings published in JAMA will change guidelines globally.

Dr Ruth Webster, of The George Institute for Global Health, said this was a major advance by showing that the Triple Pill was not only more effective than standard care, it was also safe. "It's estimated more than a billion people globally suffer from high blood pressure with the vast majority having poorly controlled blood pressure. Our results could help millions of people globally reduce their blood pressure and reduce their risk of heart attack or stroke."

The researchers tested an entirely new way of treating hypertension by giving patients three drugs, each at half dose, in a single pill for early treatment of high blood pressure. Traditionally patients begin treatment with one drug at a very low dose, which is increased over time with additional drugs added and increased in dosage to try to reach target.

Dr Webster added: "Patients are brought back at frequent intervals to see if they are meeting their targets with multiple visits required to tailor their treatments and dosage. This is not only time inefficient, it's costly. We also know that many doctors and patients find it too complicated and often don't stick to the process. This new approach is much simpler and it works."

The trial, which was conducted in Sri Lanka, enrolled 700 patients with an average age of 56 and blood pressure of 154/90 mm Hg.

Patients were randomly assigned to receive either the combination pill or usual care - their doctor's choice of blood pressure lowering medication. The Triple Pill, consisted of the blood pressure medications telmisartan (20 mg), amlodipine (2.5 mg), and chlorthalidone (12.5 mg).

Compared with patients receiving usual care, a significantly higher proportion of patients receiving the Triple Pill achieved their target blood pressure of 140/90 or less (with lower targets of 130/80 for patients with diabetes or chronic kidney disease).

At six months, 83 percent of participants in the Triple Pill group were still receiving the combination pill compared to the majority of patients in the usual-care group still receiving only one and only one third receiving two or more blood-pressure-lowering drugs.

Professor Anushka Patel, Principal Investigator of the trial and Chief Scientist at The George Institute, said this was big improvement. "The World Heart Federation has set an ambitious goal that by 2025 there will be a 25 per cent reduction in blood pressure levels globally. The Triple Pill could be a low cost way of helping countries around the world to meet this target.

"This study has global relevance. While the most pressing need, from the perspective of the global burden of disease, is low-and middle-income countries, it's equally relevant in a country like Australia where we're still achieving only 40%-50% control rates for high blood pressure."

The George Institute is now looking at strategies to maximise uptake of the study results. This includes examining the acceptability of the Triple Pill approach to patients and their doctors, as well as cost-effectiveness which will be important for governments and other payers to consider.

The study was funded by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia as part of the Global Alliance for Chronic Disease.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The target blood pressure (BP) for this study was below 140/90 (or below 130/80 in patients with diabetes or chronic kidney disease).
The news release states that: “70% (of subjects) reached blood pressure targets with the ‘Triple Pill’, compared to just over half receiving normal care.” (Normal or usual care is defined in the release as “their doctor’s choice of blood pressure lowering medication.”)
It should have been made more clear this was measured after 6 months in the study. And as a result, the effect on cardiovascular (CV) risk reduction of the combination is unknown.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - U.S. researchers have developed tiny nanoparticle robots that can travel through a patient’s blood and into tumors where they deliver a therapy that turns off an important cancer gene.

The finding, reported in the journal Nature on Sunday, offers early proof that a new treatment approach called RNA interference or RNAi might work in people.

RNA stands for ribonucleic acid — a chemical messenger that is emerging as a key player in the disease process.

Dozens of biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies including Alnylam, Merck, Pfizer, Novartis and Roche are looking for ways to manipulate RNA to block genes that make disease-causing proteins involved in cancer, blindness or AIDS.

But getting the treatment to the right target in the body has presented a challenge.

A team at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena used nanotechnology — the science of really small objects — to create tiny polymer robots covered with a protein called transferrin that seek out a receptor or molecular doorway on many different types of tumors.

“This is the first study to be able to go in there and show it’s doing its mechanism of action,” said Mark Davis, a professor of chemical engineering, who led the study.

“We’re excited about it because there is a lot of skepticism whenever any new technology comes in,” said Davis, a consultant to privately held Calando Pharmaceuticals Inc, which is developing the therapy.

Other teams are using fats or lipids to deliver the therapy to the treatment target. Pfizer last week announced a deal with Canadian biotech Tekmira Pharmaceuticals Corp for this type of delivery vehicle for its RNAi drugs, joining Roche and Alnylam.

In the approach used by Davis and colleagues, once the particles find the cancer cell and get inside, they break down, releasing small interfering RNAs or siRNAs that block a gene that makes a cancer growth protein called ribonucleotide reductase.

“In the particle itself, we’ve built what we call a chemical sensor,” Davis said in a telephone interview. “When it recognizes that it’s gone inside the cell, it says OK, now it’s time to disassemble and give off the RNA.”

In a phase 1 clinical trial in patients with various types of tumors, the team gave doses of the targeted nanoparticles four times over 21 days in a 30-minute intravenous infusion.

Tumor samples taken from three people with melanoma showed the nanoparticles found their way inside tumor cells.

And they found evidence that the therapy had disabled ribonucleotide reductase, suggesting the RNA had done its job.

Davis could not say whether the therapy helped shrink tumors in the patients, but one patient did get a second cycle of treatment, suggesting it might be. Nor could he say if there were any safety concerns.

Davis said that part of the study will be presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting in June.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Three sentences from the end, the story says the lead investigator "could not say whether the therapy helped shrink tumors." For that, we’ll give the story a hesitant satisfactory grade on this criterion. 
Yet, at the top, the story said this was "early proof that a new treatment approach…might work in people."  Indeed, there isn’t much you can say at all after tests on three tumor samples.
One thing you can say is that there isn’t any evidence yet of an impact on outcomes that people really care about – impact on longevity or quality of life, for example.  For comparison, a story on The Scientist.com placed this high in the story in the third paragraph: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, May 16, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Half of children with sleep apnea who also wet the bed might stop their bedwetting if their tonsils or adenoids are removed, new research suggests.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is marked by interruptions in breathing while asleep; it is common among children with enlarged tonsils or adenoids. Exactly how sleep apnea results in bedwetting is not fully understood, but hormonal changes may play a role.

However, half of the 417 children in this latest study who had sleep apnea and were bedwetters stopped wetting the bed after they had their tonsils or adenoids removed. Children in the study were aged 5 to 18, and were followed for just under one year after their surgery, on average.

Those who did not stop wetting the bed after the surgery were more likely to be born prematurely, be male, be obese or have a family history of bedwetting, the investigators noted. Premature birth was the greatest predictor of continued bedwetting after surgery.

"If they haven't seen an ear, nose and throat specialist, see one to see if the child who wets the bed has OSA that can be cured by tonsil or adenoid removal," said study author Dr. Yegappan Lakshmanan, chief of pediatric urology at Children's Hospital of Michigan, in Detroit.

The findings were to be presented Monday at the annual meeting of the American Urological Association (AUA), in Washington, D.C. Research presented at medical meetings should be viewed as preliminary until it has been published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

There are many other causes of bedwetting, Lakshmanan said. "About 5 to 7 million children are bedwetters, and the causes fall into three main groups: bladder issues, sleep-related problems and the kidneys," he explained. "The children in this study wet the bed due to sleep-related problems."

So why weren't they all cured? "Bedwetting is multifactorial even within these groups, and eventually we should be able to pinpoint the cause for every single child," Lakshmanan said.

"There are several potential causes of bedwetting, and sleep apnea is clearly one of them," said Dr. Lane S. Palmer, chief of pediatric urology at the Cohen Children's Medical Center in New Hyde Park, N.Y.

"There are secondary positive effects of this tonsil- or adenoid-removing surgery, but I don't know that I would jump to have my child's tonsils or adenoids out as a primary treatment for bedwetting," he said. "Children with sleep apnea and bedwetting should see an otolaryngologist first."

"This study really underscores the fact that children who have other issues with sleep should be looked at for bedwetting because anything that depresses sleep at night can lead to bedwetting," said AUA spokesman Dr. Anthony Atala, a urologist at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C.

"If a child has bedwetting, pay close attention to their sleep patterns, and observe them while they are asleep and you can see whether they are breathing at a regular pace, and if not, seek additional help," Atala said.

Children with sleep apnea can be difficult to rouse, which may cause the bedwetting, said Dr. Dennis Kitsko, an otolaryngologist at the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh. "But not every child with sleep apnea will wet the bed, and not every bedwetter will have sleep apnea."

Still, "snoring in children is abnormal," said Dr. Linda Dahl, an ear, nose and throat doctor at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Children snore because their tonsils and adenoids are enlarged, and they end up getting other behaviors that go along with sleep apnea, including bedwetting," she explained.

"There are many ancillary benefits that you may not attribute to removing large tonsil and adenoids, such as putting an end to bedwetting," Dahl added.

Find out more about bedwetting and its treatment at the Nemours Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Right in the lead, the story quantifies the benefits, saying, “Half of children with sleep apnea who also wet the bed might stop their bedwetting if their tonsils or adenoids are removed, new research suggests.” The story satisfies our criteria of absolute risk reduction. However, we would have liked to have seen more details, such as the average length of time it took for half of the 417 children to stop wetting. And, do the researchers mean COMPLETELY stopped wetting, or went from wetting most nights to wetting rarely, for example. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An emerging treatment for a common hospital-acquired infection could be (slightly) less gross in the future. Researchers have found that delivering a fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) in a pill—a poop pill, basically—is no worse than a similar procedure done with a colonoscopy.

Neither option may sound particularly enticing, but FMTs are wildly effective at treating a very nasty infection called Clostridium difficile. One of the first controlled clinical trials for FMTs in 2013 ended early because the patients who received the treatment were doing so much better than patients who didn’t. In the new study, almost 90 percent of adults treated with the capsules were cured.

“It’s absolutely insane. We just don’t see kind of efficacy with drugs,” Dr. Dina Kao told Newsweek. Kao is one of the authors of the paper and a gastroenterologist at the University of Alberta. Kao and her colleagues published the findings in the Journal of the American Medical Association on Tuesday.

C. difficile infections can set in after a course of broad-spectrum antibiotics, which can wipe out some of the bacterial populations normally found in people’s gut. The transplants work by replacing those “healthy” bacteria. “C. difficile is the single biggest cause of diarrhea in a health care setting,” Kao said. “It is our public enemy No. 1 in hospitals.”

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, C. difficile infects half a million people in the United States per year and kills 15,000 people. But patients may be hesitant to accept this potentially life-saving treatment because there are feces involved. Previous research found that while every part of this treatment was unappealing to most people, being offered the treatment in a pill form made patients significantly more open to the idea. Other efforts to take the “poop” out of the poop pills—to just include the bacteria thought to be behind the benefits—have failed.

The 116 patients used in this study may have been selected in part because they were ideal candidates for FMTs, Dr. Elizabeth Hohmann noted, but she said the paper is solid overall. (Hohmann, a researcher at Massachusetts General Hospital who has also done research on FMTs, was not involved in his research.) “The results are sort of a best-case scenario,” she said. “What I like about this paper is that it validates the upper-GI route and demonstrates that you can get very good cure rates without doing a colonoscopy.”

That’s important because colonoscopies and the anesthesia required for the procedure can put a lot of stress on a person’s body and can be complicated for the people most at risk for C. difficile infections, Hohmann noted

Kao’s study also showed that people found FMTs far less unpleasant when the poop came in a pill. Two-thirds of the 57 patients who got the pills said their experiences were “not at all unpleasant,” while just 44 percent of the 59 patients who received the FMT via a colonoscopy could say the same.

But most importantly, the study found no difference in effectiveness between the two therapies. There was a significant difference in cost. Though the procedures were done in a Canadian hospital, the FMTs delivered by colonoscopy cost nearly $500 USD more than the capsules, which cost about $300.

FMTs are not yet common practice, though Kao noted that it is becoming the standard of care for C. difficile infections. “For this group of patients, nothing else really works,” she said. However, the same cannot be said yet for other conditions. While the FDA said in 2013 that doctors can try fecal transplants in patients with C. difficile infections, the agency noted doctors should only use FMT for other conditions in clinical trials. Over 100 clinical trials are ongoing for various FMT therapies, including ones to treat ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease in children. (New FDA guidelines have been in the works since 2016 but aren’t finalized.)

Despite the FDA’s advice, some people have set up shop as FMT providers anyway. Buzzfeed reported in June that one clinic in Tampa was even providing FMTs as a treatment for autism.

Though physicians think they know how FMTs work, it remains somewhat mysterious. One recent, small study found that even stool samples that are entirely free of bacteria can be effective, perhaps because there are non-bacterial organisms that also help.

“We still don’t understand what’s going on, and in these other conditions it’s not as clear-cut that the disturbance in the bacterial composition is the cause,” Kao said. “Stool is such a complex mixture.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This was a close call. Early on, it says the pill was 90% effective for treating recurrent Clostridium difficile infections. Later on, the story explains that both were equally successful in treating the Clostridium difficile infections. It would take a bit of deduction to figure out that the 90% treatment rate applies to both the pills and colonoscopies. And the study puts this figure close to 96%.
But we’ll give the benefit of the doubt and rate it satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - In an analysis that set off a fierce debate over the health effects of salt, researchers said on Wednesday they had found no evidence that small cuts to salt intake reduce the risk of developing heart disease or dying prematurely.

In a systematic review published by The Cochrane Library, British scientists found that while cutting salt consumption did appear to lead to slight reductions in blood pressure, that was not translated into lower death or heart disease risk.

The researchers said they suspected the trials conducted so far were not big enough to show any benefits to heart health, and called for large-scale studies to be carried out soon.

“With governments setting ever lower targets for salt intake and food manufacturers working to remove it from their products, it’s really important that we do some large research trials to get a full understanding of the benefits and risks of reducing salt intake,” said Rod Taylor of Exeter University, who led the review.

The Cochrane review attracted sharp criticism from nutrition experts. Francesco Cappuccio, head of the World Health Organization’s collaborating center for nutrition at Warwick University, said it was “a surprisingly poor piece of work.”

“This study does not change the priorities outlined worldwide for a population reduction in salt intake to prevent heart attacks and strokes, the greatest killers in the world,” he said in an emailed comment.

Simon Capewell, a professor of Clinical Epidemiology at Liverpool University, said the review was “disappointing and inconclusive” and did not change public health consensus that dietary salt raises blood pressure.

Most experts are agreed that consuming too much salt is not good for you and that cutting salt intake can reduce hypertension in people with normal and high blood pressure.

Many developed nations have government-sanctioned guidelines calling on people to cut their salt or sodium intake for the sake of their longer-term health. The World Health Organization (WHO) lists reducing salt intake among its top 10 “best buys” for reducing rates of chronic disease.

In Britain, the National Institute of Health and Clinical Guidance (NICE) has called for an acceleration of the reduction in salt in the general population from a maximum intake of 6 grams(g) a day for adults by 2015 to 3 g by 2025.

U.S. guidelines recommend Americans consume less than 2.3 g of salt daily, or 1.5 g for certain people who are more at risk for high blood pressure or heart disease.

While previous trials have found there is a blood pressure benefit from cutting salt, research has yet to show if that translates into better overall heart health in the wider population. High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases — the leading causes of death worldwide.

Taylor said he thought it did not find any evidence of big benefits because the numbers of people studied and the salt intake reductions were relatively small.

“The people in the trials we analyzed only reduced their salt intake by a moderate amount, so the effect on blood pressure and heart disease was not large,” he said.

For this review, Taylor’s team found seven studies that together included 6,489 participants. This gave the researchers enough data to be able to start drawing conclusions, they said. But even so, the scientists think they would need to have data from at least 18,000 people before they could expect to identify any clear health benefits.

Elaine Rush, a professor of nutrition at Auckland University of Technology in Australia, said that putting a spotlight on single trials and generalizing dietary advice for a single nutrient such as salt was “not helpful.”

“What is helpful is for the food industry to reformulate products to reduce sodium and increase the nutrient quality of foods by using real ingredients,” she said in an emailed comment.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news of this piece is that, not withstanding the recommendations of many guidelines and experts,  the recently published Cochrane review failed to demonstrate that a small reduction in dietary salt intake decreased the chance of developing heart disease or dying prematurely.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug, apixaban (Eliquis), appears better than the old standby warfarin in preventing strokes in people with the abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation, a new study finds.

Over 2.6 million Americans are affected by atrial fibrillation, and many take warfarin (also known as Coumadin) to prevent dangerous clots that can cause a stroke. Warfarin is notoriously tricky to modulate, however, and needs to be closely monitored -- usually through monthly doctors' visits. If the drug's activity isn't checked regularly it can trigger severe bleeding episodes, the most serious of which can happen in the brain.

"Warfarin is labor-intensive to manage," said study researcher Dr. Jack Ansell, chairman of the department of medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Sometimes it impairs the patient's quality of life and the outcomes are very dependent on how well the drug dosing is managed," he added. "This [new] drug has a lot of advantages over warfarin."

With apixaban, patients can use a standard dose that doesn't need monitoring and adjusting, Ansell said. Also, unlike warfarin, apixaban has few interactions with other drugs or foods, he added.

The study was funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer, the makers of apixaban.

Apixaban is a so-called Xa inhibitor, a class of anticoagulants (anti-clotting drugs) that work by blocking factor X, a protein involved in blood clotting. Ansell expects drugs in this class will have a major effect on how atrial fibrillation is managed in the future.

Another similar drug, Pradaxa (dabigatran), has been on the market for about a year and many patients with atrial fibrillation have been switched or started on it, he said.

"Once [apixaban] is available it is going to be very difficult to avoid offering this drug to patients," he said.

The issue of cost remains a factor, however. While generic warfarin is just pennies a dose, any new brand-name drug is likely to be much more expensive. According to Laura Hortas, a spokeswoman for Bristol-Myers Squibb, because apixaban is still an experimental drug its price tag remains uncertain.

The new report was published online Aug. 28 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with its presentation at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Paris.

For the trial, more than 18,000 patients with atrial fibrillation and a heightened risk for stroke were randomly assigned to receive either apixaban or warfarin.

Over an average of 1.8 years of follow-up there were fewer strokes or clots among patients taking apixaban (1.27 percent a year), compared with patients taking warfarin (1.6 percent per year), the researchers found.

This means that apixaban prevented six patients from having a stroke, 15 patients from having a major bleeding event and eight patients from dying, the researchers said in a Duke University news release.

The major effect on stroke was preventing hemorrhagic stroke, which is caused by bleeding in the brain and is the most serious type of stroke. According to the researchers, apixaban reduced this risk by 50 percent, preventing four patients from having this type of stroke and two patients from having an ischemic stroke (cause by a vessel blockage) or stroke of uncertain origin.

As to apixaban's expected higher price tag, Ansell said that since the drug does not require monitoring and the incidence of stroke and major bleeding are less, savings in doctors' visits and stroke treatment should more than compensate.

The new trial comes on the heels of another study on apixaban that was stopped early due to safety concerns. In that trial, published in July in the New England Journal of Medicine, apixaban's use was associated with raised odds for bleeding -- without providing patients with any reduction in heart attack risk.

However, "in that case, apixaban was given to patients with coronary artery disease who were also taking two other blood thinners," Ansell noted. "The three of them together showed that the risk of bleeding was just too high and there was no real benefit in that population. But, that's an entirely different problem, compared with atrial fibrillation," he said.

Commenting on the latest study, Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles agreed that "atrial fibrillation substantially increases the risk of stroke and death."

Warfarin reduces the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, but it also boosts the odds of bleeding and is often difficult to manage, he said.

"Apixaban is now the first oral anticoagulant [blood thinner] to show a statistically significant improvement in survival over warfarin in atrial fibrillation patients," Fonarow said. "This represents a very important therapeutic advance in the care of patients with atrial fibrillation."

For more information on atrial fibrillation, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provided the absolute decrease in the number of strokes or clots, major bleeding events and hemorrhagic stroke as compared to the people in the study taking warafarin.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The gene responsible for cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989. Now, 22 years later, a drug that tries to compensate for the genetic defect might be nearing the market.

Vertex Pharmaceuticals announced Wednesday morning that the drug, VX-770, improved lung function in people with cystic fibrosis in a late-stage clinical trial. The drug also reduced the frequency of disease exacerbations that required treatment with antibiotics.

The caveat is that VX-770 is designed to counter one specific genetic mutation that accounts for about 4 percent of cases of cystic fibrosis. Vertex is working on another drug for the most common mutation, but that one is further behind in development.

Still, the news is expected to be greeted favorably by doctors and patients and by Wall Street.

“I’ve been doing clinical trials for 30 years in C.F. and these are amazing results,’’ Dr. Bonnie W. Ramsey, a lead investigator in the trial, said in an interview.

Dr. Ramsey, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Washington, was briefed on the results by Vertex.

The results were announced by a press release and have not been peer reviewed by experts.

About 30,000 Americans and 70,000 people worldwide have cystic fibrosis, a disease caused by defects in a gene responsible for the transport of chloride ions across cell membranes. People with the disease tend to have very thick mucus in their lungs, which leads to infections and lung damage. Many do not live past age 40.

Two inhaled antibiotics and one drug that loosens mucus are approved to treat cystic fibrosis, but nothing that directly improves chloride ion transport.

 

 In the trial, those who received VX-770 gained 10.6 percentage points more on a lung function test after 24 weeks than those getting a placebo, a difference that statistically was highly significant. Patients continued to take either drug or placebo for another 24 weeks and the improvement was sustained. Lung function, the primary endpoint of the trial, was measured by how much a person could exhale in one second, a standard test.

Investors had been expecting around a 5 percentage point improvement. In a note to clients Tuesday evening, before the results were known, an analyst at ISI Group, Mark Schoenebaum, said that an improvement of 10 percent would be a “home run’’ that could lead to $600 million in annual sales for the drug.

Dr. Ramsey, who has received research grants from Vertex, said that some patients could perceive a 10 percentage point change in lung function. She said other results of the trial were encouraging.

These included fewer exacerbations of the disease in those who got the drug, fewer self-reported respiratory symptoms, and a gain in weight, which is good for people with cystic fibrosis, who often have digestive problems. The saltiness of their sweat — a measure used to diagnose the disease — was markedly reduced, suggesting that the drug was having an effect on chloride ion transport.

The trial involved 161 people age 12 and older, all with at least one copy of the particular mutation, known as G551D. The main side effects, Vertex said, were headache, upper respiratory tract infections, nasal congestion, rash and dizziness.

Vertex said it hoped to apply in the second half of the year for approval of VX-770 in the United States and Europe. The company is awaiting results of a second trial of the drug, this one in younger children.

Vertex has not said how much it will charge for VX-770. But since there are only about 1,200 Americans who are candidates for the drug, the price is likely to be tens of thousands of dollars a year.

Vertex, based in Cambridge, Mass., was founded in 1989, coincidentally the same year the cystic fibrosis gene was discovered. It has not yet had a big commercial success and had a $2.5 billion net loss in the last five years.

The company is hoping that by late May it will win approval to sell a new type of drug for hepatitis C, which analysts expect will be a blockbuster.

The long time needed to develop a drug for cystic fibrosis is a lesson for those expecting a quick payout from the sequencing of the human genome, which was completed a decade ago. It is not enough to know the gene behind a disease. It can take years of research to determine how a mutation actually causes a disease and then to design a drug that corrects the problem.

Vertex received $75 million in financial support from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, one of the first nonprofit disease groups to give money to companies.

“These results are highly encouraging,’’ Robert J. Beall, president of the foundation, said in a statement Wednesday. “They provide scientific evidence that support our long-standing belief that targeting the underlying defect of C.F. may have a profound effect on the disease.’’
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Washington, DC--For years after it was administered, growth hormone continued to reduce the risk of fractures and helped maintain bone density in postmenopausal women who had osteoporosis, according to a new study published in the Endocrine Society's Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism.

Osteoporosis is a progressive condition that causes the bones to become weak and more likely to break. More than 10 million American adults have osteoporosis, and 80 percent of the people being treated for the condition nationwide are women, according to the Society's Endocrine Facts and Figures Report. Women are three times more likely to experience an osteoporosis-related bone fracture in their lifetimes than men.

"Our study is the largest and longest controlled study of growth hormone treatment for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women to date," said one of the study's authors, Emily Krantz, MD, of Södra Älvsborgs Hospital in Borås, Sweden. "Years after treatment stopped, women who were treated with growth hormone still experienced improved bone density and reduced fracture risk."

During an 18-month-long randomized, double-blind trial, 80 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis received daily injections of either placebo, a single unit of growth hormone or a 2.5-unit dose of growth hormone. The women were between the ages of 50 and 70 when they were recruited for the decade-long study.

After 18 months, the women who received the placebo halted the injections. Women who received growth hormone continued to receive injections for another 18 months. The researchers continued to follow up with the women for seven years after the growth hormone treatment was halted to monitor their bone density, fractures and perception of their quality of life.

The researchers compared the participants' bone density and rate of fractures to those of a group of 120 women who did not have osteoporosis. The controls were identified using the city census in Gothenburg, Sweden.

A decade after the study began, the women who received the larger growth hormone dose still had higher bone mineral density levels than the participants who received the lower dose or the placebo. The rate of fractures in the treated women who had osteoporosis declined by 50 percent during the 10-year-long study. More than half of the participants had fractured bones prior to the start of the study. In contrast, the rate of fractures rose four-fold in the control group as some of those women were diagnosed with osteoporosis.

"The findings indicate the beneficial effects of growth hormone remained long after the treatment ceased," Krantz said.

Other authors of the study include: Penelope Trimpou and Kerstin Landin-Wilhelmsen of Sahlgrenska University Hospital at the University of Gothenburg in Gothenburg, Sweden.

The study, "Effect of Growth Hormone Treatment on Fractures and Quality of Life in Osteoporosis - A 10-year Follow-up," was published online at http://press. , ahead of print.

Founded in 1916, the Endocrine Society is the world's oldest, largest and most active organization devoted to research on hormones and the clinical practice of endocrinology. Today, the Endocrine Society's membership consists of over 18,000 scientists, physicians, educators, nurses and students in 122 countries. Society members represent all basic, applied and clinical interests in endocrinology. The Endocrine Society is based in Washington, DC. To learn more about the Society and the field of endocrinology, visit our site at http://www. . Follow us on Twitter at https:/ .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the rate of bone fractures among study participants declined by 50 percent over the 10-year course of the study and provides an absolute measure of that benefit: 56 percent of participants had experienced a bone fracture before the study, and 28 percent had a bone fracture over the course of the study. We’ll give credit for the quantification, however it must be noted that this before and after comparison is seriously limited in what it can tell us about the benefits of growth hormone treatment — something addressed below under the “Evidence” criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A novel risk assessment tool helps identify which patients undergoing total hip replacement may be at higher risk for an implant dislocation after surgery, according to a new study from researchers at NYU Langone Health and described in the Best Poster in the Adult Reconstruction Hip at the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) 2018 Annual Meeting in New Orleans.

More than 310,000 hip replacements are performed in the United States each year, and an estimated 2.5 million Americans are currently living with hip replacements. In a hip replacement, an artificial joint comprising a ball and socket is implanted to replace the natural ball and socket in the pelvis, enabling movement that is typical of the hip joint. While dislocations only occur in about 1 percent of patients after hip replacement, certain individuals may be at a higher risk.

NYU Langone research presented at last year's AAOS Annual Meeting showed that spinal deformity was a significant risk factor for dislocation and subsequent revision surgery. The researchers reported at the time how the lumbar spine, or lower back, moves during posture changes like transitioning from sitting to standing, creating alterations in so-called spinopelvic relationship," which changes position of the hip socket and may cause an implant to dislocate in a person with spinal deformity.

This led researchers to further develop a risk prediction tool to better identify which patients undergoing a hip replacement may be at higher risk for dislocation, and then implement a treatment algorithm to help reduce that risk.

"Dislocation is a common reason for a total hip replacement to fail, and when it happens, sufferers can experience significant pain and require another surgery to fix the problem," explains lead study author Jonathan Vigdorchik, MD, an assistant professor of orthopedic surgery at NYU School of Medicine and associate fellowship director of the Division of Adult Reconstructive Surgery at NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital. "Orthopedic surgeons need to be more aware of this problem and think about the risk of dislocation prior to performing a hip replacement instead of just dealing with the complications after the surgery. We need to be proactive in our approach."

Some newer hip implants are designed with dual mobility cups that allow for increased range of motion, which helps reduce dislocation risk. However, no guidelines currently exist to aid clinicians in deciding when to use these more flexible implants, which are often more expensive than conventional implants, may not be medically necessary, and may carry added risks if implanted unnecessarily.

For the study, researchers reviewed data on 1,082 total hip replacements performed using computer navigation between January 2014 and December 2015, during which period no dual-mobility implants were used. The overall implant dislocation rate among this cohort was found to be 1.8 percent. Of this group, 320 patients had spinal disease and deformity as evidenced by imaging scans, and of them, 10 experienced dislocations, suggesting a dislocation rate of 3.1 percent for high-risk patients, or about three times higher than normal.

Beginning in 2016, surgeons used the standardized risk prediction model and treatment algorithm developed at NYU Langone, which factored in data collected from preoperative imaging taken while the patient was sitting and standing, and other measures that might affect risk for dislocation, including presence of a previous lumbar fusion. Using the risk assessment tool, the researchers identified 192 of 1,009 patients as high risk for a dislocation after surgery. All 192 patients underwent a total hip replacement through the high-risk algorithm, with dual mobility implants being used in 143 of the cases. The researchers reported only one dislocation in this high-risk group (or 0.5 percent of high-risk patients), compared with 3.1 percent in the previous group not assessed with the risk assessment and treatment algorithm. These findings represent a six-fold decrease in the rate of dislocation in the high-risk group.

"There were significantly fewer dislocations in the high-risk group once all of our patients were analyzed through our new treatment algorithm," explains study co-author Aaron J. Buckland, MD, an assistant professor of orthopedic surgery in the Division of Spine Surgery and director of spine research at NYU Langone. "We were able to stop these implant dislocations from occurring in the first place, sparing our patients follow-up care and the need for revision surgery."

All patients who undergo hip replacement at NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital now go through the risk assessment screening and treatment algorithm prior to surgery. Other technologies including laser-guidance, computer navigation, and robotic surgical devices are used for the especially high-risk and complex cases identified through the algorithm in order to ensure the best possible outcome free of complications.

This research presented at the conference has not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal and is currently in submission. Future studies aim to examine how the algorithm affects long-term outcomes and clinical benefits in patients at high risk for dislocation.

This poster, "A New Risk-Assessment Score and Treatment Algorithm for Patients at High Risk of Dislocation following Total Hip Arthroplasty," was selected by the AAOS Central Program Committee as the Best Poster in the Adult Reconstruction Hip classification at the 2018 AAOS Annual Meeting. In addition to Vigdorchik and Buckland, study authors in NYU Langone's Department of Orthopedic Surgery include Ameer Elbuluk, BA, and Richard Iorio, MD. David Mayman, MD; Seth Jerabek, MD; and Kaitlin Carroll, BS, were study co-authors.

A corresponding Scientific Exhibit, by lead author Nima Eftekhary, MD, an orthopedic surgery resident, and senior author Vigdorchik, called, "The Spinopelvic Relationship: A Stepwise Approach to Ensuring Stability in High-Risk Dislocation Patients Undergoing Total Hip Arthroplasty" also was selected by the AAOS Central Program Committee as one of the three Best Scientific Exhibits at the 2018 AAOS Annual Meeting. This exhibit in greater details demonstrates the treatment algorithm, patient cases, and the success with use of the standardized stepwise risk assessment and treatment algorithm to address dislocation risk in patients with spinal deformity.

P0072 A New Risk-Assessment Score and Treatment Algorithm for Patients at High-Risk of Dislocation following Total Hip Arthroplasty Jonathan Vigdorchik MD, Ameer Elbuluk BA, Kaitlin Carroll BS, David Mayman MD, Richard Iorio MD, Aaron Buckland FRACS, Seth Jerabek MD.

SE01 The Spinopelvic Relationship: A Stepwise Approach to Ensuring Stability in High-Risk Dislocation Patients Undergoing Total Hip Arthroplasty Nima Eftekhary MD, Ameer Elbuluk BA, Edward Delsole MD, Vinay Aggarwal MD, Richard Iorio MD, Aaron Buckland FRACS, Ran Schwarzkopf MD, Jonathan Vigdorchik MD./p>
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This study was done in two parts.
Part one: a retrospective review of 1,082 conventional (not dual cup) total hip replacements (THRs), over 2 years, in which the dislocation rate was 1.8% (19 patients). We’re told about a third of the total cohort (320 of the 1,082) had “spinal disease and deformity” on imaging scans. In this group of 320, 10 patients (3.1%) had subsequent dislocations.
Part two: Beginning in 2016 researchers began employing their risk assessment tool — pre-operative sitting/standing scans of the hip, and factoring in other risk factors like previous spinal fusion — and identified 192 of 1,009 patients (19%) as ‘high risk’ for dislocation. About three-fourths of these patients received dual cup transplants with only 1 having a subsequent dislocation (0.5%).
The news release gives us the absolute rate of dislocations in both high-risk groups (3.1% vs. 0.5%), which is vital information to understand the scope of the potential benefit. And on that basis we’ll award a satisfactory grade here. However, we note limitations under the Evidence criterion below that have a bearing on these statistics.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"Cannabidiol should not be viewed as a panacea for epilepsy, but for patients with especially severe forms who have not responded to numerous medications, these results provide hope that we may soon have another treatment option," says lead investigator Orrin Devinsky, MD, professor of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry and director of the Comprehensive Epilepsy Center at NYU Langone Medical Center. "We still need more research, but this new trial provides more evidence than we have ever had of cannabidiol's effectiveness as a medication for treatment-resistant epilepsy."

Cannabidiol, or CBD, is a compound in the cannabis plant that does not contain psychoactive properties that induce a high. The study included a liquid pharmaceutical formulation of CBD, called Epidiolex, which is manufactured by GW Pharmaceuticals and has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. GW Pharmaceuticals funded the clinical trial.

For the study, 120 children and adolescents with Dravet Syndrome between the ages of 2 and 18 years were randomized across 23 sites in the United States and Europe to receive either CBD 20 mg/kg or placebo added to their existing treatment over a 14-week period. Seizure frequency was tracked for one month prior to the study for baseline readings, and during the course of the study.

Specifically, seizure frequency dropped in the CBD-treated group by 39 percent from a median of nearly 12 convulsive seizures per month before the study to about six; three patients' seizures stopped entirely. In the placebo group, there was a 13 percent reduction in seizures from about 15 monthly seizures to fourteen. The difference in the degree of seizure reduction between the CBD group and the placebo group was both statistically significant and clinically consistent.

Side effects – experienced by 93.4 percent of patients in the CBD group and 74.6 percent of those treated with placebo – were generally reported as mild or moderate in severity. The most common side effects in the CBD group were vomiting, fatigue and fever. Eight participants from the CBD group withdrew from the trial due to side effects compared to one participant in the placebo group.

The new study confirms results from a December 2015 open-label expanded access program led by Dr. Devinsky that reported reductions in seizure frequency. In that program, both the researchers and patient's families knew they were receiving CBD, which may have introduced a bias into the results. This new, randomized, controlled clinical study eliminated those concerns as participants and their physicians did not know if they were on CBD or placebo, say the study authors.

Future research will look at whether safety and tolerability might be improved and whether efficacy of CBD can be maintained at lower doses. Longer term studies of CBD for Dravet Syndrome as well as for other forms of treatment-resistant epilepsy are also underway.

In addition to Dr. Devinsky, the co-authors in this study were: J. Helen Cross, PhD, FRCPCH, Linda Laux, MD, Eric Marsh, MD, Ian Miller, MD, Rima Nabbout, MD, Ingrid E Scheffer, MD, PhD , Elizabeth Thiele, MD, and Stephen Wright, MD on behalf of The Cannabidiol in Dravet Syndrome Study Group. Judith Bluvstein, MD, and Daniel Friedman, MD, also served as co-authors at the NYU Langone site involved in the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release describes benefits in clear terms, and provides numbers to add context. It states:
“Specifically, seizure frequency dropped in the CBD-treated group by 39 percent from a median of nearly 12 convulsive seizures per month before the study to about six; three patients’ seizures stopped entirely. In the placebo group, there was a 13 percent reduction in seizures from about 15 monthly seizures to fourteen.”
It also notes that the difference in the degree of seizure reduction between the CBD group and the placebo group was “both statistically significant and clinically consistent.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Fibromyalgia is so common, and we have such a difficult time treating it effectively. It’s defined by what the patient tells you,” he added. “It’s hard for some patients’ families and their doctors to get their head around what it is and whether it’s real. So, that these results were so positive for something that’s very safe is an impressive accomplishment.”

Recent studies have suggested that tai chi, with its slow exercises, breathing and meditation, could benefit patients with other chronic conditions, including arthritis. But not all of these reports have been conclusive, and tai chi is hard to study because there are many styles and approaches.

The fibromyalgia study involved the yang style of tai chi, taught by a Boston tai chi master, Ramel Rones. Dr. Solomon and other experts cautioned that bigger studies with other masters and approaches were necessary.

Still, patients, who received twice-weekly tai chi classes and a DVD to practice with 20 minutes daily, showed weekly improvement on an established measurement, the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire, improving more than the stretching-and-education group in physicians’ assessments, sleep, walking and mental health. One-third stopped using medication, compared with one-sixth in the stretching group.

Dr. Chenchen Wang, a Tufts rheumatologist who led the study, said she attributed the results to the fact that “fibromyalgia is a very complex problem” and “tai chi has multiple components — physical, psychological, social and spiritual.”

The therapy impressed Mary Petersen, 59, a retired phone company employee from Lynn, Mass., who said that before participating in the 2008 study, “I couldn’t walk half a mile,” and it “hurt me so much just to put my hands over my head.” Sleeping was difficult, and she was overweight. “There was no joy to life,” she said. “I was an entire mess from head to foot.”

She had tried and rejected medication, physical therapy, swimming and other approaches. “I was used to being treated in a condescending manner because they couldn’t diagnose me: ‘She’s menopausal, she’s crazy.’ ”

Before the study, “I didn’t know tai chi from a sneeze,” said Ms. Petersen, who has diabetes and other conditions. “I was like, ‘Well, O.K., I’ll get to meet some people, it will get me out of the house.’ I didn’t believe any of it. I thought this is so minimal, it’s stupid.”

After a few weeks, she said she began to feel better, and after 12 weeks “the pain had diminished 90 percent.” She has continued tai chi, lost 50 pounds and can walk three to seven miles a day.

“You could not have convinced me that I would ever have done this or continued with this,” she said. “I wouldn’t say it’s a cure. I will say it’s an effective method of controlling pain.”

Dr. Shmerling said that though tai chi is inexpensive compared with other treatments, some patients would reject such an alternative therapy. And Dr. Gloria Yeh, a Beth Israel Deaconess internist and co-author of the editorial, said others “will say, ‘It’s too slow, I can’t do that.’ ”

But she said it offered a “gentler option” for patients deterred by other physical activities. “The mind-body connections set it apart from other exercises,” she said, adding that doctors are seeking “anything we can offer that will make patients say ‘I can really do this.’ ”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story presents the evidence in relative terms. It would have been nice to see the absolute numbers. Still, it’s easy to calculate roughly what one third of 33 would be and one sixth would be. Essentially about 11 people stopped taking drugs after tai chi, and 5 or 6 stopped using other therapies. That’s not a huge difference, but, because there was any improvement, the researchers and the journal were understandably curious and hoping the study might spark more research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 6, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Cancer patients who have ovarian tissue removed and stored for later transplantation have a chance at a successful pregnancy, a new study finds.

Powerful chemotherapy and radiation treatments for cancer can impair a woman's fertility. This new study shows that ovarian tissue transplants are safe and effective and pose little risk of the cancer coming back, the Danish researchers said.

"This procedure is gaining ground worldwide as an optional fertility treatment for fertile female cancer patients who after cancer treatment most likely will be infertile," said lead researcher Dr. Annette Jensen, from the Laboratory of Reproductive Biology at Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen.

With this procedure, many women who survive cancer should be able to become pregnant and have healthy children, Jensen said.

Of 32 women who had ovarian tissue frozen and transplanted in this study, 10 women -- or 31 percent -- had a child, she said.

Many young cancer patients today can expect to live a normal lifespan. Their focus shifts from survival to quality-of-life, explained senior researcher Dr. Claus Yding Andersen, a professor of human reproductive physiology at the University of Copenhagen. "Here, fertility is very important to many young women," he said.

"The tissue restores ovarian organ function, and women regain menstrual cycles and sex hormone levels that will avoid menopause," Andersen added.

Dr. Avner Hershlag, chief of the Center for Human Reproduction at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., called the new research "innovative and exciting."

Simultaneous advances in cancer treatment and reproductive medicine have made these scientific leaps possible, he said.

However, Hershlag said he would like to see a pregnancy rate above 31 percent. "The pregnancy rate with frozen embryos is close to 50 percent, and results are getting better," he said, referring to another option for women hoping for a future pregnancy. "It remains to be seen which method is better."

The Danish report was published Oct. 7 in the journal Human Reproduction.

For the study, the researchers reviewed the outcomes of 53 transplantations of thawed ovarian tissue in 41 Danish women. The investigators followed the women for 10 years, looking at ovarian function, fertility and safety.

The women's average age when the tissue was removed and frozen was nearly 30. Average age of the first transplant was 33.

Thirty-two of the women attempted pregnancy. Ten were successful and had at least one child -- 14 children in all.

Eight children were conceived naturally, and six with the help of in vitro fertilization, the researchers reported.

Two women had abortions, one because she was separating from her partner and the other because her breast cancer recurred. Another woman had a miscarriage, the researchers said.

For three of the mothers, more than 10 years had passed since the ovarian tissue transplantation. In six cases, it was more than eight years. And for 15 of the women, transplantation had taken place more than five years earlier, the researchers said.

Although three women had a relapse of their cancer, these relapses did not appear related to the tissue transplantation. And no cancer developed in the transplanted tissue, Jensen said.

"So some of these women will still be able to have more children and avoid menopausal symptoms," she said, noting two more pregnancies have been reported to her laboratory since the study's publication.

Not all women are eligible for ovarian tissue transplants, however. "In particular, we have not performed transplants in patients who have suffered from leukemia, because the ovarian tissue may harbor cancer cells," Jensen said.

For more on fertility and cancer treatments, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story arguably overstates the impact of transplantation, allowing a researcher to claim that “many” women who survive cancer will be fertile because of this surgery — when the story clearly states that less than a third of the women in this tiny study had a good outcome.
But since the main thrust of this criterion is numbers, and the story does provide them, we’ll give the benefit of the doubt here. However, we wish that the story had pushed back harder against this framing — “some” or “a minority” of women would have been a better descriptor here than “many.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MILAN (Reuters) - An established targeted therapy for bowel cancer may also help women with an aggressive form of breast cancer, a mid-stage clinical study revealed on Monday, opening up a potential new market for the medicine.

Adding Erbitux to cisplatin, a platinum-based chemotherapy, doubled the tumor response rate and the length of time patients lived without their disease worsening, compared with giving cisplatin on its own, in the Phase II trial.

“We are very excited by these results,” lead researcher Jose Baselga of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center in Boston told the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) — Europe’s biggest cancer meeting.

Erbitux — from Merck KGaA, Eli Lilly and Bristol-Myers Squibb — is approved for bowel and head and neck cancer. Sales last year were $1.7 billion.

An independent Nordic study, published at ESMO on Sunday, revealed 566 patients who were given Erbitux plus a three-drug chemotherapy regimen called FLOX, in first-line treatment for bowel cancer, did not live longer or gain any significant extra benefit to those on chemotherapy alone.

It is the first time researchers have shown that a drug like Erbitux, which targets a protein called epidermal growth factor involved in cancer cell growth, can provide substantial benefit in difficult-to-treat “triple negative” breast cancer.

Women with triple negative breast cancer have tumors that do not respond to two types of hormonal therapy, or drugs that target a protein called HER-2.

The disease tends to spread through the body rapidly and there are few treatment options, though Sanofi-Aventis has a promising drug in late-stage development.

The Phase II study included 173 women whose cancer had spread and who had received other treatments. The best overall tumor response rate, of 20 percent, was in those given Erbitux. This compared with 10 percent among those on cisplatin alone.

Erbitux, known generically as cetuximab, also more than doubled the median time before the patients’ disease worsened, to 3.7 months from 1.5 months.

Baselga said that level of improvement was rarely seen in this advanced-disease population and was highly promising.

“This study clearly opens the field ... I am convinced that cetuximab or other anti-EGFR agents have a role in triple negative breast cancer. No question,” he said.

Still, further studies will be needed to build the case, including testing Erbitux alongside other types of chemotherapy, he added, noting the Phase II study did not meet its primary objective of proving a greater than 20 percent response rate.

Dr. Fabrice Andre from Institut Gustave Roussy in Villejuif, France, who was not involved in the research, said the results were “extremely important” but echoed the view that the findings now had to be confirmed in larger-scale clinical tests.

In practice, experts suspect triple negative breast cancer represents a number of different disease sub-groups and that analyzing patients according to the molecular profile of their tumors may help identify a sub-group that could benefit most.

Wolfgang Wein, head of oncology at German drugmaker Merck, welcomed the latest findings, which could broaden the market for the company’s key medicine.

Merck suffered a setback last year when its attempts to win marketing approval to sell Erbitux in lung cancer were rebuffed by regulators.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Novo Nordisk’s (NOVOb.CO) top-selling diabetes drug Victoza cut the risk of heart attack, stroke and cardiovascular death by 13 percent in a closely watched study, but the result disappointed investors who had hoped for more.

The stock fell around 5 percent in Copenhagen on Tuesday.

Victoza is only the second diabetes drug to show such heart benefits, after Eli Lilly (LLY.N) and Boehringer Ingelheim’s pill Jardiance. Victoza’s effect was evident across risks.

“To me, the impressive thing about this trial is the consistency across clinical endpoints and its robustness,” said John Buse, professor of medicine at the UNC School of Medicine, who worked on the study.

He believes doctors’ approach to type 2 diabetes treatment will now start to shift to a greater focus on minimising overall risks, rather than simply cutting blood sugar levels.

Because about half of deaths in people with diabetes are caused by heart disease, reducing heart risk is considered essential to their care.

But investors had been anticipating a bigger effect. Jefferies analyst Jeffrey Holford said market expectations had been for a mid-to-high teens percent reduction in complications.

There was also concern that Victoza did not appear to lower heart risks in American patients monitored in the study, despite doing so in other parts of the world and producing a solid result globally.

Novo, the world’s biggest diabetes company, had said in March that Victoza cut heart risks “significantly” in the study but the scale of the benefit was only disclosed on Monday.

Researchers told the American Diabetes Association’s (ADA) annual meeting that 13.0 percent of patients on Victoza died from cardiovascular causes or suffered non-fatal heart attacks or strokes, against 14.9 percent of those on placebo.

Deaths from heart disease were 22 percent lower in the Victoza group.

The Jardiance trial last year showed a similar 14 percent overall relative risk reduction and a 38 percent reduction in cardiovascular deaths.

The Victoza trial, known as Leader, had been designed to show Novo’s drug did not increase heart risk, so its superiority is welcome news for the company, especially as Sanofi’s (SASY.PA) rival Lyxumia failed to show heart benefits in an earlier test.

Victoza, which had sales of $2.7 billion last year, is the biggest seller in a class of drugs known as GLP-1 analogues that stimulate insulin production.

“I think physicians will look to GLP-1s with greater enthusiasm,” Buse said in an interview.

Once-daily Victoza is typically prescribed as a third or fourth option after patients have first tried various oral medicines.

“The significance of this is that now we can start to change the conversation around diabetes management from one of ‘let’s manage your blood sugar’ to one of ‘let’s manage your risk of complications’,” Buse said.

Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen, Novo’s chief science officer, said the results should encourage doctors to use Victoza earlier, since they could now see it offered “life-expanding” treatment.

The findings, which involved following 9,340 patients for a median 3.8 years, were also published online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Gastrointestinal upset was the biggest side effect with Victoza. There were fewer cases of pancreatitis, which has been viewed as a potential problem, but more cases of pancreatic cancer, although the difference was not statistically significant.

Since 2008, U.S. regulators have demanded studies for new diabetes medicines to show there is no increase in heart risk, opening a new battleground between different treatments. Lilly is conducting a similar large study to try and prove the heart benefits of its once-weekly GLP-1 drug Trulicity.

The Leader study was funded by Novo and the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story’s key figure, which features in the headline, is a 13% reduction in the risk of heart attack, stroke and cardiovascular death. Unfortunately this figure only measures the relative risk reduction; i.e. the change in risk for patients who got Victoza as a percentage of the actual risk of heart attacks, strokes or cardiovascular death for patients who didn’t get Victoza.
However, the story does also give actual risk figures for the treatment and placebo group (13.0% vs. 14.9%). This allows a keen eyed reader to calculate the absolute risk reduction: a less impressive sounding 1.9%. Because of this, the story rates Satisfactory on this criterion. It’s worth nothing the news release didn’t include the placebo group reductions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The information entered on this page will not be used to send unsolicited email, and will not be sold to a third party.

Daily treatment with the antiviral drug tenofovir during the third trimester of pregnancy reduced the mother-to-child transmission rate of hepatitis B (HBV) from 18 percent to 5 percent, according to the findings of a clinical trial led by researchers from NYU Langone Medical Center and published on June 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

The study focused on the most common way that children become infected with hepatitis B, an incurable viral infection that causes liver disease and cancer, which is through infection during the perinatal period. Without intervention, 80 to 90 percent of infants who are born to mothers infected with hepatitis B develop a chronic infection. The current standard of care is to provide vaccine and immune globulin to reduce transmission rates.

“Preventing mother-to-child transmission is the most effective way to reduce the global burden of chronic hepatitis B infection and liver cancer,” says Calvin Pan, MD, lead author of the study and a clinical professor of medicine at NYU Langone. “We believe that these findings will not only save many lives, but could also help to eradicate hepatitis B nationally and abroad.”

The study was conducted in five locations in China, where HBV infection is endemic. Pan and colleagues enrolled 200 pregnant women with a high “viral load,” defined as one million copies of the virus per milliliter in a blood sample. Participants were randomly assigned to either a control group that received no antiviral therapy, or to a second group that received a daily dose of 300 milligrams of tenofovir in pill form, beginning at 30 or 32 weeks of pregnancy and continuing until 4 weeks after delivery.

Treatment effectively reduced the viral load of the pregnant women, says Pan. Before delivery, 68 percent of tenofovir-treated mothers had HBV loads below 1 million copies per milliliter, compared to 2 percent of nontreated mothers.

In terms of safety, researchers found that tenofovir was well tolerated; only one participant treated with tenofovir voluntarily withdrew from the study due to nausea. Among the children born during the study, Pan and his colleagues found no significant differences between the tenofovir-treated group and the control group with regard to fetal development and infant growth.

“This study provides strong evidence on how best to care for women infected with hepatitis B during pregnancy and reduce the rate of disease transmission,” says Mark Pochapin, MD, the Sholtz/Leeds Professor of Gastroenterology and director of the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology at NYU Langone.

Based on the findings, the investigators recommend that women be tested for HBV viral load at week 28 of pregnancy. Those with a high viral load should receive tenofovir treatment starting at gestational week 30 until delivery to reduce the risk of transmission to their infants. In addition, infants should receive hepatitis B vaccine and immune globulin. Moving forward, longer term, observational studies are needed to confirm the safety of fetal exposure to tenofovir treatment, says Pan.

This research was supported by Gilead Sciences.

Dr. Pan’s co-authors were Zhong Ping Duan at Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical University, in Beijing; Er Hei Dai and Bao Shen Zhu at Fifth Hospital of Shijiazhuang, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang; Shu Qing Zhang and Wen Jing Zhao at Hepatobiliary Disease Hospital of Ji Lin Province, Changchun; Guo-Rong Han and Hong-Xiu Jiang at Second Affiliated Hospital of Southeast University, Nanjing; Yuming Wang at Institute for Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing; Huai Bin Zou at Youan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing; and Huai Hong Zhang at Nanyang Center Hospital, Nanyang, Henan, all for the China Study Group for the Mother-to-Child Transmission of Hepatitis B.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly says that 68 percent of women receiving the drug reduced their viral load while only 2 percent of the women in the control group had that success. It also says that the transmission of hepatitis B from mother to newborn dropped from 18 percent to 5 percent, an important clinical outcome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Jet lag might be the worst part of long-distance travel, especially when it leaves you feeling tired, cranky and off-kilter for days.

But scientists at Stanford University say there may be a way to prevent jet lag without medication or adjusting your sleep schedule.

A team of researchers led by neurobiologist Jamie Zeitzer is working on a technique that exposes people to short flashes of light while they sleep to help them adjust more quickly to time zone changes.

Current light therapy treatment includes sitting in front of bright lights for hours at a time during the day, which allows you to transition your body clock to a new time zone in small steps prior to taking a trip. Zeitzer's latest study, published Monday in the Journal of Clinical Investigation , could make treatment easier by providing light exposure during sleep, before the trip, without changing or interrupting your routine.

The circadian system is synchronized to the outside world through exposure to light; it controls sleep timing, hormone release and mood, said Zeitzer, an assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences. Jet lag occurs when sleeping and waking patterns are not synchronized to circadian rhythms.

To adapt to a new time zone, most people try to get as much light exposure as possible corresponding to their destination, either by waking up early before a trip or staying up late when they arrive, Zeitzer said. Or they do nothing and suffer the exhausting consequences; the body eventually adjusts at a slow pace of about one hour a day, taking up to three days to catch up.

Through light therapy, the technique Zeitzer is experimenting with, a person's brain can be tricked into adjusting more quickly to disturbances in sleep cycles by increasing how long he or she is exposed to light prior to traveling to a new time zone. The treatment "exploits biology in the eye" to speed up the brain's adjustment to time changes, he said.

This study builds on previous research published in 2014, which found that light therapy works best at night because the body's circadian rhythms are more sensitive to light at night, even through closed eyelids. In this latest study, Zeitzer and Raymond Najjar, a former postdoctoral scholar at Stanford now at Singapore Eye Research Institute, found that short flashes of light at night are more effective than continuous light exposure and could speed up the process of adjusting to a different time zone before a trip.

"The previous study was proof of principle: Can we elicit these kinds of changes and can we do it without interfering with sleep?" Zeitzer said. This time around, researchers tried to further optimize the process.

To determine which would provide the fastest method of adjusting sleep cycles, researchers recruited 39 participants ages 19 to 36. They put them on a routine sleep-wake cycle, going to bed and waking up at the same time every day for about two weeks. They then had the volunteers sleep in the lab, where some were exposed to continuous light for an hour and others were exposed to a sequence of flashes of various frequencies for an hour.

They found that exposing people to two millisecond flashes of light, similar to a camera flash, every 10 seconds elicited two hours of change in circadian timing, compared with 36 minutes for those exposed to continuous light. Participants were able to sleep through the flashes of light without waking.

"You get more effectiveness out of flashes of light. It will enable us to have more potent countermeasures to jet lag than continuous light, which is the current prescribed light therapy treatment," Zeitzer said.

The treatment could benefit not only travelers but also overnight shift workers and people with constantly changing schedules, he said, but that's a long way off. There's still more testing to be done before the technique is available to the public.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Details on the benefits are minimal but we do get a sense that two different groups of volunteers were tested with different light exposures (continuous vs. intermittent flashing) and those with the intermittent flashing light had “two hours of change in circadian timing, compared with 36 minutes for those exposed to continuous light.” Changes in “circadian timing” is not explained.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After decades of dreaming about getting patients' immune systems to fight cancer, immunotherapy is finally here. The Food and Drug Administration approved Provenge this spring to treat advanced prostate cancer.

But now the study that led to FDA approval is finally out in this week's New England Journal of Medicine. And it's clear that experts are still scratching their heads about just how Provenge works.

It does work, sort of.

In the study, men with prostate cancer that no longer responds to hormone therapy (basically, chemical castration) lived about four months longer if they took Provenge than if they got placebo treatment. That's better than the only other approved treatment for such advanced cancers.

But, as the study's lead author Dr. Philip Kantoff acknowledges, "It's not a home run; this is not going to cure prostate cancer."

The primary mystery is how Provenge extends life, since it doesn't shrink prostate tumors, as far as anyone can tell. "Prolongation of survival without a measurable antitumor effect is surprising," writes Dr. Dan Longo of the National Institute on Aging in a NEJM editorial.

Deep in the data is further mystery.

Provenge is supposed to work by, in effect, vaccinating patients against their own cancers using a patient's own white blood cells.

The theory is that the custom-made vaccine incites patients' immune cells to attack the cancer. The study shows that patients who got Provenge were indeed more likely to mount immune-cell responses to a prostate cancer antigen in the test tube. But oddly, the patients who had these activated immune cells didn't survive any longer than those who didn't.

The other side of the immune system – the antibody arm -- showed a different picture. Patients who had a good antibody response to Provenge lived longer than those who didn't.

Nobody yet knows just how to explain these results. Longo, the NEJM editorialist, says he'd be more convinced if the placebo patients had received infusions of white blood cells that had been exposed just to the general immune-stimulating part of the Provenge treatment, without the prostate antigen part.

The way the study was done, he says, "does not allow one to conclude" that Provenge is working because it mobilizes the immune system specifically against prostate cancer.

But, after all, Provenge is just the first cancer immunotherapy on the market. So it's not surprising there's a lot to be learned, and that it's pretty pricey.

Other immunotherapy approaches are in the pipeline, along with fancier versions of drugs to block the hormones that feed prostate cancer.

Meanwhile, Dendreon, the Seattle-based company that makes Provenge, says there's a waiting list for the drug. The company estimates 100,000 American men have the kind of hormone-resistant, metastatic cancer the drug is approved to treat. But the company can only make enough at this point for 2,000 patients in the first year.

So does the waiting list contain thousands of men? Tens of thousands? "Can't say," replies Dendreon COO Hans Bishop.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: In a broad overview comment, it’s sufficient for the story to have stated "men with prostate cancer that no longer responds to hormone therapy (basically, chemical castration) lived about four months longer if they took Provenge than if they got placebo treatment."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Welcome to Dear Julia, a weekly column where readers can submit everyday health questions on anything from the science of hangovers to the mysteries of back pain. Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.

What's the difference between Tylenol, Advil, and aspirin? Which is the best to take for pain?

I used to take acetaminophen (usually referred to by its brand name, Tylenol) for the occasional headache or sore muscle, mostly because that's what we used in my house growing up. I didn't think much about whether it was more or less effective than any other type of over-the-counter pain reliever, and I suspect the same is true for many folks. Acetaminophen, after all, is the most popular over-the-counter painkiller worldwide.

So I was surprised when I found out there's a huge gap between how pain researchers think about this drug and how the public does. More specifically, every researcher I contacted for this piece said some variation of what Andrew Moore, a pain researcher at Oxford University, told me: Tylenol doesn't actually work that well for pain. To be more exact, he said, "I can't imagine why anybody would take acetaminophen."

Moore has done a number of systematic reviews on over-the-counter pain medications, looking at all the available evidence to figure out which ones work best for various problems. I asked him to describe the overall success rates for the most common three: acetaminophen (like Tylenol), ibuprofen (like Advil), and aspirin.

Like all good evidence-based medicine thinkers, he was able to provide a very practical answer: "If you’re talking about aspirin in doses of 500 to 1,000 mg or two tablets, 30 percent of people get relief from acute pain. For acetaminophen at doses of 500 to 1,000 mg, about 40 percent have a success. For ibuprofen, in its normal formulation at something around 400 mg or two tablets, about 50 percent have success."

Now, Moore was referring here to acute pain that strikes after a specific event, like a surgery, a cut, or a burn, but his message was simple: Ibuprofen seems to work best, followed by acetaminophen, and then aspirin.

For ongoing (or chronic) pain — a sore lower back, say, or the kind of degenerative arthritis that typically develops with age — ibuprofen still outperforms acetaminophen.

"WE FOUND THAT [TYLENOL] IS INEFFECTIVE ON BOTH PAIN AND DISABILITY OUTCOMES FOR LOW BACK PAIN" A 2015 systematic review of high-quality evidence, published in the BMJ, found that acetaminophen didn't seem to help most sufferers of chronic low back pain, and that it barely alleviates pain in people with osteoarthritis. As the researchers wrote, "We found that [acetaminophen] is ineffective on both pain and disability outcomes for low back pain in the immediate and short term and is not clinically superior to placebo on both pain and disability outcomes for osteoarthritis."

A limitation of the study is that the evidence on acetaminophen was mainly for acute low back pain, but as the University of Leeds's Philip Conaghan explained, "There is very little long-term data [on chronic back pain], and if a drug doesn't work in the acute problem, it seems unlikely to work in the chronic phase — though back pain may be even more complex than osteoarthritis pain."

The study also noted that patients on acetaminophen "are nearly four times more likely to have abnormal results on liver function tests compared with those taking oral placebo."

Other studies, like this well-designed randomized control trial of people with knee pain, have similar conclusions: Acetaminophen doesn't perform as well as ibuprofen, and it's linked to higher rates of liver problems. (Ibuprofen also has potential side effects; more on that below.)

So what about the occasional headache? What works best for that?

It turns out this is another fascinating problem area for pain researchers. Moore has looked at all the evidence for what he calls "infrequent tension headaches" and found "it is surprising how poor [the research] is and how little it tells us." Either the outcomes in studies are badly defined, the studies have too few participants to say anything concrete, or many people in the studies actually seem to have chronic headaches as opposed to the ordinary ones the researchers are allegedly studying.

"Most people would say, if you look at the data, take an ibuprofen tablet," Moore said. "Acetaminophen is just not a very good analgesic [pain reliever], yet it’s the go-to drug because it’s thought to be safe."

And that's where things get even more interesting: Acetaminophen isn't actually that safe.

"We always thought [acetaminophen] was safe, but there are increasing signals of accidental overdose in people who are regularly using it for chronic pain, and some liver toxicity," explained Conaghan, who has studied adverse events data related to this popular drug.

Between 1998 and 2003, acetaminophen was the leading cause of acute liver failure in the US. There are also hundreds of related deaths every year — though keep in mind that millions of people take drugs with acetaminophen, so these more extreme side effects are rare (especially if you're only taking them in small doses occasionally). Still, for the drug's minimal pain-killing benefits, the risks may not be worth it. 



"Don't believe that just because something is over-the-counter, it’s safe," Conaghan added. (He advised people to see their doctor if they're taking any of these painkillers for more than a few days — particularly if they're on other drugs already.)

"[Tylenol] is an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether"

Kay Brune, a professor of pharmacology and toxicology at Germany's Friedrich-Alexander University who has also studied the toxicity of painkillers, was even more direct in his thoughts on acetaminophen: "It's an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether."

Aspirin is safer than acetaminophen, he said, though to be used as a pain reliever it requires much higher doses — which can have side effects like stomach upset. Aspirin also interferes with blood coagulation for days after taking it. "If you take one gram of aspirin," Brune explained, "you're at risk of bleeding for another four days." This is why aspirin has its place as a protective agent against strokes and heart attacks for people at a higher risk.

Ibuprofen doesn't have these two problems — it's less toxic than the others in the doses that give people pain relief. But it has other side effects. "Ibuprofen puts people at risk of bleeds in the gastrointestinal tract and kidney damage — so it's not free of risk," said Brune. Using it in high doses also seems to raise blood pressure and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke — one reason the Food and Drug Administration recently warned people should only use ibuprofen (and other "nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs," or NSAIDS, like naproxen) for short periods of time and in small amounts.



I asked Brune about what he'd suggest for the occasional headache or sore muscle. "Taking 400 mg of ibuprofen won't cause measurable harm," he answered. "Of all drugs we have available, for most indications, it's also the most effective one."

Is acetaminophen good for anything?

If the research community seems to have sided with ibuprofen for pain, is acetaminophen good for anything?



Yes. There are some groups of people with health complications who shouldn't take ibuprofen. For example, patients with kidney, gastric, cardiovascular, or bleeding problems may need to avoid NSAIDS like ibuprofen, so doctors might suggest Tylenol in these cases. 



There's also some evidence that NSAIDS may increase the risk of psychosis and cognitive impairment in the elderly, so doctors may avoid prescribing these drugs for older patients. And Tylenol is generally considered safer than Advil or aspirin for pregnant women.



Fever is another area where acetaminophen can help, said Moore. According to one systematic review, acetaminophen seems to be safe for treating very young kids with fever, and you can give children as young as 3 months old acetaminophen, whereas you need to wait until kids are at least 6 months old to safely treat them with ibuprofen. This may help to explain the popularity of drugs like Tylenol for kids.

But a final caveat here: If your child is older than 6 months, it's not all that clear that acetaminophen outperforms ibuprofen for reducing fevers, and the same is true for adults. So keep that in mind the next time you confront your medicine cabinet.

Send your questions to Julia via the submission form or @juliaoftoronto on Twitter. Read more about Dear Julia here.

Watch: How Americans got stuck with endless drug ads
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article takes a close look at the drawbacks and benefits of each drug. For example, while the experts said acetaminophen is less effective than ibuprofen in treating pain (and carries more risks than the others), it is beneficial in treating fever, especially in children age three and up. Ibuprofen is deemed less toxic for pain relief but it carries the risk of bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract and kidney damage. There’s also a reasonable amount of quantification provided by an expert source, Dr. Andrew Moore, who says: “If you’re talking about aspirin in doses of 500 to 1,000 mg or two tablets, 30 percent of people get relief from acute pain. For acetaminophen at doses of 500 to 1,000 mg, about 40 percent have a success. For ibuprofen, in its normal formulation at something around 400 mg or two tablets, about 50 percent have success.” The story would have been even stronger had it provided links or additional details regarding where this expert obtained his estimates.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - Scientists for the first time have used gene therapy to successfully destroy cancer tumors in patients with advanced disease — a goal that has taken 20 years to achieve.

Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania engineered patients’ own pathogen-fighting T-cells to target a molecule found on the surface of leukemia cells.

The altered T-cells were grown outside of the body and infused back into patients suffering from late-stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), which affects the blood and bone marrow and is the most common form of leukemia.

Two participants in the Phase I trial have been in remission for up to a year. A third had a strong anti-tumor response, and his cancer remains in check. The research group plans to treat four more patients with CLL before moving into a larger Phase II trial.

“We put a key onto the surface of the T-cells that fits into a lock that only the cancer cells have,” said Dr. Michael Kalos, director of translational and correlative studies at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine and an investigator on the study.

The results provide “a tumor-attack roadmap for the treatment of other cancers,” including those of the lung and ovaries as well as myeloma and melanoma, researchers said.

The findings were published simultaneously Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine and Science Translational Medicine.

Kalos said past efforts to use the technique, known as “adoptive T-cell transfer,” failed either because the T-cell response was too weak or proved too toxic for normal tissue.

The technique differs from other cancer therapies designed to harness the body’s own immune system to fight tumors — such as therapeutic cancer vaccines.

“We are saying forget about stimulating an immune response. We are going to give you an immune response,” Kalos said.

The treatment appears safe, but researchers said more study was needed. The leukemia patients in the Phase I trial had to be treated with an immunity-boosting drug since the targeted molecule, CD-19, is also present on certain normal immune-system cells.

To deliver the gene therapy, the researchers used a virus that can only infect cells once. It was used to carry a chimeric antigen receptor targeting CD-19 coupled with receptors for two other components of T-cell activity.

About two weeks after the gene therapy, patients began to experience “tumor lysis syndrome” — chills, nausea and fever — caused by the break-down products of dying cancer cells.

The engineered T-cells were detected in patients’ blood for several months afterward, and a portion of them turned into “memory T-cells,” which could provide ongoing protection against cancer recurrence, researchers surmised.

Dr. Walter Urba of the Providence Cancer Center in Portland Oregon cautioned that continued presence of activated T-cells and memory cells might be more of a problem in other types of cancer where toxic effects on normal tissue could be more severe.

In addition, the long-term viability of the treatment is still unknown.

“One of the big questions is ... will those persistent T-cells continue to work and prevent that tumor from coming back,” said Urba, who was not involved in the study.

All of the funding for the University of Pennsylvania’s gene therapy work has come from the academic community, but the work is expensive.

“We are looking for corporate partners as we head into Phase II trials,” Kalos said.

Further study will show whether the latest results “reflect an authentic advance toward a clinically applicable and effective therapy or yet another promising lead that runs into a barrier that cannot be easily overcome,” Urba said in an NEJM editorial.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: As in the WebMD story, this story stated that, “Two participants in the Phase I trial have been in remission for up to a year. A third had a strong anti-tumor response, and his cancer remains in check.” The WebMD story provided more details, though.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO - The majority of patients were pain free after receiving a new image-guided pulsed radiofrequency treatment for low back pain and sciatica, according to a study presented today at the annual meeting of the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA).

Low back pain is an extremely common problem that affects at least 80 percent of the population at some point in their lifetime. It is the most common cause of job-related disability. Low back pain affects men and women equally.

Most back pain is short-term, but about 20 percent of people affected by acute low back pain go on to develop chronic low back pain lasting a year or more. A compressed and herniated disk, in which the rubbery cushion between vertebrae impinges on and irritates nearby nerves, is a major cause of low back pain that can radiate to the legs.

"The nerve root is a sensitive structure that when pinched becomes inflamed and causes pain," said lead investigator Alessandro Napoli M.D., Ph.D., an interventional radiologist at Sapienza University of Rome. "The body reacts with muscle constriction, which decreases the distance between vertebrae, and a vicious cycle is created."

The single-center prospective study included 80 patients experiencing at least three months of low back pain due to a herniated disk that had not responded to conservative treatments including exercise and medication.

The patients underwent a minimally invasive interventional radiology procedure in which, with the help of CT imaging, a needle is guided to the location of the bulging disc and nerve root. A probe is then inserted through the needle tip and delivers pulsed radiofrequency energy to the area over a 10-minute period. Even without touching the disc, the pulsation serves to resolve the herniation.

"The probe delivers a gentle electrical energy, so there's no thermal damage," Dr. Napoli said. "The results have been extraordinary. Patients have been relieved of pain and resumed their normal activities within a day."

Of the 80 patients treated, 81 percent were pain free one year after a single 10-minute treatment session. Six patients required a second pulsed radiofrequency session. Ninety percent of the patients were able to avoid surgical treatment.

"Following this treatment, inflammation and pain go away. With relaxation of the muscles, the distance between the vertebrae returns," Dr. Napoli explained.

Dr. Napoli said no patients experienced side effects after receiving the minimally invasive outpatient treatment.

"There's a big gap between conservative treatments for disc compression and herniation and surgical repair, which can lead to infection, bleeding and a long recovery period," Dr. Napoli said. "Evolving technologies like this image-guided treatment may help a substantial number of patients avoid surgery."

Note: Copies of RSNA 2017 news releases and electronic images will be available online at RSNA.org/press17 beginning Monday, Nov. 27.

RSNA is an association of over 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists, promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release addresses benefits with this statement: “Of the 80 patients treated, 81 percent were pain free one year after a single 10-minute treatment session. Six patients required a second pulsed radio-frequency session. Ninety percent of the patients were able to avoid surgical treatment.” This would imply that 65 of 80 patients had pain relief at one year.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Fast food outlets should hand out free cholesterol-lowering statin drugs to their customers to “neutralize” the heart risks of eating fatty foods like burgers and fries, British scientists suggested on Thursday.

But a few experts say you might want to ask your server to hold the statin at this point.

In a study published in the American Journal of Cardiology, scientists from the National Heart and Lung Institute at Imperial College London calculated that the reduction in heart disease risk offered by a statin could offset the increase in risk from eating a cheeseburger and a milkshake.

“Statins don’t cut out all of the unhealthy effects of a burger and fries. It’s better to avoid fatty food altogether. But we’ve worked out that in terms of your likelihood of having a heart attack, taking a statin can reduce your risk to more or less the same degree as a fast food meal increases it,” said Dr. Darrel Francis, who led the research team.

“When people engage in risky behaviors like driving or smoking, they’re encouraged to take measures that minimize their risk, like wearing a seatbelt or choosing cigarettes with filters. Taking a statin is a rational way of lowering some of the risks of eating a fatty meal.”

Still, Peter Weissberg, medical director at the British Heart Foundation (BHF) health charity, said Francis’ idea should not be taken too literally. He urged people to focus on maintaining a good diet and taking exercise to keep their hearts healthy.

“Statins are a vital medicine for people with — or at high risk of developing — heart disease,” he said. “They are not a magic bullet.”

A study in June in the Archives of Internal Medicine suggested, in fact, that statins do not save lives in patients without heart disease, although they may prevent some non-fatal heart attacks.

Dr. Franz Messerli, the director of the hypertension program at two New York hospitals, St. Luke’s and Roosevelt, worried about the message handing out statins would send to burger-eaters.

“Complimentary statin packets are prone to ... give Quarter Pounder consumers a sense of false security,” he told Reuters Health by email.

While statins might combat some of the toll that fatty foods take on cholesterol, there’s a lot they can’t negate: “sodium content is high, fibres are absent, and caloric load gargantuan,” Messerli said of the fast food the authors looked at.

Statins are among the most widely used drugs for the treatment and prevention of heart disease and strokes — the world’s top killers.

One statin, a generic drug called simvastatin, is already available in low doses over the counter at pharmacies in Britain without a prescription. Other statins such as Pfizer’s Lipitor and AstraZeneca’s Crestor - which are among the biggest-selling drugs in the world — are for prescription only.

In the U.S., all statins are only available by prescription.

“Although no substitute for systematic lifestyle improvements, including healthy diet, regular exercise, weight loss, and smoking cessation, complimentary statin packets would add, at little cost, one positive choice to a panoply of negative ones,” the scientists write in their paper.

Francis’ team — who worked independently and had no funding from the drug or food industries for their research — used data from a previous large study to quantify how a person’s heart attack risk increases with their daily intake of total fat and harmful trans fats.

They compared this with the decrease in risk from taking statins, using data from seven previously published trials.

“It makes sense to make risk-reducing supplements available just as easily as the unhealthy condiments (such as salt or ketchup) that are provided free of charge,” Francis said in his report of the research. “It would cost less than 5 pence ($0.07) per customer — not much different to a sachet of ketchup.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION:         
A balance was struck between the claims of the study author and those of several unaffiliated experts.  While the study centered on the cholesterol lowering effects of a statin condiment, the negative effects of a high fat, high sodium, high calorie diet were highlighted providing a balance to the story.  
The story mentions that "A study in June in the Archives of Internal Medicine suggested, in fact, that statins do not save lives in patients without heart disease, although they may prevent some non-fatal heart attacks." But this wasn’t the only study to come to that conclusion, and, in fact, the drug company’s own research backs this claim up, as has been well documented in previous news stories.
We wish the story had clarified whether the research team was suggesting popping a single statin pill in response to a single cheeseburger, or whether they were suggesting a regular regimen of statin use.  This is a key point, and is relevant to any discussion about the quality (or lack) of evidence, and about potential harms and benefits.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A common blood test could help diagnose cancer earlier, according to research suggesting a high platelet count is strongly associated with the disease.



Platelets are tiny blood cells that circulate in the body, helping wounds to clot. But in some individuals too many platelets are produced – a condition known as thrombocytosis, thought to affect about half a million people in the UK over the age of 40.

Researchers say that raised platelet counts are as good a predictor of getting any cancer as a lump in the breast is for breast cancer.

“This is a clue which can be used in practice by GPs to help them select patients for further investigation … most excitingly in some patients who may not already have other symptoms of cancer to achieve earlier diagnosis,” said Sarah Bailey, co-author of the research from the University of Exeter.

Previous studies have suggested a link between thrombocytosis and various cancers, with recent guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence advising high platelet counts could be a sign of cancer of the oesophageal, stomach, lung or uterus.

But it remained unclear whether the condition could signal an increased risk of all cancers, and how it ties in with factors such as age and sex.

Writing in the British Journal of General Practice, Bailey and colleagues report how they examined data from almost 50,000 individuals aged 40 or over who had been given a blood test by their GP. The patients were selected at random from a national database.

In total, over 31,000 patients found to have a raised platelet count, and nearly 8,000 without, were included in the analysis.

Within a year of the blood test, the team found that cancer was more common among those who had thrombocytosis: 11.6% of men and 6.2% of women were found to have cancer compared to 4.1% of men and 2.2% of women without a raised platelet count. In the general population about 1% of individuals over the age of 40 develop cancer each year.

For comparison, among women aged between 50 and 59 who have discovered a breast lump, the proportion who are found to have breast cancer is 8.5%.



“We found cancer was more commonly diagnosed in men with raised platelet counts than it was in women with raised platelet counts and we believe that is because there are more causes of raised platelet counts in women that are not cancer,” said Bailey.

The team add that cancer was more common among for those who had thrombocytosis for longer. Of the men who had a raised platelet count of the same value or higher six months after being diagnosed with thrombocytosis, 18.1% developed cancer, while for women the figure was 10.1%.

While many different types of cancer were present in both groups, the team found that breast and prostate cancers were less common among those with thrombocytosis than in the general population, while lung and colorectal cancers were more common.

For about a third of cases of lung and colorectal cancer in patients with thrombocytosis, there had been no other symptoms that raised the suggestion of cancer. That, say the researchers, makes testing for raised platelet count a valuable tool, and could speed up cancer diagnosis by at least three months for thousands of patients a year.

Richard Neal, professor of primary care oncology at the University of Leeds who was not involved in the research, welcomed the study.

“This is an excellent study that demonstrates the potential for a commonly used blood test to identify some patients with cancer earlier,” he said.

“This work should begin to change practice, so that GPs should be testing patients with raised platelet counts for cancer, especially those without other potential cancer symptoms,” he added.

Dr Jasmine Just, Cancer Research UK’s health information officer, said more research was need to confirm whether further tests following a high platelet count would save lives.

“There are lots of possible reasons a person’s platelet count might be high, and in most cases it won’t be down to cancer,” she added.

“Measuring platelet count in patients who don’t otherwise warrant a blood test is not necessarily a good idea. But if a patient has a blood test for another reason and a high platelet count is found, then one of the possible diagnoses doctors should consider is cancer.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story’s author did a good job of describing the numbers of patients whose data were drawn from a national database, and the percentages across ages and genders who were identified with some form of cancer within a year of a high platelet count, compared to percentages of who were not diagnosed with cancer. It also noted the rate of cancer diagnosis in the general population overall as a comparative factor. There were also data given about the types of cancer most diagnosed and the potential impact for early diagnosis. The thoughtful reader will come away with the notion that even if platelet counts are utilized widely, they are not going to serve as markers for most cancers that arise in adults.
One thing the story needed on this note was better framing on how these results differed by age. Our concern is there may be unnecessary anxiety for some people to pressure their doctor into performing a platelet count beginning at a young age that may not be necessary.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drugs To Prevent Weak Bones Linked To Unusual Fractures In Women

There's fresh evidence pointing to a troubling link between commonly used osteoporosis drugs and a rare type of thighbone fracture.

When a hip bone breaks because of osteoporosis, the fracture usually involves either the ball at the top of the femur or the narrow neck just below the ball. The unusual fractures that may be associated with certain osteoporosis drugs called bisphosphonates occur lower on the bone. Ironically, that's where the femur, the longest bone in the body, is usually strongest.

These unusual fractures can occur suddenly without any trauma, such as a fall. And they can be complex breaks that are difficult to fix and slow to heal.

In the study, published in current issue of JAMA, researchers looked at 716 of these fractures in more than 200,000 Ontario women who had taken bisphosphonates.

Women who had taken the drugs for five years or longer had nearly a three times higher risk of suffering atypical fractures compared with women who had only transient exposure to such drugs.

That's called the relative risk, and it seems alarming. But the "absolute risk" of these unusual fractures is still pretty low — 13 fractures per year for every 10,000 people taking bisphosphonates for five years or longer. That is, long-term users have a risk of about a tenth of 1 percent.

Moreover, the study verified that long-term use of bisphosphonate drugs reduces the risk of typical osteoporosis fractures by 24 percent. That's obviously a lot more benefit than risk.

"The big message really is the number of typical hip fractures is much, much larger than the number of unusual thigh fractures," says Dr. Gillian Hawker of St. Michael's Hospital in Ontario, an osteoporosis specialist and study author. "So although we believe there is an increased risk of these unusual fractures, it doesn't outweigh the benefit" of taking osteoporosis drugs.

Merck, which makes Fosamax, the original and leading bisphosphonate drug, criticizes the new study. The company said in a statement to Shots that women who had atypical fractures were different from those who didn't. For instance, they started out with a history of more fractures, so the comparison isn't valid.

"Merck believes that the results must be interpreted with caution and should not be overstated," says the company's statement.

Still, the accumulating evidence that there is a risk of these serious, unusual fractures associated with bisphosphonates is getting a lot of attention in the medical community.

Last fall the Food and Drug Administration issued a "safety update" urging doctors and patients to be on the lookout for the problem. Often, the FDA says, an atypical fracture is preceded by pain in the thigh, apparently from a small stress fracture that signals bone weakness. "Although it is not clear if bisphosphonates are the cause, these unusual femur fractures have been predominantly reported in patients taking bisphosphonates," the FDA says.

The concern is heightened by another, even rarer possible side effect – osteonecrosis of the jaw. Basically, it means that part of the jawbone dies.

Some reports – including one published earlier this month in the Journal of Dental Research — have found a higher risk of the jaw problem in dental patients taking bisphosphonates.

Again, Merck disputes the connection. Earlier this month it convinced a New Jersey jury that Fosamax did not cause one woman's jaw problems.

Amid all the debate, many specialists are wondering if women on bisphosphonates should take a "holiday" from the drug from time to time. The idea is that perhaps they'd get the osteoporosis benefit without the risks of osteonecrosis and unusual fractures. "You could do five years on, five years off," Dr. Clifford Rosen, a bone specialist at Maine Medical Center, tells Shots. "Some people are doing three on and three off."

But at some point, should these patients start taking the drug again? "I don't think anybody knows," Rosen says. "The thought is you would have to put them back on at some time."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job explaining the tradeoffs of benefits and harms and quotes a doctor who worries that fear of rare events may be preventing women from taking drugs that could save them from the typical hip fractures.
If only the article took the extra step by talking about treatment benefits in absolute terms, rather than relative. The competing Reuters article tries to put the absolute benefit in perspective by noting that about half of people with osteoporosis will have a fracture in their lifetime.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many women with early breast cancer do not appear to need removal of their lymph nodes, as is often recommended, according to a federally funded study released Tuesday.

The study, involving nearly 900 women who were treated at 115 sites across the country, found that those who did have their lymph nodes removed were no more likely to survive five years after the surgery than those who did not, the researchers reported in a paper published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Breast cancer is diagnosed in about 200,000 women each year in the United States, with the cancer reaching the lymph nodes in about one-third of the cases.

When the cancer has spread to any lymph nodes, doctors usually recommend that nodes in the armpit be removed surgically, along with the tumor in the breast, to reduce the risk of a recurrence. But such removal is painful, makes recovery more difficult and leaves women susceptible to complications, including infections and a chronic, sometimes disabling swelling in their arms known as lymphodema.

In the new study, Armando Giuliano of the John Wayne Cancer Institute at Saint John's Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif., and colleagues analyzed data collected from 445 women who had their nodes removed and 446 who did not, along with radiation and chemotherapy. They found no significant difference in the patients' chances of surviving five years after their diagnosis. The five-year "disease-free" survival rate was 83.9 percent in those who did not have the more aggressive surgery compared with 82.2 in those who did, the researchers reported.

Based on the findings, the researchers said, women who fit the criteria of those in the study probably do not need to undergo the additional surgery. The researchers noted that the study was limited to women with tumors known as T1 or T2, meaning they were relatively small, had no enlarged nodes that could be felt, and the cancer had not spread elsewhere.

In an accompanying editorial, Grant Walter Carlson and William Wood of Emory University in Atlanta called the study an "important contribution" that represents the latest development in breast cancer treatment, which has steadily been moving toward less-aggressive options, sparing women from unnecessary surgery and follow-up therapy. The study provides "strong evidence" that many women can safely forgo lymph node removal, they wrote.

In a telephone interview, Gary Lyman of the American Society of Clinical Oncology said the findings will probably prompt the group to revise its recommendations for breast cancer patients accordingly. The panel that issues those guidelines is currently reviewing its recommendations, he said.

"I think this will be practice-changing," he said.

About 60 to 70 percent of women with cancer diagnosed in lymph nodes may now opt not to have more nodes removed based on this study, meaning thousands of women would avoid the additional surgery, he said.

"This is good news. It's a substantial number of women," Lyman said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The potential benefits were included in the article.  The “five-year ‘disease free’ survival rate was 83.9%…” for women who did not have the more aggressive surgery “…compared with 82.2% in those who did…”  Because full axillary lymph node dissection did not decrease mortality or decrease disease free survival, this may no longer be the standard recommendation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers Say Common Test For Prostate Cancer May Not Work

More bad news on the prostate cancer front: A widely used test that's supposed to help doctors and patients predict the outcome of most prostate cancers is basically worthless.

That's according to a study just published in the journal CANCER.

The new study discrediting the test, coupled with persistent questions about how useful prostate screening is for most men anyway, add up to a whole lot of discussion points patients should take to their doctors.

The test in question is called "clinical staging." It relies on certain signs doctors use to classify how advanced an individual patient's cancer is – that is, what stage it's in. It includes criteria like whether the doctor can feel a nodule through rectal examination, and whether a tumor is detected through a test called trans-rectal ultrasound.

Ten years ago, the American College of Surgeons Commission on Cancer decreed that doctors should use these types of clinical staging tests to help decide how to treat cancers.

"Our findings question the utility of our current staging system for localized prostate cancer," says Dr. Adam Reese of the University of California at San Francisco, lead author of the study.

To begin with, doctors err in using this prostate test 35 percent of the time. When these errors occur, the study says, doctors most often conclude the cancer is less serious than it really is.

But even when researchers allowed for these errors, they found the test doesn't predict how patients ultimately do.

Dr. Gerald Andriole of Washington University, who was not involved in the study, told Shots he wasn't surprised by the results. Recently, he says, urologists "have begun to realize these criteria are not adequate. But this is the first study that quantifies the magnitude of the inadequacy."

Even so, Andriole says, the findings may not make too much difference in the real world. Before treatment recommendations are made, doctors put most prostate tumors through other tests, too, like the Gleason score, and they look at the percentage of biopsies that are positive for cancer cells.

"I use all those parameters to tell a patient what his chances of a good outcome are," Andriole says.

Still, both study author Reese and Andriole say the new study may serve as a wakeup call to those who are over-relying on the clinical staging system.

They say what's really needed is a set of tests that classify prostate tumors by what genes are turned on or off in the cells.

Once this is sorted out, doctors treating prostate cancer will be less like the blind men who try to guess what kind of creature they're dealing with when they grasp the elephant's trunk or tail.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story covered a study that raised questions about clinical staging being “worthless.”  The story made clear that there were serious new questions about the absence of benefit.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study from The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston has revealed that a treatment taken daily by people who have had organ transplants to prevent organ rejection protects against Alzheimer's disease. An early online version of this paper detailing the findings has been published and is scheduled for publication in the July 7 issue of the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common age-associated neurodegenerative disorder that has no cure. Compelling evidence shows that toxic protein aggregates called Aβ oligomers selectively target and disrupt the points of communication between brain cells, impairing memory in people suffering from the disease. Because of this, there is a large consensus that preventing this kind of toxicity would be an effective treatment strategy.

Calcineurin is an enzyme that regulates communication between brain cells and memory formation. The UTMB research team and others have shown previously that this enzyme plays a central role in the harmful effects of the Aβ oligomers and that elevated calcineurin is found in the nervous system of Alzheimer's patients.

Using a mouse model of Alzheimer's, the researchers earlier showed that blocking calcineurin restored memory function. However, the question of whether such a strategy would prevent the onset and progression of Alzheimer's in people is challenging because treatment with a calcineurin-blocking agent suppresses the immune system.

To bypass this issue, the UTMB team analyzed data from the medical records of 2,644 patients who received organ transplants and must take calcineurin inhibitor-based medications, such as Tacrolimus or cyclosporine, for the rest of their lives to prevent rejection of the transplanted organ. As part of the medical care for transplant recipients, any evidence of memory impairment or dementia is immediately noted and monitored, as it can limit treatment compliance among these patients.

The participants were separated into groups by age at the time of last visit or death, gender and ethnicity. Eight participants showed evidence of dementia - two were younger than 65, five were in the 65-74 years old group and one was in the 75-84 years old group.

The UTMB study data was compared with national data obtained from the 2014 Alzheimer's Association Facts and Figures dataset on age-matched patients to compare the prevalence of Alzheimer's.

"These data clearly show that the prevalence of dementia and Alzheimer's in our transplant patient group is significantly lower, in fact almost absent, when compared to national data from the general population," said senior author Luca Cicalese, professor in the department of surgery. "In patients over 65 years, 11 percent of the general population had dementia compared with 1.02 percent of the study subjects. In Americans over 75 years, 15.3 percent of the population had dementia compared with 0.6 percent of the study subjects. Among Americans over 85 years, 32 percent had dementia, although we did not have any patients in this age group with dementia."

Since the people involved in the study mostly come from Texas, the researchers further compared their over 65 years old group with the prevalence of Alzheimer's in the general population of the state and got similar results.

"Taken together, our findings from these people confirm the data obtained with animal models and support, for the first time in human subjects, our notion that calcineurin inhibition has a protective effect on the development and possible progression and even reversal of Alzheimer's disease," said senior author Giulio Taglialatela, Professor and Vice Chair for Research in the department of neurology and director of UTMB's Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases. "Therefore, we are currently working on devising treatment strategies to obtain the same beneficial effects in AD humans using low doses of calcineurin inhibitors that result in minimal or no immunosuppression, thus limiting possible undesired side effects."

UTMB's Cristiana Rastellini, Professor in the departments of Surgery and Microbiology & Immunology also was an author on this paper.

This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health and the Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’ll reward the news release here for providing data taken from the published study that quantities the benefits. It helpfully gives the absolute rates of dementia in those taking the drugs and in the general population. That makes the numbers easy to understand and gives an accurate sense of the size of the effect. Having said that, however, the language used in the title and the comments from the senior author go beyond what the study is capable of determining. We’ll discuss that shortcoming below under the “Evidence” criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - The inexpensive tests that look for hidden blood in a person’s stool are effective for colon cancer screening, a study out Tuesday confirms.

The findings, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, give some extra weight to fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) as a valid option for early detection of colon cancer.

Experts generally recommend that people at average risk of colon cancer start screening tests for the disease at age 50. And they can pick from a number of tests that have all been found to cut the risk of dying from colon cancer.

Along with stool tests — done once a year at home — the choices include two invasive procedures: colonoscopy done every 10 years and flexible sigmoidoscopy done every five years.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally supported expert panel, recommends that people at average risk of colon cancer choose any of the three methods.

FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be a sign of colon cancer or pre-cancerous growths called polyps. Positive results on the screen prompt a follow-up colonoscopy to investigate the source of the blood.

Advances in the stool tests in recent years have made them more effective. A newer version called immunochemical FOBT (iFOBT) is supposed to zero in on colon growths better than an older version known as guaiac FOBT — which often picked up bleeding originating in the upper digestive tract, such as from a stomach ulcer.

Immunochemical FOBT is now largely replacing the older test. But there’s been surprisingly little evidence that it really is highly “specific” to colon cancer, according to Dr. Yi-Chia Lee of National Taiwan University Hospital, one of the researchers on the new study.

So for their study, the researchers followed nearly 2,800 adults who all volunteered to have iFOBT, a colonoscopy and an upper endoscopy to check for problems in the upper digestive tract.

They found that of 28 people confirmed to have colon tumors after a colonoscopy, all but one had also a positive iFOBT result.

“It means that almost every case with colon cancer can be identified by iFOBT,” Lee told Reuters Health in an email. “It is a strong support to iFOBT as an effective screening tool.”

The researchers also found that iFOBT had “specificity” for colon cancer of close to 90 percent, meaning the test would accurately give a negative result to almost 90 percent of people who did not have colon cancer.

Of three study participants who were found to have cancers of the stomach or esophagus, for instance, none had a positive result on the iFOBT test.

Like any screening test, iFOBT does have a risk of false-positive results, which leads to unnecessary invasive testing in some people. In this study, about 10 percent of all participants had a false-positive finding on the stool test.

Among the risk factors for false-positives the authors identified were the use of anticlotting drugs and low levels of the iron-rich molecule hemoglobin in the blood.

In practice, a positive iFOBT result would be followed by colonoscopy, in which a scope is used to investigate the interior of the colon.

Whether used for first-line screening or as a follow-up, colonoscopy has the advantage of allowing doctors to spot and remove pre-cancerous growths called polyps — which means the test can prevent cases of colon cancer.

But as far as cutting the risk of death from colon cancer, stool testing is similarly effective, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

And it’s much cheaper: iFOBT is more expensive than the older stool tests, but it is still roughly $30. A screening colonoscopy averages around $3,000.

The downside of iFOBT being specific to colon tumors is that it is not useful for catching cancers of the stomach or throat.

That’s particularly important in Asia, where those cancers are common.

Lee said researchers there are looking into whether combining iFOBT with the older guaiac test is useful for catching cancers in the lower and upper digestive tract — and whether adding a third stool test, which looks for the ulcer-causing bacteria H. pylori, can help as well. Infection with H. pylori is associated with increased risks of stomach and throat cancers.

In the U.S., cancers of the upper digestive tract are relatively uncommon. The average American has a one in 200 chance of developing esophageal cancer, while the risk of stomach cancer is one in 114.

In contrast, Americans’ lifetime risk of colon cancer is about one in 19, according to the American Cancer Society. More than 50,000 Americans died of the disease in 2010.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Sensitivity and specifity of the test were explained very well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Dec. 29, 2009 (HealthDay News) -- Many older adults consume ginkgo biloba, hoping to keep their minds sharp, but a new study finds that the herbal product doesn't stave off cognitive decline.

"Measuring the effect of ginkgo in a big trial in older people, we didn't see any effect of the drug on slowing down or delaying normal age-related changes of cognition," said lead researcher Dr. Steven T. DeKosky, vice president and dean of the University of Virginia School of Medicine in Charlottesville.

"If you are older and thinking 'I'll try ginkgo to preserve brain health,' we have no evidence that it is useful," he said. "I won't take it anymore."

The report, published in the Dec. 23-30 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, supports the findings of earlier, smaller studies.

To test ginkgo's effect on cognitive decline, DeKosky's group looked at results from the ginkgo Evaluation of Memory study, which included 3,069 community-dwelling adults 72 to 96 years of age. The participants, who were generally healthy when the study began, either took 120 milligrams of ginkgo or placebo twice a day and were routinely tested for cognitive abilities.

Over more than six years of follow-up, the researchers found no evidence that ginkgo delayed or prevented normal declines in memory, language, attention, visuospatial abilities or executive functions, such as anticipating outcomes and adapting to changing situations and thinking abstractly.

These results remained the same regardless of sex, age, race or education, the researchers noted.

However, ginkgo was safe and no serious side effects were noted, DeKosky added. "The good news is it appeared that it was fairly safe; the bad news was it didn't seem to do anything at least as far as trying to slow down the cognitive changes of aging."

Earlier results from the same study found that ginkgo did not prevent or slow the development of Alzheimer's or other dementias, DeKosky said.

The American Botanical council took issue with the findings, however.

"There are many significant limitations of this study," Mark Blumenthal, council founder and executive director said in a statement.

"First, the data being published this week are drawn from a previous clinical trial which was not designed to determine the decline in cognition. Second, about 40 percent of the subjects dropped out over the six-year duration of the trial; the statistics reported in the study include the dropouts for which no final data are available," Blumenthal said. "Further, the subjects in the study were not monitored for certain cognitive parameters until several years after the trial began, creating difficulty in determining accurately whether they experienced a decline in cognition or not. Also, the age of the subjects is quite advanced, at an average of 79 years at the beginning of the trial. This age group is not typical of the age of both healthy people and those with mild cognitive impairment who use ginkgo for improving mental performance."

Another group, the Council for Responsible Nutrition (CRN), which represents the dietary supplement industry, also had reservations about the study.

In a statement, Douglas MacKay, CRN's vice president of scientific and regulatory affairs, said that "there is a large body of previously published evidence, as well as ongoing trials, which suggest that ginkgo biloba is effective for helping to improve cognitive impairment in older adults." He added that, "as a former practicing naturopathic doctor, I have had the benefit of working with patients and have seen firsthand how ginkgo biloba can be effective in improving cognitive function."

Ginkgo biloba is believed to have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties that protect cell membranes and help govern the workings of the brain's chemical messengers, or neurotransmitters.

Dr. Lon S. Schneider, director of the state of California's Alzheimer's Disease Research and Clinical Center at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, said that these findings were "straightforward and expected."

No measurable effect from ginkgo is seen on cognition, Schneider said. "Regardless of whether people say 'I take it and I feel better,' you just don't see an effect," he said.

Still, Schneider won't object if someone wants to try it. "It is not in my position to deflate hope," he said. "If someone really feels they need to take this and they need to try it, well go ahead and do it. But their expectations should be realistic, and if they don't experience anything, then they probably should stop."

For more information on ginkgo biloba, go to the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story stated that the researchers found no evidence that ginkgo delayed or prevented cognitive declines. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- When it comes to shedding pounds and improving or eliminating type 2 diabetes, gastric bypass surgery may be better than other surgical weight-loss procedures, two new studies find.

But obese patients should be careful to choose surgeons who have performed a high volume of these procedures before committing, said Dr. Guilherme M. Campos, lead author of one of two papers appearing in the February issue of the Archives of Surgery.

Gastric bypass and lap-banding are the two most common surgical weight-loss procedures performed in the United States. The former involves stapling the stomach so food has to bypass a section of the small intestine, meaning you get full faster and less food gets absorbed into the gut.

Lap-banding, introduced in 2001, involves separating the stomach into two sections with a band so, simply speaking, eating too much becomes more difficult. "It's a diet with a seatbelt," said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of bariatric surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City and Northern Westchester Hospital in Mt. Kisco, N.Y.

In a third type of weight-loss procedure, known as sleeve gastrectomy, surgeons remove part of the stomach.

The study led by Campos compared weight loss and diabetes outcomes in 100 patients who underwent gastric bypass surgery with 100 patients who underwent lap-banding. Gastric bypass is considered riskier and more technically demanding than the band.

All patients were morbidly obese (with a body-mass index higher than 40), and 34 in each group had type 2 diabetes.

Although Campos is now an associate professor of surgery at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison, he conducted the study while at the University of California, San Francisco.

In the bypass group, patients lost an average of 64 percent of their excess weight, vs. 36 percent for those in the lap-banding group. Three-quarters of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery saw their diabetes improve or resolve, vs. only half in the other group.

The average cost of a bariatric surgery is nearly $30,000, according to a recent study from Johns Hopkins University.

Like all surgeries, weight-loss surgery carries its own set of possible risks, including bleeding, blood clots, infection and leaks from sites where body tissues are sewn or stapled together, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Later complications may include malnutrition, hernias and a tendency in about one in 10 people to regain much of the weight they lost as a result of the procedure.

In Campos' study, roughly equal numbers of patients in each group experienced complications after one year (12 percent in the gastric bypass group compared to 15 percent in the lap-banding group); these included infection, internal bleeding and blood clots, but no deaths. More people in the bypass group had complications right after the surgery. More of those undergoing lap-banding, however, needed repeat surgeries (13 percent vs. 2 percent).

The second study, conducted in Taiwan and led by Dr. Wei-Jei Lee of the Min-Sheng General Hospital, involved randomly assigning 60 obese (but not morbidly obese) patients with type 2 diabetes to receive gastric bypass surgery or sleeve gastrectomy.

Almost all of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery (93 percent) had their diabetes resolved, vs. only half in the other group (these numbers declined to 57 percent and 0 percent after a year).

Those in the gastric bypass group also lost more weight, and there were no serious complications in either group.

There are various theories to explain why gastric bypass may be superior, including one that attributes the success to changes in hormones that control the metabolism of blood sugar.

And certain procedures may still be preferable for certain patient populations, added Roslin, such as bands for patients with lower BMI who don't have so many metabolic challenges.

"Everyone thinks that all weight-loss operations are the same, even the doctors and the surgeons. [But] they're different, and they have different resolutions of comorbidities and probably should be used for different indications," he said.

An editorial accompanying the studies noted the results should be interpreted with caution since longer-term data is not yet available.

Visit the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery for more on weight-loss procedures.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: A little bit better job with the numbers than the LA Times. The same weight loss data are provided in absolute terms, but this story also attaches a figure to the number of patients whose diabetes resolved after bypass compared with the band procedure. The LA Times called the results here “far better” for gastric bypass, but HealthDay notes that improvement or resolutions was seen in three-fourths of bypass patients and half of band patients — a more precise characterization.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: The investigational anticancer therapeutic abemaciclib, which targets CDK4 and CDK6, showed durable clinical activity when given as continuous single-agent therapy to patients with a variety of cancer types, including breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), glioblastoma, and melanoma, according to results from a phase I clinical trial.

Journal in Which the Study was Published: Cancer Discovery, a journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.

Senior authors: Amita Patnaik, MD, associate director of clinical research at South Texas Accelerated Research Therapeutics in San Antonio, Texas, and Geoffrey I. Shapiro, MD, PhD, director of the Early Drug Development Center at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.

Background: In February 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib (Ibrance) for use in combination with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole for treating postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer.

The oral CDK4/6 inhibitor abemaciclib is a very different molecule from palbociclib, with distinct attributes that contribute to its discrete therapeutic effects, in particular, its single-agent activity, according to Shapiro. For example, abemaciclib has greater selectivity for CDK4 compared with palbociclib, which may explain why it does not affect white blood cell counts as severely, allowing it to be taken on a continuous schedule without treatment holidays, he said. Abemaciclib also penetrates the central nervous system, whereas palbociclib does not, raising the possibility that it could be used to treat primary or metastatic brain tumors, he added.

How the Study Was Conducted and Results: Patnaik, Shapiro, and colleagues enrolled 225 patients with a variety of types of advanced cancer in the phase I clinical trial designed to evaluate the safety and preliminary efficacy of abemaciclib. In the dose escalation phase, the researchers determined that the maximum tolerated dose was 200 milligrams (mg) every 12 hours; the dose-limiting toxicity was grade 3 fatigue.

In the expansion phase, single-agent abemaciclib was administered to 47 patients with breast cancer, 68 with NSCLC, 17 with glioblastoma, 26 with melanoma, and 15 with colorectal cancer. Among these patients, the most common treatment-related adverse events were fatigue, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, kidney dysfunction, and decreased red and white blood cell counts.

Radiographic responses were observed for some patients with breast cancer, NSCLC, and melanoma. Among the 36 patients with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, 11 had a partial response, with four of the 11 responders having continued prior endocrine therapy, and an additional 18 patients had stable disease. Among the 68 patients with NSCLC, two had a partial response and 31 had stable disease; one patient who had a partial response and 12 who had stable disease were known to have KRAS-mutant NSCLC. Among the 26 patients with melanoma, one had a partial response and six had stable disease. Three of the 17 patients with glioblastoma had stable disease, with two of them continuing to receive treatment without disease progression for 19 and 23 cycles, respectively.

Author Comment: "These data show that abemaciclib is an oral drug that can be taken on a continuous schedule and achieve durable clinical activity against multiple tumors including breast and lung cancers," said Shapiro.

"The results of the trial supported the FDA decision to grant breakthrough therapy designation to abemaciclib (previously known as LY2835219) for patients with refractory hormone receptor-positive advanced or metastatic breast cancer," added Patnaik.

Limitations: Patnaik explained that because this study included 225 patients with different types of cancer, confirmatory clinical trials in specific patient populations are necessary to precisely define the role of abemaciclib in cancer care. Multiple clinical trials have already been initiated to evaluate abemaciclib as a treatment for certain groups of patients with breast cancer and NSCLC, as well as children with primary brain tumors and adults with brain metastases, she noted.

Funding & Disclosures: The study was funded by Eli Lilly and Company. Patnaik has received research funding from Lilly. Shapiro served on an advisory board for Lilly during the conduct of the study; reports receiving personal fees from Lilly, GI Therapeutics, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, and grants from Lilly for work other than reported here; and is an investigator on several trials using other CDK4/6 inhibitors, including palbociclib and ribociclib.

About the American Association for Cancer Research

Founded in 1907, the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) is the world's first and largest professional organization dedicated to advancing cancer research and its mission to prevent and cure cancer. AACR membership includes more than 35,000 laboratory, translational, and clinical researchers; population scientists; other health care professionals; and patient advocates residing in 104 countries. The AACR marshals the full spectrum of expertise of the cancer community to accelerate progress in the prevention, biology, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer by annually convening more than 30 conferences and educational workshops, the largest of which is the AACR Annual Meeting with nearly 19,500 attendees. In addition, the AACR publishes eight prestigious, peer-reviewed scientific journals and a magazine for cancer survivors, patients, and their caregivers. The AACR funds meritorious research directly as well as in cooperation with numerous cancer organizations. As the Scientific Partner of Stand Up To Cancer, the AACR provides expert peer review, grants administration, and scientific oversight of team science and individual investigator grants in cancer research that have the potential for near-term patient benefit. The AACR actively communicates with legislators and other policymakers about the value of cancer research and related biomedical science in saving lives from cancer. For more information about the AACR, visit http://www. .

To interview Amita Patnaik or Geoffrey I. Shapiro, contact Julia Gunther at julia.gunther@aacr.org or 215-446-6896.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release is appropriately restrained in its description of the potential benefits of a drug just starting the long process of trials in patients. It specifically reports the number of trial participants whose tumors appeared to respond or at least not advance during the test, without making premature claims of effectiveness. However, we would like to see news releases about early trials of cancer drugs go further, to state explicitly that signs of partial responses or stable disease do not imply potential cures or even extended survival. More emphatic cautionary statements seem particularly appropriate to releases like this one that point out an experimental drug has been given “breakthrough therapy designation” by the FDA, which is a technical definition that the FDA notes is frequently misinterpreted by the public and even health care professionals. Since it referenced “durable response,” it would have been nice to see the release include a definition. In brief, the term refers to the length of time that a partial or complete response is observed as a result of treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pill That Hits A Cause Of Cystic Fibrosis Beats Expectations

More than 20 years after the gene behind cystic fibrosis was identified, a pill that could fix the problem in some people is getting closer to reality.

The experimental medicine, taken twice a day, goes by the code name VX-770. Now there are some promising results from a study in 161 people with a specific genetic mutation that affects about four percent of cystic fibrosis patients.

Lung function got 10 percentage points better, on average, in people who got the drug compared with those taking a placebo. The improvement at six months was still present almost a year after the study's start.

That much improvement is "a big deal for CF patients," Robert Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation told Shots. "It is larger than any other clinical intervention we've ever had in cystic fibrosis." Beall said there were no significant side effects.

The foundation has championed the development of drugs, including VX-770, and has provided $75 million to Vertex to get the medicine this far. If the drug makes it to market, the foundation will receive royalties from sales.

This pill, for people with the G551D mutation of the cystic fibrosis gene, helps a defective protein in cell membranes do a better job moving things around. Lisa Jarvis has more details on that at the Haystack blog. But a key takeaway is that the medicine gets at a root cause of cystic fibrosis in some people rather than just relieving their symptoms.

Now, to be perfectly clear, all we know about the latest data is from press releases. And the drug hasn't been submitted for review by the Food and Drug Administration, though Vertex expects to do that later this year.

But these results, even with plenty of caveats, suggest the drug is on the right track. Vertex's shares jumped 15 percent Wednesday as investors figured VX-770 looks even better than they'd expected.

"Wow!" wrote Dr. Mark Schoenebaum, a biotech and drug analyst ISI Group, in a note to investors. The effectiveness of VX-770 looks "best case," he wrote. Ultimately, the drug might be used by around 3,000 patients worldwide, if approved, and Schoenebaum expects it would be command a very high price, perhaps $250,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Good enough.  We appreciate at least the attempt to explain that the 10 percentage points improvement in lung function “is a big deal for CF patients.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A biotech company today will begin offering the first genetic test to assess a woman's risk for the most common forms of breast cancer, reigniting debate about the growing number of unregulated genetic tests.

The test by Decode Genetics of Reykjavik, Iceland, a respected pioneer in genetic research, promises to determine a woman's risk through a simple blood sample or cheek swab. Previously, the only tests for breast cancer risk were for relatively rare genes, leaving most women with no way to assess their individual genetic predisposition.

"What this does for women is allow them to assess their personal risk for the common forms of breast cancer," said Kári Stefánsson, Decode's chief executive. "That's what you need to do to make early diagnoses or take preventive measures. This test will most definitely save lives."

While welcomed by some patient advocates and doctors, the $1,625 test raises concerns among others. Some questioned its reliability, while others worried that the results could either lull women into a false sense of complacency or needlessly alarm them, prompting them to take unnecessary tests or even undergo unneeded surgery.

"There is at least a significant chance this test will could falsely reassure some women and alarm others," said Eric Winer, a breast cancer expert at Harvard Medical School and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology. "I fear for many women the results could be quite misleading."

"I wouldn't recommend to anyone that she have such a test. I certainly wouldn't want my daughter to have such a test," said Mary-Claire King, a geneticist and breast cancer expert at the University of Washington. "It's meaningless, and it could very easily introduce real confusion."

The test comes as concern has been rising about the proliferation of genetic tests. Hundreds of laboratories are now offering genetic testing for more than 1,200 conditions. The Food and Drug Administration does not regulate such tests when they are performed by the labs offering them.

"There is concern about the validity of many genetic tests that are being offered," said Joan Scott, deputy director of the Center for Genetics and Public Policy at Johns Hopkins University. "Without an external review, the consumer -- be it the physician or the patient directly -- is not going to know which ones have been validated."

An FDA spokeswoman said the agency had just become aware of the new test and could not say whether it would take any action, though she noted that in August the agency sent a letter expressing concern to another company marketing a questionable genetic test for ovarian cancer.

"I can't speculate on this one," said Karen Riley, the spokeswoman.

Breast cancer strikes more than 180,000 women each year in the United States and kills more than 40,000, making it the most common form of cancer after skin cancer and second leading cancer killer among women.

Doctors can estimate a woman's chances of developing breast cancer based on a variety of factors, including her age and family history, but most women have no way of knowing their precise risk. Women with a strong family history can get tested for two genes that sharply increase their predisposition, but they account for only 1 to 3 percent of all breast cancers.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: It is not clear how this test improves on these current practice as there was no evidence presented about it. The story appropriately expresses caution when presenting the value of this new test to predict a woman’s lifetime risk of developing cancer.  There is a wide range of experts interviewed, all of whom express concern about the current available evidence for the predictive value of this test.  Most experts advise against women taking this test, and the American Cancer Society does not promote the test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 15, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- People with high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome were better able to "catch" social cues after inhaling the hormone oxytocin, new research shows.

Oxytocin,which is produced in abundance when a mother is breast-feeding her baby, is known as the "bonding" hormone.

Although there are many kinks to be worked out, experts feel the strategy holds promise to treat one of the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder.

"When you start thinking of a hormone that can actually encourage pro-social behavior, you're talking about potentially significant changes in quality of life," said Clara Lajonchere, a vice president of clinical programs at the advocacy group Autism Speaks and a clinical assistant professor at the Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California.

"In the absence of intellectual deficits, the areas where they have the greatest struggle is around social communication and social connectedness," she continued. "These people can't interpret other people's perceptions, they can't read social cues, they don't make eye contact."

While there are drugs for the secondary symptoms of autism, such as irritability and aggression, doctors have nothing yet for the core symptoms in the areas of language, social interaction and intellectual deficits.

Prior studies have shown a strong effect of oxytocin on people with autism, as well as on people who are not on the autism disorders spectrum. One study found that autistic people seem to have a lower sensitivity to oxytocin than people without the disorder.

"There's no doubt that oxytocin has a big effect on social interactions in anyone. It's almost like a designer drug, a drug which has a selective effect on a behavior in the normal range," said Keith Young, vice chairman of research in psychiatry and behavioral science at the Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine in Temple and the neuroimaging and genetics core leader at the VA Center of Excellence for Research on Returning War Veterans at the Central Texas Veterans Health Care System.

The new study, led by Angela Sirigu at the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience in Lyon, France, was published in this week's issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. It involved 13 adults, most of them men, aged 17 to 39. All had high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome.

Participants performed different tasks -- either after inhaling oxytocin or without using the hormone.

When observed playing a virtual ball game, individuals who had inhaled oxytocin were able to interact better with their virtual partners compared to untreated participants.

Also, after inhaling oxytocin, participants showed more alertness to socially important visual cues in pictures of human faces.

There were, however, wide variations in individual responses, the team noted.

"It's not clear whether this would be effective at all in children or in young adults who had intellectual problems," warned Young.

The long-term effects of the hormone are also uncertain.

"I really want to encourage clinical trials in this area because of its potential significance, but we have to be very careful in terms of safety data," Lajonchere said. "Safety data is really critical."

Also, scientists would need to come up with a different method of delivery, Young said.

"The nasal [inhaled] drugs only work for a few minutes. Potentially it would be very difficult to be using this drug once an hour or something. It doesn't make a whole lot of sense," he pointed out. "But it does point the way to the possibility of raising oxytocin levels with other kinds of compounds to increase oxytocin levels more generally over a longer period of time. I don't know whether this is a realistic therapy as we have it now but, potentially, in the future it could really help these people whose primary autistic symptoms are having to do with reduction in social activity."

For more on autism, visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The published study itself does not quantify benefits clearly , perhaps understandable given that it is a laboratory study, not a clinical one. But we give the story a satisfactory rating for doing a reasonable job of putting the study results into context. The brevity of the response and the inconsistent findings across individuals were noted appropriately in the story.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATS 2016, SAN FRANCISCO - A new skin test for tuberculosis infection has proven safe, easy to administer and accurate in two Phase III clinical trials, according to research presented at the ATS 2016 International Conference.

The test, known as C-Tb, combines the "field friendliness of the PPD-based tuberculin skin test with the high specificity of interferon gamma release assays, or IGRAs," said lead researcher Morten Ruhwald, MD, PhD, head of human immunology at Statens Serum Institut in Denmark, which developed the test.

The new test measures the body's immune response to two TB antigens, EAST-6 and CFP10. The test is administered like a tuberculin skin test (TST), and results are interpreted by measuring the size of the skin induration two or three days later.

The TST is the most commonly used test to detect TB infection, with about 50 million tests worldwide each year, according to the World Health Organization. The test is easy to administer but produces too many false positives to achieve the WHO's goal of reducing TB deaths by 95 percent and new cases by 90 percent by 2035, Dr. Ruhwald said.

Introduced a decade ago, IGRAs have high specificity, producing few false positives, but require blood samples and complicated lab work, which has limited their widespread use. There is also a dramatic price difference between the two diagnostic tests. According to Dr. Ruhwald, a TST costs about $2; an IGRA is 20 to 40 times more expensive depending on setting.

In the first clinical trial, Dr. Ruhwald and colleagues conducted a double-blinded study of C-Tb in 979 participants enrolled at 13 clinical trial sites in Spain. Participants, all adults, ranged in TB status from presumed uninfected through intermediate and high risk of latent TB to active disease.
• Both C-Tb and the IGRA had a specificity of 97 percent.
• C-Tb was highly concordant to IGRA in 95 percent of study participants.
• The specificity of C-Tb, unlike the TST, was not impacted by the BCG vaccine, the partially effective vaccine that many residents in the developing world receive. TST specificity in this group was only 62 percent.
• The sensitivity of C-Tb was comparable to the IGRA in confirmed TB cases (77 percent vs. 81 percent), indicating similar abilities to detect infection.

In the second double-blinded trial, researchers were primarily concerned with testing how accurate C-Tb was in HIV-positive patients and in young children--populations in which the accuracy of the TST and the IGRA is known to be compromised. The study, conducted in South Africa, enrolled 1,090 participants, including 299 patients with HIV and 402 children as young as 28 days.
• Among participants with HIV, the ability of all three tests to detect TB infection was diminished, though the C-Tb appeared more robust in HIV-infected participants with low CD4 T cell counts.
• Among children under 5, C-Tb was comparable with the other two tests in identifying those infected.

Dr. Ruhwald said another advantage of C-Tb is that the measurement of infection, a 5mm or larger induration, is universal across patients with different risk factors, including HIV infection. With TST, the size of the induration is often adjusted to increase its accuracy in measuring infection in different patient populations.

Regulatory approval for C-Tb is currently being sought and Statens Serum Institute is actively seeking a commercial partner for marketing of C-Tb. The cost of a C-Tb test is to be determined; however, it is expected to be significantly less than an IGRA.

Diagnostic Accuracy of the Novel C-Tb Skin Test for Latent M.tuberculosis Infection; Results from Two Phase III Clinical Trials 

M. Ruhwald1, J.A. Cayla2, H. Aggerbaek1, K. Dheda3, P. Andersen1 

1Statens Serum Institut - Copenhagen/DK, 2Public Health Agency of Barcelona - Barcelona/ES, 3UCT Lung Institute, Lung Infection & Immunity Unit - Cape Town/ZA

Renewed emphasis on the detection and preventive treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected individuals at risk is required to reach the goals of the WHO post-2015 global tuberculosis strategy.

Statens Serum Institut has developed a novel specific skin test, C-Tb, based on the antigens ESAT-6 and CFP10. C-Tb combines the field friendliness of the PPD-based Tuberculin Skin Test (TST), with the high specificity of the interferon gamma release assays (IGRA).

This presentation outlines the results from two recently completed phase III trials (TESEC-05 and -06). The results have not previously been published or presented.

The TESEC-06 trial included 979 participants from 13 clinical trial sites in Catalonia, Galicia and Basque Country (Spain) with various risk profiles of M.tuberculosis infection. The TESEC-05 trial included 1090 participants with symptoms of TB and 100 endemic controls from Cape Town (South Africa).

In both trials C-Tb and TST were administered in a double-blinded fashion to one or the other forearm. Skin indurations were read 2 to 3 days later. A reading ?5mm was considered positive for the TST and C-Tb (cut off preset in phase II). Blood for IGRA testing (Quantiferon, QFT-GIT) was drawn prior to skin testing.

The safety profile of C-Tb was acceptable and not different from TST. Test specificity was assessed in 212 presumed unexposed Spanish controls. Here, C-Tb had comparable specificity to QFT-GIT (both 97%, p=1.0, and there was no impact of BCG vaccination). By contrast, previous BCG vaccination subverted TST specificity [62% (67/108) in BCG vaccinated compared to 95% (99/104) in BCG unvaccinated persons; (p<0.001)]. Sensitivity of C-Tb and QFT-GIT was comparable in patients with confirmed TB [77% (235/307) vs 81% (250/307); p=0.08]. In contacts, mirroring the findings with QFT-GIT, there was a strong trend in increasing C-Tb test positivity with M. tuberculosis exposure (figure 1). The impact of age and HIV infection on C-Tb, TST and QFT reactivity was assessed in 1090 individuals with symptoms suspect of TB disease, analysis is ongoing and will be included in the presentation.

These phase III trial results demonstrate that C-Tb is safe, has comparable diagnostic performance to QFT-GIT and addresses the problem of false positive TST results in BCG vaccinated persons.

The field-friendliness and high specificity offered by the C-Tb test could allow for improved targeted treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected persons in also in resource-constrained settings, where IGRAs are too complicated to implement.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release provides information that the new test — the C-Tb — is almost as effective as the IGRA, or interferon gamma release assays, which are more expensive, require blood samples and complicated lab work. It also explains that C-Tb is less prone to produce false positives than the TST in BCG-vaccinated individuals. News releases on diagnostic tests should also address the balance between sensitivity — which is how good the test is at positively identifying people who actually have the problem – and specificity – how good the test is at ruling out people who don’t have the problem. This release addresses the specificity issue, stating “The specificity of C-Tb, unlike the TST, was not impacted by the BCG vaccine, the partially effective vaccine that many residents in the developing world receive. TST specificity in this group was only 62 percent. The sensitivity of C-Tb was comparable to the IGRA in confirmed TB cases (77 percent vs. 81 percent), indicating similar abilities to detect infection.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This Test Can Determine Whether You've Outgrown A Food Allergy

An estimated 4 percent of Americans have food allergies, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has concluded that allergies are a growing public health concern. But diagnosing allergies can be tricky, and kids can outgrow them, too.

Now, a new study sheds light on the effectiveness of a test called a food challenge to determine whether a person can tolerate a food they once reacted to.

Jula Cieciuch, a fifth-grader who lives in Telluride, Colo., recently took a food challenge to find out if she was still allergic to eggs.

When she passed, she was ecstatic. After years of avoiding all foods with eggs, she was a bit shocked. "For so long, it was: You can't eat this. You can't eat this," Jula says. " I was very emotional!"

She's also outgrown allergies to walnuts and almonds. "It's a huge relief ... it has really opened up her diet — a lot," her mom, Kendall Cieciuch, told us. Once you can eat eggs, you can eat cakes and breads and frittatas, and lots of other baked goods.

Jula is still allergic to some foods, including milk and cashews, so she still needs to be careful. But Kendall says every time she's crossed a food off her allergy list, "it makes life a little easier."

Jula Cieciuch's story is not uncommon. About 70 to 80 percent of children with an egg allergy will outgrow it. And about 20 percent of kids outgrow peanut allergies.

In Jula's case, her allergists at National Jewish Health in Denver, Colo., repeated the standard allergy blood tests last summer. That's when they realized she may have outgrown her egg allergy. 

 

The blood test measures the levels of a certain type of antibody, immunoglobulin E (IgE). The higher the level, the more likely a person is to have an allergic reaction. Jula's blood revealed a drop in antibody count.

 

But the only way to confirm that it was safe for Jula to eat egg was to take the food challenge test. Basically, the test entails eating small quantities of the foods you've been allergic to. The testing is done under medical supervision.

"What they do is give you a really small dose, like a crumb, basically," explains Jula. Then after 20 minutes or so, if you don't have any reaction, "you can take a dose that's a little bigger." If you can eat an entire egg, you pass.

A new study published in the Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology illuminates just how many people come to find out they can eat foods they've long avoided. 

 

 Researchers studied the results of about 6,300 food challenges. The tests were done in adults and children whom doctors suspected had become tolerant to foods they'd once reacted to.

 

"We found that 14 percent of the patients challenged had mild or moderate allergic reactions," explains study author Carla Davis, an allergist and director of the Food Allergy Program at Texas Children's Hospital. "If the symptoms were treated with just Benadryl or another antihistamine, they were considered mild or moderate. She says 2 percent of the reactions were more serious, requiring treatment with epinephrine.

But the vast majority of patients, 86 percent, did not have an allergic reaction. In other words, they tolerated the food just fine. She says the results aren't that surprising, since allergists had classified these patients as low-risk for reacting to the foods they were being tested for.

 

"I think [the results] are very encouraging," Bruce Lanser, a pediatric allergist who directs the Pediatric Food Allergy Program at National Jewish Health in Denver, told us. He was not involved in the study, but he says the findings mirror what he sees in his clinical practice. "We know a certain percentage will outgrow [their] allergies," Lanser says. "And the last thing I want to miss is the opportunity to get a food into a kid's diet."

He says many of the patients in the study may have outgrown their allergy, just like Jula did. "But it's also possible [some of them] never truly had a food allergy." As we've reported, people sometimes misinterpret the symptoms of a condition such as lactose intolerance for a food allergy.

Lanser says it can be tricky to diagnose food allergies. That's because the two main tests doctors use — the blood test and the skin prick test — only reveal part of the story. "Both tests only measure sensitization," he explains. "All they can tell us is how likely you are to react when you eat the food."

 

And that's where the oral food challenge comes in. It's become the gold standard test to rule out an allergy.

 

So, if you or your child tested positive for a food allergy years ago, you may want to consider seeing an allergist again.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provides the percent of patients who were categorized as having no response, mild allergic response, and anaphylaxis. Because this wasn’t a randomized controlled trial, those numbers summarize the important findings of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two existing drugs, in combination, have shown significant promise in promoting weight loss, according to a new report.

The drugs, phentermine and Topamax, in combination with lifestyle and weight-loss counseling were associated with a 18-22 pound weight loss in trial participants, compared with a three-pound weight loss in patients who received counseling alone.



 The drug also appears to have reduced other obesity-related indicators, such as blood pressure, cholesterol and inflammation levels.

By comparison, the only approved long-term prescription weight loss medication available on the market today, Xenical, is associated with a seven-pound weight loss when combined with diet and exercise.

The study was funded by the pharmaceutical company Vivus, which combined the two drugs into one pill called Qnexa, and petitioned the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for approval in October 2010. The Food and Drug Administration denied the request, asking for more safety data from the company before moving forward.

According to the report, there were specific concerns about each drug's safety individually; specifically Topamax, which is reported to cause some psychiatric and cognitive side effects and may cause clef palate birth defects if taken while pregnant.

According to the manufacturer's study, the two drugs, when taken together, and at controlled-release doses, were very safe. Participants in the trial reported minor side effects such as dry mouth and constipation, however at higher doses, some participants did complain about some psychiatric side effects.

Among the 2,487 study participants, nine became pregnant, and none of their children were born with cleft palates, the report said.

The drug could be a good option for some people, but it's most likely not a silver bullet, said Dr. Melina Jampolis, CNNHealth's physician nutrition expert, who is not connected with the study.

"This might be a good tool in the short term to get someone motivated, and that's great," she said. "But unless it's paired with aggressive lifestyle changes, it may not be great in the long term."

Phentermine is commonly used as a short-term weight loss treatment, and was previously paired with fenfluramine to make the successful but now-discontinued weight loss drug Fen-phen. Fen-phen was removed from the market in 1997 amid concerns about the drug's heart risk, but phentermine has been used successfully for short-term appetite suppression since then with no major safety concerns.

Topamax is commonly used to treat migraines and seizures.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately reported on the potential benefits.  It just didn’t provide the context we applauded in the LA Times story. But it did state:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Targeted magnetic pulses to the brain were shown to reduce craving and substance use in cocaine-addicted patients. The results of this pilot study, published in the peer-reviewed journal European Neuropsychopharmacology, suggest that this may become an effective medical treatment for patients with cocaine addiction, although a larger trial is needed to confirm the initial findings.

Cocaine use is widespread in the Western World. Last year, 2.3 million young Europeans (aged 15 to 34) used cocaine, and the US National Institute on Drug Abuse estimates that 1.4 million Americans suffer from cocaine addiction1. There is no effective drug treatment for cocaine addiction, with behavioural therapies being the main element of any treatment regime. Now a group of researchers working in Italy and the USA have shown in a preliminary clinical study that cocaine use can be reduced by treatment with rTMS (repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation).

As author, Dr Antonello Bonci (Scientific Director, National Institute on Drug Abuse, and Adjunct Professor, John Hopkins University, Baltimore) said:

"Despite the fact that more than 20 million people worldwide suffer from cocaine use disorders2, there are no effective neurobiological treatments for patients with this devastating condition".

The practical work was conducted by team of scientists led by Dr Luigi Gallimberti, from the University of Padova Medical School, Italy, who enrolled 32 patients who were seeking treatment for cocaine addiction at the hospital clinic. The participating patients were randomized to receive either rTMS or standard symptom-relieving medications.

The experimental group received one rTMS session per day for five days, and then once a week for the following three weeks, for a total of 8 TMS sessions over 29 days. Those in the control group received pharmacological treatment for symptoms associated with cocaine addiction (such as depression, anxiety and sleep problems). The study indicated the safety of rTMS in patients with cocaine addiction. There was significantly less craving and there were a significantly higher number of cocaine-free urine drug tests in the rTMS compared to the control group. In addition, 69% (11/16) patients) in the experimental group showed no relapse to cocaine use, whereas only 19% (3/16) patients) in the control group showed a similar positive result (the results are adjusted for patients who dropped out of the trial).

Dr Bonci said: "rTMS is a non-invasive and very safe therapeutic approach which is used with other mental health and neurological conditions, such as depression and neuropathic pain. Our study suggests that rTMS may also represent a new treatment for patients with cocaine use disorder".

At the end of the first 29 days of the experiment, the experimental group was given the option of continuing the treatment, whereas those in the control group were given the possibility of receiving the same rTMS treatment as the experimental group for 63 days. Results further confirmed the beneficial effects of rTMS in helping patients to maintain abstinence from cocaine.

Dr. Bonci continued: We consider this study promising but preliminary. We need to replicate the work in a bigger group of patients using sham-TMS as the control condition. As far as we know, this work represents the first clinical report indicating that rTMS treatment results in significant reduction in cocaine use. It is also important to emphasize that, in this study patients were seeking treatment for their cocaine addiction in a hospital setting: the group studied, albeit small, was a "real world" sample. We have continued to follow patients from the trial, and the improvement seems to be sustained over time, up to 12 months, although we don't have any hard data on that yet. It is important that this is taken forward to a larger trial.

We decided to target an area of the brain involved in decision making, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DL PFC). This was because previous animal studies from our lab had shown that compulsive cocaine-seeking was associated with hypoactivity in the prelimbic cortex, which is a brain area that shares similar behavioural roles to the DL PFC. Importantly, we had found that increasing the activity in the prelimbic cortex could significantly reduce cocaine self-administration".

"This study represents a creative approach to a disorder that is notoriously difficult to treat in the real world. These pilot data also show that biological treatments nowadays reach far beyond medications and that new neuroscience methods may be used for targeted changes in brain regions relevant for complex mental disorders".
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does an adequate job of pointing to improvements in both a reduction of drug cravings and an apparent reduction in cocaine use, based on regular urine tests. In addition, the release points to a greater relapse rate among those in the control group versus those who received the brain stimulation — using absolute numbers to describe the differences.
The study is promising and exciting, but the findings are only a suggestion and not a conclusion. We think the news release makes the distinction clear.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
According to a U.S. government advisory panel, almost no one should get screened for prostate cancer. But a new study this week reflects the continued view of many physicians — that screening does help to catch tumors earlier. To screen or not to screen: here's why experts still can't agree

If you’re wondering why experts still can’t agree on prostate-cancer screening, you’re not alone.

Just two months ago, a major U.S. government panel said that basically no one should get screened for prostate cancer, claiming the simple blood test for prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, does more harm than good. Now, a new study looks at government data and finds that, without PSA testing, the U.S. would have three times as many patients each year diagnosed with advanced-stage prostate cancer — and the vast majority of those cases would be fatal.

“Almost all men with clinically apparent metastases at initial diagnosis will die from prostate cancer,” urologist and study author Edward Messing told reporters, as he explained the importance of his study.

The new study reflects a broader divide in the medical community, between public health experts who have largely turned away from PSA screening, and many practicing clinicians who feel the test has helped their patients immensely.

No one denies that PSA tests can help to catch prostate cancer early. But two issues are still unresolved. One is how well screening can actually work to prevent cancer deaths; the other is what kind of negative effects screening brings along with its benefits.

On the first issue, there is still some uncertainty. In the U.S., a large randomized trial found no mortality benefit of screening. But an even larger randomized clinical trial in Europe has found a benefit. In its latest results published this spring, the European study team said that men who undergo routine testing have significantly lower risk of prostate-cancer death after 11 years.

Still, the real crux of the debate on PSA testing is the second issue: the possible negative effects of screening. No diagnostic test is 100% accurate, and if a PSA test comes back positive for prostate cancer, the patient will usually be referred for a biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. That test can have side effects. Then, if the patient does have cancer, the available treatments for it — surgery, radiation, as well as other options — also have side effects, chief among them impotence, incontinence, and urinary incontinence. The same European trial that found lower cancer mortality with PSA testing also found that, to save just one life through screening, an extra 37 men would need to be diagnosed with prostate cancer and treated. Many health experts think that’s too much risky treatment to justify the results.

So when the government advisory panel — the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force — recommends against routine PSA testing, it’s making a judgment call. It’s saying that, for most men, the (albeit small) risk of sexual dysfunction and urinary leakage from eventual treatment is not worth it, given the even smaller chance that PSA testing could save your life. But that decision does remain a judgment call. It depends on how much you value certain quality-of-life measures versus how much you value having any life at all.

As for the new paper this week, which suggests that three times as many men would be diagnosed each year with metastatic prostate cancer if it weren’t for PSA testing, that study is published in the journal Cancer — and its numbers deserve a little explanation. To calculate the total number of metastatic cases we’d get without screening, the study takes today’s population of the United States and applies the rates (broken down by age and race) of advanced-stage prostate cancer that were observed before PSA testing was introduced — that is, the rates way back in 1983-85.

In other words, it tells us what the current U.S. population would look like if today we faced the same risks that Americans faced in the ’80s; it finds we’d have roughly 25,000 U.S. men diagnosed with advanced-stage prostate cancer each year compared to just 8,000 today. But is going back in time 30 years really the same thing that we’d get if we abolished PSA testing today? Who knows? The rate of new diagnoses of all cancer types combined has been falling consistently in recent years. However, prostate cancer is one of the few cancers that’s not strongly linked to smoking (and falling cigarette consumption over the past 40 years is a major reason for falling cancer rates). It is, however, linked to obesity, which has been on the rise since the 1980s.

One further fact to keep in mind is that PSA testing works to cut the number of newly diagnosed advanced-stage cancers — but it does so by increasing the number of cancers that are caught early. And, as the debate over PSA testing shows us, early diagnosis is only useful if early treatment can help patients live longer and healthier lives, preventing progression to advanced-stage cancer down the line, but without increasing the risks of other health problems too much in the process. That’s what experts can’t agree about.

Many doctors do have very strong opinions, though. As a patient, if you’re deciding whether to get a PSA test, or whether not to get a PSA test, remember you do have a right to your own opinion too. There’s no easy answer.

MORE: Prostate Cancer Screening: What You Need to Know
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does quantify the purported benefits of PSA screening as described in this recent study. And it at least made a stab at questioning the basis of these projected benefits – and the statistical modeling study that was just published.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Both tests would be less expensive than colonoscopy, and potentially more effective. Compliance with colonoscopy is low, since people don’t want to have one, and the overall cost per detection is high because most people are healthy, and even colonoscopy misses many tumors in the upper part of the intestine.

Exact Sciences now plans to enlist several thousand patients in a prospective trial designed to win the Food and Drug Administration’s approval. The trial will be completed in 2012 and the test, if approved, should be available shortly thereafter.

“If widely used, and regularly, this test really does have the opportunity to eliminate colon cancer,” said Dr. David A. Ahlquist, a colon cancer expert at the Mayo Clinic and an adviser to Exact Sciences.

The practical value of the tests depends critically on details like their sensitivity, meaning the proportion of tumors that are detected, and their specificity, meaning how many of the positive results are in fact false alarms.

Exact Sciences reported in July that its test was highly sensitive and specific when applied directly to cells taken from tumors. But in the real world, the tumor DNA must be detected in stool samples, even though almost all the DNA comes from the bacteria of the gut. Just 0.01 percent of the DNA is human, and most of this is normal DNA, not the altered DNA of tumors.

The company reported Thursday at a meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research that in a trial of 1,100 patients, the test had detected 64 percent of adenomas, or polyps, larger than one centimeter in diameter, and 85 percent of cancers, as judged by the colonoscopies also given to the patients.

Dr. Ahlquist said he was very pleased with the new results, especially the 64 percent detection rate for precancerous polyps, since these are best targets for intervention.

Although such a detection rate sounds far from perfect, it can be effective if the test is given on a regular schedule. “The Pap smear detects only 50 percent of cervical cancers, but applied over time it virtually eliminates the disease,” Dr. Ahlquist said.

The specificity of the Exact Sciences test is 88 percent, meaning that 12 percent of the time the patient will be given a false alarm. This may be acceptable, given that the worst that will happen is that the patient will get an unnecessary colonoscopy.

“With stool tests, you need a 90 percent specificity,” said Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a cancer expert at Johns Hopkins University who is also an adviser to the company. “Exact Sciences has gotten close to that. There’s a lot of hope for getting a stool-based test.”

Promising results for the blood-based tests were reported this week at a meeting in Barcelona, Spain. Epigenomics said its test had a sensitivity of 86 percent and a specificity of 93 percent.

Proponents of each test note possible weaknesses of the other. Dr. Achim Plum, a vice president for Epigenomics, said that 30 to 40 percent of people have small polyps, but less than 10 percent of these ever become cancerous. The colon-based test may pick up too many of these, sending far too many people in for colonoscopy.

“The health economics of such a test make no sense,” he said.

But the blood-based test may have a similar problem, since a positive signal could come from cancers anywhere in the body. If the patient is advised to take a whole body imaging scan, more false positives could be generated “so you end up doing more harm than good,” Dr. Vogelstein said.

Dr. Plum said that Epigenomics did not see its test as being necessarily in competition with the Exact Sciences test, because the blood-based test would be good alternative for people put off by stool testing.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did a decent job comparing data presented on two new competing tests. It does not, however, compare the benefits to existing colon cancer screening tests.  We will dock points for this in our final criterion on “comparing the new approach with existing alternatives” but will give it the benefit of the doubt on this one.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SCOTTSDALE, Arizona - A migraine is much more than just a bad headache. Migraine symptoms, which can be debilitating for many people, are the sixth leading cause of disability, according to the World Health Organization. While there is no cure, a new study published in Cephalalgia in March shows single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation is a new way to prevent migraine attacks. It's safe, easy to use and noninvasive.

MULTIMEDIA ALERT: Video and audio are avaiable for download on the Mayo Clinic News Network.

Researchers at Mayo Clinic and other major academic headache centers across the U.S. recently conducted the study that examined the effectiveness of using a single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation device to prevent migraine attacks. The eNeura SpringTMS Post-Market Observational U.S. Study of Migraine study, also known as ESPOUSE, instructed participants to self-administer four pulses with the device in the morning and four pulses at night over three months to prevent and treat migraine attacks as needed. Spring TMS stands for Spring transcranial magnetic stimulation or sTMS.

"The migraine brain is hyperexcitable, and basic science studies have demonstrated modulation of neuronal excitability with this treatment modality," says Amaal Starling, M.D., a Mayo Clinic neurologist, who is first author of the study. "Our study demonstrated that the four pulses emitted from this device twice daily reduce the frequency of headache days by about three days per month, and 46 percent of patients had at least 50 percent or less migraine attacks per month on the treatment protocol. This data is clinically significant. Based on the current study and prior studies in acute migraine attack treatment, sTMS not only helps to stop a migraine attack, but it also helps prevent them."

"For certain patients, treatment options for migraines, such as oral medications, are not effective, well-tolerated or preferred," Dr. Starling adds. "The sTMS may be a great option for these patients and allow doctors to better meet their unique needs."

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration already had approved the sTMS device for the acute treatment of migraine with aura. The FDA now has approved it to prevent migraine, as well.

Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization committed to clinical practice, education and research, providing expert, comprehensive care to everyone who needs healing. Learn more about Mayo Clinic. Visit the Mayo Clinic News Network.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that twice daily, self-administered TMS reduced the frequency of headache days by nearly three days per month. Also, just under half the patients had at least 50% or less migraine attacks per month with treatment.
The release reports that patients had nine migraine days per month at baseline and this was reduced by 2.75 days with TMS treatment. This earns a satisfactory for describing the benefit in numerical terms. However, quantifying the improvement at followup would have been more helpful for readers wanting to assess TMS as a treatment option.
The release would have been improved had it included what the baseline severity and frequency of the 95 volunteers headaches were, and that claims of benefits were self reported. Furthermore, there was incomplete information regarding the concomitant use of pain medications during the 3-month study period.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The immune checkpoint blockade drug nivolumab reduced tumor burden in 24.4 percent of patients with metastatic bladder cancer, regardless of whether their tumors had a biomarker related to the drug's target, according to clinical trial results from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. The study will be presented Sunday, June 5, 2016 at the 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meeting.

"The response rate is better than we've seen for other potential second-line treatments and nivolumab is really well-tolerated, which is important because bladder cancer patients are a fragile group after frontline treatment with platinum chemotherapy," said Padmanee Sharma, M.D., Ph.D., professor of Genitourinary Medical Oncology at MD Anderson.

Nivolumab unleashes an immune system attack on cancer by blocking activation of a protein called PD-1 on T cells, white blood cells that find and attack cells, viruses or bacteria that have specific targets. PD-1 acts as a brake, or checkpoint, to shut down activated T cells. PD-1 is turned on by a ligand called PD-L1, which is often found on cancer cells and other types of cells.

The presence of PD-L1 on a patient's tumor has been considered a potential biomarker to guide treatment. The study found no significant difference in response rates between those with little to no PD-L1 on their tumors (26 percent) and those with greater PD-L1 expression (24 percent).

"We can get good results without choosing to treat patients based on PD-L1 status," said Sharma, who also is scientific director of MD Anderson's immunotherapy platform and an investigator with the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at MD Anderson. The platform is part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program, launched in 2013 to reduce cancer deaths by accelerating development of therapies, prevention efforts and early detection from scientific discoveries.

This Phase I/II clinical trial treated 78 patients: five (6.4 percent) had complete responses, 14 (18 percent) had partial responses, in which tumor burden shrinks by at least 30 percent, and 22 (28.2 percent) had stable disease. Thirty (38 percent) patients had disease progression.

Treatment-related side effects included mainly low-grade fatigue, itching, elevated lipase, rash, nausea, joint pain and anemia. Grade 3 or 4 side effects occurred in 20.5 percent of patients. Two patients discontinued therapy because of adverse events related to the drug.

At a median follow up of 213 days, 33.3 percent remained on treatment, and 45.6 percent of patients survived for at least one year, which Sharma noted "is better than anything we've seen in the past."

Overall survival will be analyzed in conjunction with the Phase II portion of this clinical trial, which provides nivolumab or a combination of nivolumab plus the immune checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab. The trial allows patients to cross over to the combination if nivolumab alone fails.

Initial results from the Phase II portion of the trial will be presented later this year.

Both nivolumab, known as Opdivo, and ipilimumab, known as Yervoy, were developed and marketed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, which funded the clinical trial.

Ipilimumab targets the CTLA-4 checkpoint on T cells and was the first immune checkpoint inhibitor. It was based on the research of Jim Allison, Ph.D., chair of Immunology, executive director of the immunotherapy platform and director of the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at MD Anderson.

Ipilimumab was the first drug ever shown to extend the survival of patients with metastatic melanoma. Long-term follow up shows 22 percent of those treated with the drug survive 10 years or longer.

Nivolumab has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for advanced melanoma, lung cancer, kidney cancer and Hodgkin lymphoma. The five-year survival rate for those with metastatic melanoma treated with nivolumab is 34 percent. The two-year survival rate of patients treated with both drugs in combination is 69 percent.

Until May 18, there were no drugs approved for second-line treatment of metastatic bladder cancer. The U.S. FDA approved atezolizumab, which blocks PD-L1, for these patients.

Co-authors with Sharma, who presented the data at ASCO, are Petri Bono, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Joseph Kim, Yale Cancer Center; Pavlina Spiliopoulou, Beatson, West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow; Emiliano Calvo, Centro Integral Oncológico Clara Campal, Madrid,Spain; Rathi Pillai, Emory Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta; Patrick Ott, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston; Filippo DeBraud, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; Michael Morse, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, N.C.; Dung Le, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore; Dirk Jaeger, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; Emily Chan, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn.; Chris Harbison, Chen-Sheng Lin, Marina Tschaika, Alex Azrilevich, of Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Jonathan Rosenberg of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does a pretty good job here, explaining that: “This Phase I/II clinical trial treated 78 patients: five (6.4 percent) had complete responses, 14 (18 percent) had partial responses, in which tumor burden shrinks by at least 30 percent, and 22 (28.2 percent) had stable disease. Thirty (38 percent) patients had disease progression.” Later, the release states that “At a median follow up of 213 days, 33.3 percent remained on treatment, and 45.6 percent of patients survived for at least one year, which [one doctor] noted ‘is better than anything we’ve seen in the past.'” The release also places analysis of survival in context by noting that “Overall survival will be analyzed in conjunction with the Phase II portion of this clinical trial, which provides nivolumab or a combination of nivolumab plus the immune checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Men who have a certain genetic variations that put them at higher risk of prostate cancer may benefit from regular screening for the disease, a study by British scientists found Friday.

The findings suggest that by narrowing the focus of prostate cancer screening to those whose genes put them at most risk, doctors would catch more cancers early as well as reducing the potential for costly and damaging overdiagnosis.

“Although these are early results, it appears that (prostate cancer) screening is reasonably accurate at predicting potentially aggressive prostate cancer among men at higher risk of the disease due to a genetic predisposition,” said Ros Eeles, who led a research team from Britain’s Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) and Royal Marsden hospital.

The study found that the predictive value of screening these men — expressed as the number of cancers detected relative to the number of tissue samples taken — was 48 percent, far higher than the 24 percent achieved in population-wide screening.

Screening for prostate cancer is controversial because the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) tests used cannot differentiate between men with aggressive cancer and men who would never have symptoms or need treatment, and this can lead to overdiagnosis.

A study in the United States last year found that routine prostate cancer screening had resulted in more than a million being diagnosed with tumors who might otherwise have suffered no ill effects from them.

The ICR-led study is aiming to find out whether screening men who have genetic variants that increase their prostate cancer risk could lead to earlier diagnosis. It aims to screen 1,700 men for five years, but results from the first 300 men were published in the British Journal of Urology International.

Genetic factors that increase prostate cancer risk include inheritable variations in genes known as BRCA1 and BRCA2.

Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men worldwide and kills 254,000 men a year. U.S. doctors routinely recommend PSA screening in men over 50 on the assumption that early diagnosis and treatment is better than doing nothing.

But fears about overdiagnosis, which can lead to treatments such as surgery, radiation or hormone therapy that can cause serious side-effects such as impotence and incontinence, have so far dissuaded many European countries from nationwide screening.

The men in this study — 205 with confirmed BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations and 95 who had tested negative for the mutations — were all offered annual PSA blood testing, and 24 who had raised PSA levels were given a follow-up biopsy.

Eeles said the findings added to the increasing evidence that BRCA gene variation carriers develop more aggressive disease and supported the idea that men with genetic risks should be routinely screened for prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story reports the results in a way that is typically rare in journalism – using the positive predictive value of the test. This is a much more helpful way to present the information to consumers than other measures commonly used in screening tests, such as sensitivity/specificity. At the same time, the heart of the PSA screening controversy remains. Even if one improves on the performance of the PSA test to detect more prostate cancers early, we still don’t know if the potential benefits in terms of mortality reduction outweigh the known harms of overdiagnosis and overtreatment. The ability to one day differentiate the indolent prostate cancers from the aggressive cancers will be key. This study did not do that, despite the comments from the author.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Individuals who have heart disease are often advised to take a low-dose aspirin every day to prevent blood clots that cause heart attacks and most strokes.

Some healthy men and women should take aspirin every day to ward off heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer. That’s the final recommendation from the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) after more than a year of study and lively public comment. The recommendations were published Monday in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Aspirin has been used for more than 100 years to ease fever and relieve pain. Many people with heart disease are advised to take a low-dose aspirin every day to prevent blood clots, the cause of heart attacks and most strokes. That’s called secondary prevention. Whether healthy individuals should do the same thing, a strategy called primary prevention, is controversial.

The FDA is against taking aspirin for primary prevention, arguing that the risks, including bleeding in the brain and stomach, outweigh the benefits. The USPSTF recommends it for men and women aged 50 to 59 who are at risk of heart attack or stroke. The dueling recommendations kicked off a lively debate in the medical community.

Despite the clashing opinions, experts agree on two things: Aspirin should be just one part of an overall strategy to prevent heart attack and stroke that includes weight control, healthy eating, exercising, and not smoking. And don’t take aspirin without talking with your doctor.

Beyond that, here’s a sample of expert opinions.

Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo: Task force says some will benefit

Charles H. Hennekens: Balance between benefits and harms still hazy

Deepak L. Bhatt: No easy way to identify who will benefit or be harmed

Cynthia Boyd and Milo Puhan: Add personal preferences to the equation

Freek W.A. Verheugt: Even doctors are confused

By Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo: Taking aspirin is easy, but deciding whether or not to take aspirin for prevention is complex. Aspirin can help prevent heart attacks, strokes, and colorectal cancer, but it also increases the risk of bleeding.

The US Preventive Services Task Force found that the benefits of taking low-dose aspirin daily clearly outweigh the harms for people who are 50 to 59 years old, who have increased risk of cardiovascular disease, and who are not at increased risk for bleeding. People who are 60 to 69 can also benefit from taking aspirin, but the risks for bleeding are higher in this age group. Some older individuals may be less likely to benefit from aspirin’s ability to prevent colorectal cancer because it takes about 10 years of daily aspirin for it to affect this risk.

It is important to note that this draft recommendation applies to people who are not at increased risk for bleeding, have at least a 10-year life expectancy, and are willing to take low-dose aspirin daily. Also, it is meant for people who do not already have cardiovascular disease.

Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, MD, is vice-chair of the US Preventive Services Task Force. She is also professor of medicine and of epidemiology and biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco.

By Charles H. Hennekens: After more than 25 years of research on aspirin for primary prevention, we are not much further along than we were after the landmark findings from the Physicians Health Study in 1988. We know that taking aspirin will prevent a first heart attack and a first stroke, but we also know that aspirin can cause serious bleeding, mainly in the gastrointestinal system and, more rarely, in the brain.

In a meta-analysis of the six major randomized trials of aspirin for primary prevention, among more than 95,000 participants, serious cardiovascular events occurred in 0.51 percent of participants taking aspirin and 0.57 percent of those not taking aspirin. That corresponds to a 20 percent relative reduction in risk. At the same time, serious bleeding events increased from 0.07 percent among non-aspirin takers to 0.10 percent among those taking aspirin, or a 40 percent relative increase in risk.

Although the totality of evidence is incomplete, it appears that aspirin has net benefits when the absolute 10-year risk of having a cardiovascular event is greater than 10 percent. Unfortunately, fewer than 5,000 of the trial participants have been in that risk category. (Individuals can calculate their 10-year risk using a relatively simple calculator from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute or a more complex one from the American Heart Association.)

These calculators don’t tell the whole story. Clinicians should evaluate additional risks and benefits. For example, some individuals are at higher risk of bleeding, such as those with a history of ulcers. Others are at higher risk of having a cardiovascular event because they are obese, physically inactive, or have a family history of such events.

Several ongoing trials will provide information on aspirin’s benefit-to-risk ratio. This information is essential for making rational guidelines for aspirin in primary prevention.

Charles H. Hennekens, MD, is professor of medicine at Florida Atlantic University. He was the principal investigator of the Physician’s Health Study, which was the first to demonstrate that aspirin prevents a first heart attack in men, and the Women’s Health Study, which was the first to demonstrate that aspirin prevents a first stroke in women.

By Deepak L. Bhatt: The use of aspirin for primary prevention is one of the most complex issues in medicine today. That’s ironic because aspirin is ubiquitous and most patients perceive it to be safe and harmless. After all, it is sold over the counter.

Here’s the problem: The lower an individual’s risk of a future heart attack or ischemic stroke, the less he or she will benefit from taking daily low-dose aspirin. Yet the odds that aspirin will cause a problem, such as bleeding, remain relatively steady. That means for some low-risk individuals, taking daily aspirin could do more harm than good.

If there was a foolproof way to identify individuals at high risk for a future heart attack or stroke, as well as those at high risk for developing complications, we would know who should be taking aspirin for primary prevention and who should not. Unfortunately, no such tool exists.

Many patients — and many health care providers — believe that the aspirin-for-primary-prevention issue is settled. Not so. In fact, several clinical trials now underway are looking at this very question. These include the ASCEND, TIPS-3, and ASPREE trials.

The data on aspirin for preventing colorectal cancer are provocative, but are even less robust than for primary prevention of cardiovascular events.

Deepak L. Bhatt, MD, is executive director of interventional cardiovascular programs at Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.

By Cynthia Boyd and Milo Puhan: Combining guidelines for the use of aspirin to prevent three different conditions — heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer — into a single recommendation makes good sense for patients. But making such recommendations is difficult because they must take into account so many factors.

Personal preferences are one very important factor. Say your mother had a disabling stroke, and you are willing to do everything you can to prevent having a stroke, even if it puts you at risk of bleeding. This might tip the balance in favor of taking aspirin. In contrast, someone who isn’t worried about having a cardiovascular event or developing colorectal cancer might want to stay away from aspirin to avoid bleeding.

With an international team of colleagues, we created an online tool that calculates whether the benefits of aspirin for primary prevention (preventing heart attack, ischemic stroke, and cancer) are greater than the harms (severe hemorrhagic stroke and severe gastrointestinal bleeds). The tool is based on research we recently published in BMC Medicine.

To use the tool, an individual enters his or her age group and sex and uses sliders to show how worried he or she is about six outcomes:

Green, orange, and red boxes represent the benefit-harm balance corresponding to the user’s information.

For now, this tool is for research purposes only. It must be verified before it is ready for prime time. But it suggests a direction for decision aids that can help individuals choose whether to adopt preventive strategies like aspirin that come with potentially harmful side effects.

Cynthia M. Boyd, MD, is associate professor of medicine at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Milo A. Puhan, MD, is director of the Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute and professor of epidemiology and public health at the University of Zurich.

By Freek W.A. Verheugt: Who should take aspirin to prevent a first heart attack or ischemic stroke is a complex issue — even for cardiologists. A recent report with data on 120 medical practices serving 69,000 patients found huge variation in doctors’ approaches. In some practices, 70 percent of patients were inappropriately taking aspirin. Part of my job, and that of other cardiologists and clinicians, is to help our patients make good choices about aspirin, guiding those at high risk toward aspirin use and those at low risk away from it.

It is important to keep in mind that other therapies, such as statins, have also been proven to decrease the risk of cardiovascular events. These are often used in combination with aspirin. As I showed in a commentary in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, when combined with a statin, aspirin’s net benefit in primary prevention is almost completely lost.

Freek W.A. Verheugt, MD, is professor of cardiology at the Heart-Lung Centre of the University Medical Centre of Nijmegen and is in the department of cardiology at Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis in Amsterdam, both in the Netherlands.

An earlier version of this article was published on Dec. 11, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: One of the commentators, Charles Hennekens, gave an excellent summary of the quantified benefits citing both absolute and relative numbers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Women undergo more cesarean sections each year in the United States than any other major surgery, with the procedure carrying a significant rate of infection at the incision site.

A new study from Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis offers strong guidance on the best way to reduce the infection risk. Rather than prepping patients with iodine-alcohol — a common antiseptic combination in C-sections — the research indicates that chlorhexidine-alcohol is significantly more effective. The researchers argue that the evidence is strong enough to change standard skin-prep practices for C-sections.

The study appears online Feb. 4 in The New England Journal of Medicine and coincides with a presentation at the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine’s Annual Meeting in Atlanta.

“One of the biggest complications of surgery, and of C-sections in particular, is infection,” said first author Methodius G. Tuuli, MD, assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology. “For a new mother who needs to care for her baby — which is stressful even when all things are equal — having an infection can really impair her ability to do that. We are very interested in clarifying the best ways to prevent these infections, reducing the burden on the patients, on their infants and on the health-care system as a whole.”

An estimated 1.3 million women in the U.S. delivered their babies by C-section in 2013, with surgical-site infections complicating 5 to 12 percent of those deliveries. The average cost of treating those cesarean-related infections in the hospital is $3,500 and may be much higher for severe infections.

The research shows that patients in the chlorhexidine-alcohol group developed significantly fewer infections than patients in the iodine-alcohol group. Those who received the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination had a 4 percent infection rate, which is nearly half that of the patients who received the iodine-alcohol combination — 7.3 percent.

The clinical trial included 1,147 patients who underwent cesarean sections at Barnes-Jewish Hospital from 2011 to 2015. Of 572 patients randomly assigned to receive the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination, 23 developed an infection at the site of the surgery within 30 days of the procedure. Of 575 patients who randomly received the iodine-alcohol combination, 42 developed a surgical-site infection.

The investigators pointed out that all other standard procedures for reducing the risk of infection after surgery, including giving preventive antibiotics beforehand, were the same in both groups.

Studies of other types of surgeries also have suggested the superiority of chlorhexidine over iodine in preventing infection. But according to Tuuli, the unique circumstances of a C-section — that bacteria come from both skin and vagina and that a woman’s immune system is altered during pregnancy — mean the results of these studies may not apply.

In addition, past trials comparing antiseptics before surgery included relatively few participants and often compared a chlorhexidine-alcohol combination with iodine alone. These studies could not determine whether the worse performance of iodine alone was due to the chlorhexidine, the alcohol or the combination.

Although the new study was conducted at only one hospital, the researchers said the patient population was racially diverse and that more than 60 percent received public insurance. Tuuli and his colleagues also pointed out that the superiority of the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination was consistent whether the C-section was scheduled or unscheduled, whether or not the patient was obese, whether staples or sutures were used to close the wound and whether the patient had chronic medical conditions, including diabetes.

Highlighting the significance of the findings, the study’s senior author, George A. Macones, MD, the Mitchell and Elaine Yanow Professor and head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, said, “This study is a tremendous addition to the literature on preventing surgical-site infections after cesarean. There are few circumstances when a single study should change our practice. But based on the biological plausibility and the striking reduction in surgical-site infections with chlorhexidine, this is one of those circumstances.”

This work was supported by a Women’s Reproductive Health Research Career Development grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant number 1K12HD063086-01; and by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Tuuli MG, Liu J, Stout MJ, Martin S, Cahill AG, Odibo AO, Colditz GA, Macones GA. A randomized trial comparing skin antiseptic agents at cesarean delivery. New England Journal of Medicine. Feb. 4, 2016.

Washington University School of Medicine’s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantifies the benefits well, explaining that a randomized-controlled trial showed “patients in the chlorhexidine-alcohol group developed significantly fewer infections than patients in the iodine-alcohol group. Those who received the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination had a 4 percent infection rate, which is nearly half that of the patients who received the iodine-alcohol combination — 7.3 percent.”
The news release includes both relative and absolute numbers — a big plus. The absolute numbers included the number of women who developed infections after being treated with either chlorhexidine-alcohol (23) or iodine-alcohol (42) and the size of their co-hort (572 vs. 575).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ever since she was an infant, Reagan Roberts could not tolerate being anywhere near cow's milk. A mere sip would leave her vomiting and gasping for breath. If she were even touched by someone with milk on their hands, she would break out in hives and a bright red rash.

"We just had to keep her away from milk," said Reagan's mother, Lissa. "We couldn't have it around the house. At preschool she had to sit by herself. We brought her food to birthday parties. We couldn't go to restaurants. It was very hard."

Today, however, Reagan, 9, of Ellicott City, can drink as much milk as she wants and eat anything.

"She eats ice cream. She eats cheese. She eats yogurt. She drinks chocolate milk. She eats any food anybody else can," Lissa Roberts said. "It's a miracle."

Reagan is one of a small number of children who have undergone an experimental treatment that is showing promise for treating milk, peanut and other food allergies. The approach, known as oral immunotherapy, involves slowly desensitizing the immune system by painstakingly ingesting increasing amounts of whatever triggers the reaction.

"It's pretty encouraging," said Robert A. Wood, chief of pediatric allergy and immunology at Johns Hopkins, who led the study that Reagan participated in at the Hopkins Children's Center in Baltimore. "We've still got a long way to go, but I never thought we'd get this far."

Although the approach appears to be highly effective for some children with milk and peanut allergies, the researchers conducting the studies and others caution that much more research is needed to prove and perfect the approach and that it is far from ready for widespread use. No one should try the approach on his own, because the treatments themselves can trigger potentially life-threatening reactions.

"It's still very investigational," said Wesley Burks, chief of the division of pediatric allergy and immunology at Duke University, who has produced promising results in children with peanut allergies. "We're very hopeful. But there are lot of things we need to do to understand it better, make it more effective and make sure it's safe."

The strategy is being tested in a handful of small studies that are part of a surge of research in a field that for years showed little progress.

"There's been a substantial uptick in the amount of research," said Marshall Plaut of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which has more than doubled the funding for food-allergy research since 2007. "I think it's time to be cautiously optimistic."

In addition to the oral immunotherapy studies, scientists are in the early stages of testing an experimental suppository, a Chinese herbal remedy and variations of oral immunotherapy that might be safer and more effective.

"There's definitely been a spike in the amount of work going on," said Hugh A. Sampson, a professor of pediatrics, allergy and immunology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York who leads a federally funded consortium studying food allergies. "Five years ago there was almost nothing going on in people with respect to therapies, whereas now there are a variety of different therapies being looked at."

The spike in research has been driven by increasing evidence that food allergies are becoming more common, occurring earlier in life and lasting longer. About 12 million Americans are estimated to suffer from food allergies, including about 3 million children. Some evidence suggests that peanut allergies may have doubled in children in the past decade.

The reason for the trend is the subject of intense research and debate. There are several theories, including changes in how food is processed and children's not being exposed to certain foods early in life. Evidence has also been mounting for the "hygiene hypothesis," which blames growing up in increasingly sterile homes, making the immune system overreact to ordinarily harmless substances, including food.

Whatever the cause, researchers have long struggled to develop therapies. Food allergies can trigger symptoms ranging from rashes and hives to responses believed to cause perhaps 200 deaths each year in the United States. Currently, food-allergic people have only two options: to avoid the substance that causes their reaction or to try to stop a reaction with an injection of epinephrine.

That leaves parents of allergic children scouring food labels, avoiding restaurants, sending their children to school and parties with specially made food and snacks, and still worrying about inadvertent contact with peanuts, milk, eggs and other ubiquitous foods.

"It's hard to live," said Angie Duty of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old son, Sam, was intensely allergic to peanuts before undergoing the therapy as part of one Burks's studies. "Sam doesn't like to be different, but of course he is different and we have to explain that to him."

Although doctors have long used shots to desensitize people allergic to pollen and other substances, early attempts to do the same for food allergies ended in failure.

"The side effects were so great that they were as bad if not worse than the disease itself," Burks said.

But a small number of researchers in recent years have begun trying the approach again, this time by orally administering the protein in the food that triggers the allergic reaction.

With doctors standing by in case of a severe reaction, each study subject undergoes careful testing to determine the maximum dose he or she can safely tolerate. Once that is established, the participants are sent home to sprinkle that amount of purified protein on their food for a week or two; then they return to the research center in to see if the dose can be increased. The procedure is repeated for months or even years to slowly raise the amount they can safely consume.

"It's a way of sort of rerouting or tricking the immune system to no longer be allergic to that food," said Stacie Jones, chief of allergy and immunology at the Arkansas Children's Hospital, who has been working Burks to test the approach for peanut allergies.

In a study involving 19 children who were severely allergic to milk, Wood found that within four to six months most of the children significantly increased the amount of milk protein they could tolerate. After between about nine months and two years, about half of the children could safely consume as much milk or food containing milk as they wanted.

"These are children who could have died from a teaspoon of milk before," Wood said.

In March, Burks and Jones reported the results of a pilot study involving 33 children with peanut allergies. The children started by ingesting peanut protein powder equivalent to one one-thousandth of a peanut. Four of the children had to drop out because of allergic reactions, but six of nine children who underwent the treatment for 2 1/2 years have been able to stop the peanut powder and have now gone six to eight months without reacting to eating peanuts. "It's fabulous," said Janet Vande Berg of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old daughter, Caroline, can eat peanuts for the first time in her life. "It makes a huge, huge difference in the quality of life for both the kids and the families. It just takes the stress away."

The researchers are tracking the remaining children in the study to see if any others achieve similar results and have followed up with a more stringent study in which 13 children received a similar treatment and seven received a placebo.

After about 10 months, all seven children on the placebo were still allergic, whereas none of the 13 on the peanut powder had reactions when they were challenged. All the children are now receiving the treatment and are being followed to see if they remain desensitized and perhaps become "tolerant," meaning they no longer need to consume daily doses of peanuts or peanut protein to maintain their ability to eat peanuts freely.

"I think it's an important advance in the field," said the NIH's Plaut. "It's a small number of subjects, so it's hard to draw full-blown conclusions. But it's the first data that suggest you may be able to achieve something like this in food allergies."

It remains far from clear, however, what proportion of children will benefit, how long the benefit might last and what proportion will need to continue to consume at least some milk or peanuts every day to maintain their protection. While some children, such as Vande Berg, appear to completely lose their allergies, others seem to just be able to eat more of the milk or food before reacting. But even that can be helpful.

"We know this therapy at least protects them from accidental ingestion so they won't have a life-threatening reaction," said Jones, the Arkansas researcher. "At the very least it's providing some security for these families."

Burks and Jones are part of the federal consortium, which is studying the same approach for eggs at research institutions across the country, including Johns Hopkins, and conducting detailed immunological studies to try to get a better understanding of how the treatment works.

Meanwhile, researchers in London are studying 640 babies at high risk for food allergies to see if exposing them to peanuts early in life reduces their chances of developing the allergy in the first place.

"There are a lot of people putting ideas out there and producing some promising preliminary data," Plaut said. "That makes me think there will be some important developments in the future."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION:  The story included absolute risk reduction data from the milk and peanut studies.  
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - A hormone called DHEA and mostly secreted by the adrenal glands may be able to help women who are going through menopause and could also give them better sex lives, a study found on Tuesday.

Italian researchers writing in the journal of the International Menopause Society, Climacteric, said they had found the first robust evidence that low doses of DHEA can help sexual function and menopausal symptoms, suggesting it may one day become an alternative to hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

But they stressed that the trial was small, so far larger studies are needed to confirm the results.

“We must bear in mind that this is a pilot study with a small sample,” Anna Fenton, co-editor of Climacteric, said in commentary on the work. “We can’t yet say that this study means that DHEA is a viable alternative to HRT, but ... we should be looking to do larger studies to confirm these initial results.”

DHEA, or dehydroepiandrosterone, is a natural steroid hormone mostly made in the adrenal glands and has a variety of therapeutic uses.

HRT, which is a combination of the hormones oestrogen and progesterone, is an approved treatment for women going through the menopause, who often experience unpleasant symptoms such as hot flushes, night sweats, loss of sex drive and mood swings.

But sales of HRT drugs have fallen sharply since a large study in 2002 found higher rates of ovarian cancer, breast cancer and strokes in women who took the pills, and the search has since been on for alternatives.

American researchers said in January that the antidepressant Lexapro, made by drugmaker Forest Laboratories, significantly cut the number and severity of hot flushes in menopausal women, and other antidepressants including GlaxoSmithKline’s Paxil and the Pfizer drugs Prozac and Effexor also have been found to be effective.

For this trial, a team of researchers led by Andrea Genazzani of the University of Pisa followed a group of 48 post-menopausal women with troubling symptoms.

Over a year, 12 women took vitamin D and calcium, 12 took DHEA, 12 took standard HRT and 12 took a synthetic steroid called tibolone which is used to alleviate menopausal symptoms.

The women’s menopausal symptoms, sexual interest and activity were measured using a standard questionnaire that explores factors such as satisfaction with frequency of sex, vaginal lubrication, orgasm, and sexual partner.

After 12 months, all the women on hormone replacements had improvements in menopausal symptoms, but those taking vitamin D and calcium did not show any significant improvement.

At the start of the trial, all groups had similar sexual activity, but after the year, those taking calcium and vitamin D scored an average of 34.9 on the questionnaire scale, while those taking DHEA had a score of 48.6, showing that those on DHEA had more sexual interest and activity.

The results for the HRT group were similar, and both the HRT DHEA groups showed a higher level of sexual intercourse in comparison to the control group, the researchers said.

Genazzani said the results showed DHEA has potential, especially for those women who may have problems in taking more conventional HRT. “But this is a small study, a proof of concept. What we need to do now is to look at a larger study, to confirm that these initial results are valid,” she added.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a nice job specifically explaining the benefits or lack thereof. It says, “After 12 months, all the women on hormone replacements had improvements in menopausal symptoms, but those taking vitamin D and calcium did not show any significant improvement. At the start of the trial, all groups had similar sexual activity, but after the year, those taking calcium and vitamin D scored an average of 34.9 on the questionnaire scale, while those taking DHEA had a score of 48.6, showing that those on DHEA had more sexual interest and activity.” By presenting the actual scores, readers are able to see how close the scores were and decide for themselves whether the increased benefit was worth the risk of possible side effects.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many migraine sufferers could have fewer, less severe headaches if they took preventive medicines, but few eligible patients do, say doctors releasing updated treatment guidelines Monday.

The guidelines list seven prescription medicines and one herbal remedy backed by strong evidence, and include many other treatments that might work for some patients.

"Migraine is one of the most disabling conditions known to man, but patients need to know that there is hope," says Stephen Silberstein, a neurologist at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia and lead author of the guidelines from the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society. They were presented at an academy meeting and published in the journal Neurology.

Medicines backed by the strongest evidence include anti-seizure drugs (divalproex sodium, sodium valproate and topiramate), blood pressure drugs (metoprolol, propranolol and timolol) and, for menstrual-related migraines, a medicine called frovatriptan, the guidelines say. They also cite strong support for the herbal remedy butterbur and include a longer list of prescription and non-prescription therapies patients can consider.

These preventive treatments usually are used daily. The guidelines do not look at the options patients have once symptoms begin.

Not everyone with migraines needs prevention medicine. But nearly 40% have headaches that are so frequent (at least once a week), severe or hard-to-treat that they qualify, Silberstein says. Studies find that just 3% to 13% use the treatments.

Why so few? One reason is that it's hard to persuade people to take medicines on days when they feel fine, says Elizabeth Loder, a neurologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. Silberstein adds that some patients have not been properly diagnosed or made aware of their options. Still others try the treatments and decide they don't work or have unacceptable side effects.

"You have a lot of gun-shy patients because of a lot of bad experiences," says Michael John Coleman, founder of the patient group MAGNUM, also known as the National Migraine Association. Many spend months or years taking medicines that don't work and make them miserable, he says.

That's what happened to Emily Guzan, 26, a lawyer from Pittsburgh who was diagnosed with migraine in 2008. She was given a prescription for Topamax (topiramate), and it "was a real nightmare," she says. She kept having headaches bad enough to land her in an emergency room once a month and suffered nightmares, an altered sense of taste, an unwanted 30-pound weight loss and memory problems — all of which she attributes to the drug.

She tried some other medications, but for now, she's given up on all of them and says she's getting better results with diet, yoga and other lifestyle changes.

Finding the right medication for the right patient can take a lot of trial and error and careful dosing, Silberstein says. But about 80% will get relief, he says — defined as a headache reduction of at least 50% — after trying three or four drugs, alternative remedies and lifestyle changes.

Even hard-to-treat patients may eventually respond to something, Loder says, so she urges frustrated patients to keep trying.

"The life toll that poorly controlled headaches take is really underappreciated," she says. "You don't get back the time you lost at work or the time you lost with your children."

Coleman, of Alexandria, Va., also urges fellow sufferers to keep working with their doctors: His own migraines took 40 years to control. "This is not a cookie-cutter disease and there is no magic bullet, but there is hope."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes one of the guideline authors who says that “about 80% will get relief …— defined as a headache reduction of at least 50% — after trying three or four drugs, alternative remedies and lifestyle changes.”
This may well be true, but we think the 80% figure puts the benefits in the best possible light and misplaces the emphasis. If it takes 3 or 4 drugs, alternative remedies and lifestyle changes to achieve a benefit for 80% of people, clearly a much smaller number of people are likely to experience a clinically significant benefit from any individual treatment.
A close call here, but the story does mention that treatment can “take a lot of trial and error and careful dosing” — enough context to merit a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women who undergo Caesarean sectionsmore than seven days before their due dates put their babies at higher risk of respiratory problems, longer hospital stays and other complications.

A multisite study that appeared Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine reinforces recommendations by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists that discourage scheduling C-sections before 39 weeks of pregnancy unless there is documentation of lung maturity or it is medically necessary. (Due dates are set at 40 weeks gestation, and infants are considered full term at 37 weeks.)

The findings offer important guidance to the growing number of women who face planned C-sections -- one in three babies in the United States, estimates the National Center for Health Statistics.

"We recognize that by the end of a long pregnancy there is a desire to see the baby and to move forward," said Dr. Brian Mercer, one of the study's authors and director of both the division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and obstetrics at MetroHealth Medical Center in Cleveland.

"But mothers and families need to recognize the potential risk of moving forward before it's time," he said.

The findings from the study sponsored by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development's Maternal Fetal Medicine Units Network also underscore the importance of a woman seeking medical care as early into her pregnancy as possible, so that doctors can accurately gauge the gestational age with an ultrasound, Mercer said.

Researchers at 19 medical centers studied more than 24,000 women who gave birth to a single child by C-section from 1999 to 2002. Of those, more than 13,000 had elective C-sections. All of the women had previously had C-sections.

More than one-third of the surgeries performed during that time happened at 37 or 38 weeks. Babies born at 37 weeks were twice as likely to have breathing problems, infections or to stay in intensive care than babies born a week later. Breathing problems -- already a high risk because labor helps clear the baby's lungs of fluid -- happened four times as often in babies born at 37 weeks than those born at 39 weeks.

Dr. Justin Lavin, director of theMaternal-Fetal Medicine Departmentat Akron Children's Hospital and a high-risk obstetrician, said he hopes the study's findings help people understand why doctors like him say nowhen it comes to scheduling unnecessary C-sections early.

"This happens to me every day," Lavin said. "Sometimes [the mother] is a bit uncomfortable, or sometimes Dad has to go on a business trip or Grandma wants to fly in," Lavin said. "It's human nature."

The standard practice has been that doctors planning repeat C-sections do so between 36 and 40 weeks, when most fetuses have developed enough to survive outside the womb.

The tests the doctors perform to determine the extent of the fetus's development are often not sophisticated enough to determine subtle milestones for breathing and processing food independently, said Dr. John Thorp, a University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill obstetrician and one of the authors of the study.

"I think there is something inherent in labor -- probably a signal from baby to mother that the baby is ready to make the transition -- that we choose to circumvent when we schedule an elective, repeat C-section," Thorp said.

"I think it points to a role for the baby in the initiation of labor and the baby's readiness to make the transition."

The Associated Press and McClatchy Newspapers contributed to this story.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantifiies the risks of C-section. The story could have provided context for these numbers by comparing them to natural birth.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philippe Autier is willing to bet that taking vitamin D supplements will never be proved to do anything beyond helping to build strong bones — and certainly not to prevent heart disease, cancer, diabetes, depression, multiple sclerosis or the common cold, as many claim. In fact, the physician has wagered a few good bottles of champagne that none of three large randomized trials now underway will find proof of positive effects.

To Autier, a researcher at the Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences in Glasgow, Scotland, the widespread faith in vitamin D’s benefits is like a religion. “People want to have a simple story they can believe in,” he says.

Cedric Garland, meanwhile, hews just as strongly to the opposite view — that vitamin D supplements confer a slew of benefits, including warding off colon cancer, breast cancer, even Type 1 diabetes.

“The science is, in my opinion, unassailable,” says Garland, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at the University of California at San Diego. “It’s just preposterous to say it’s not proven.”

In January 2014, Autier published a statistical analysis of results from hundreds of studies of vitamin D. He concluded: “Unfortunately, there is probably no benefit to expect from vitamin D supplementation in normally healthy people.”

Garland, on the other hand, is the co-author of dozens of studies showing a strong, inverse association between vitamin D levels and seemingly every disease under the sun. Indeed, sun exposure is Garland’s explanation for why rates of cancer, Type 1 diabetes and other diseases tend to be higher the farther people live from the equator. Vitamin D, after all, is the “sunshine vitamin,” synthesized from cholesterol in the skin in response to sunlight.

“It’s a mathematical relationship,” he said in a telephone interview. “The higher your latitude and the greater your area’s average cloud cover, the higher your rates of cancer.” Since he and his late brother, Frank Garland, published the first study, in 1980, revealing that relationship, hundreds of other studies have explored the link between vitamin D, including supplements, and health — but none were large enough, long enough or designed well enough to convince the skeptics.

Now three nationally recognized researchers are leading landmark studies designed to settle at least some of the questions about vitamin D once and for all. The one thing the research leaders are certain of is that the public’s faith in vitamin D as a modern panacea has far outpaced what the scientific evidence proves.

“There’s been a rush to judgment on vitamin D,” says JoAnn E. Manson, chief of the division of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. “Everyone has gotten on the bandwagon. Unfortunately, the lessons of history have shown repeatedly that many of these supplements that appeared to be very promising did not pan out in more rigorous testing.”

Manson should know. She has led or collaborated on more than a dozen large, randomized, placebo-controlled studies, dating back more than two decades, which found none of the expected protection against cancer, heart disease, dementia or other diseases that scientists once attributed to beta carotene, vitamin E or vitamin C supplements. (She did find, however, that supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 offered modest protection against age-related macular degeneration and, for those with a diet low in B vitamins to begin with, a hint of protection against the loss of cognitive abilities.)

Now Manson is co-directing the Vitamin D and Omega-3 Trial (VITAL), testing whether, compared with placebo, a daily supplement of either 2,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D or one gram of fish oil (another widely touted substance) reduces the risk of stroke, cancer, heart disease and other health problems. The five-year study, involving 25,874 men and women, is scheduled to end in October 2017.

Another trial is testing whether a daily supplement of 4,000 IU of vitamin D will prevent Type 2 diabetes. The so-called D2d study, which will run for four years, is seeking to enroll 2,382 people older than 30 who are at high risk of developing diabetes due to weight or blood-sugar levels but who have not yet been diagnosed with the disease.

“I would call myself an optimistic skeptic,” says Anastasios Pittas, principal investigator of the D2d study and a professor of medicine at Tufts School of Medicine in Boston. “The indirect evidence is very strong. People with higher levels of vitamin D in their blood have been shown again and again to have a lower risk of developing diabetes in the future. These studies are as consistent as we have ever seen with any nutrient.”

But, he adds, “those studies do not prove cause and effect. Before we make a blanket recommendation for the 86 million people in the United States who are at risk for Type 2 diabetes to go out and buy vitamin D supplements, we need to know for sure if they help.”

A third trial, designed to test whether 5,000 IU of vitamin D per day will slow the progression of multiple sclerosis in 172 patients, is being led by Ellen Mowry, an associate professor of neurology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

“I do discuss vitamin D with my patients,” Mowry says. “But I point out that we don’t yet have randomized, controlled-trials data to back it up. That’s why there are no official recommendations yet from any medical organizations. We have to be sure.”

So what are people to do in the meantime? Four years ago, Manson sat on a committee established by the Institute of Medicine to review how much vitamin D and calcium Americans need each day to maintain health and prevent disease. The report concluded that both are necessary for bone health but that as for preventing cancer, heart disease, diabetes and autoiummune disorders, the evidence was “inconsistent, inconclusive as to causality, and insufficient to inform nutritional requirements.” Even so, the committee recommended that children and adults up to age 70 get 600 IU of vitamin D daily — from food and, if necessary, supplements — and that adults age 71 and older get 800 IU.

Some studies have found no ill effects from taking far higher amounts, and many of the prospective but not proven benefits against cancer and other diseases are believed to require doses ranging from 2,000 to 5,000 IU. Manson urges people to rely on the Institute of Medicine report, which set a safe upper limit of 4,000 IU of vitamin D per day.

“It’s fine to take that amount,” Manson said. “But keep in mind, there isn’t yet evidence that taking those higher amounts will confer any benefits beyond the recommended daily allotment of 600 to 800 IU.”

Some studies, she noted, have even found evidence that very high levels of vitamin D circulating in the blood might be just as unhealthful as very low levels. A 2014 study, for instance, found that people with the highest levels of vitamin D in their blood (more than 60 nanograms per milliliter) were significantly more likely to die in the three months following a hospitalization as were people whose levels were between 30 and 49.9 ng/mL. Such findings are why she, Mowry and Pittas strongly advise people against taking more than the currently recommended upper daily limit of 4,000 IU, even though doses as high as 10,000 IU are available online and at many stores.

Frustrated by the uncertainty? Pittas takes it in stride.

“This is the beauty of medical research,” he says, “where you have some people convinced that vitamin D does nothing and others who believe it’s already proved to work. There is such controversy now that the only way to convince people who sit on those sides of the equation is to complete rigorous, randomized trials. We’ll see what happens. I have a hypothesis that vitamin D will work, but we have to test it. At the end of the studies, one of us will be right. I just don’t know which one.”

Hurley is a science journalist and author of “Natural Causes: Death, Lies and Politics in America’s Vitamin and Herbal Supplement Industry” (Broadway Books, 2007).
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story begins from a baseline context of controversy and uncertainty, rather than one of assumed benefit — an approach that frames the issue appropriately in our view. There is detailed discussion of research showing benefits, and research NOT showing benefits. In the absence of definitive large trials, the benefits accepted by the Institute of Medicine are limited to bone health.
The story quotes the Institute of Medicine, which concludes that vitamin D and calcium are “necessary for bone health” but that as for preventing cancer, heart disease, diabetes and autoiummune disorders, the evidence was insufficient.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
America's favorite dietary supplements, multivitamins, modestly lowered the risk for cancer in healthy male doctors who took them for more than a decade, the first large study to test these pills has found.

The result is a surprise because many studies of individual vitamins have found they don't help prevent chronic diseases and some have even caused problems.

In the new study, multivitamins cut the chance of developing cancer by 8%. That is less effective than a good diet, exercise and not smoking, each of which can lower cancer risk by 20% to 30%, cancer experts say.

Multivitamins also may have different results in women, younger men or people less healthy than those in this study.

"It's a very mild effect and personally I'm not sure it's significant enough to recommend to anyone" although it is promising, said Dr. Ernest Hawk, vice president of cancer prevention at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and formerly of the National Cancer Institute.

"At least this doesn't suggest a harm" as some previous studies on single vitamins have, he said.

Hawk reviewed the study for the American Association for Cancer Research, which is meeting in Anaheim, Calif., where the study was to be presented on Wednesday. It also was published online in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

About one-third of U.S. adults and as many as half of those over 50 take them. They are marketed as a kind of insurance policy against bad eating. Yet no government agency recommends their routine use "regardless of the quality of a person's diet," says a fact sheet from the federal Office of Dietary Supplements.

Some fads, such as the antioxidant craze over vitamins A and E and beta-carotene, backfired when studies found more health risk with those supplements, not less. Many of those were single vitamins in larger doses than the "100% of daily value" amounts that multivitamins typically contain.

Science on vitamins has been skimpy. Most studies have been observational — they look at groups of people who do and do not use vitamins, a method that can't give firm conclusions.

Dr. J. Michael Gaziano, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and VA Boston, led a stronger test. Nearly 15,000 male doctors who were 50 or older and free of cancer when the study started were given monthly packets of Centrum Silver or fake multivitamins without knowing which type they received.

After about 11 years, there were 2,669 new cancers, and some people had cancer more than once. For every 1,000 men per year in the study, there were 17 cancers among multivitamin users and more than 18 among those taking the placebo pills. That worked out to an 8% lower risk of developing cancer in the vitamin group.

Multivitamins made no difference in the risk of developing prostate cancer, which accounted for half of all cases. They lowered the risk of other cancers collectively by about 12%. There also was a trend toward fewer cancer deaths among multivitamin users, but the difference was so small it could have occurred by chance alone.

Side effects were fairly similar except for more rashes among vitamin users. The National Institutes of Health paid for most of the study. Pfizer Inc. supplied the pills and other companies supplied the packaging.

The main reason to take a multivitamin is to correct or prevent a deficiency, "but there may be a modest benefit in reducing the risk of cancer in older men," Gaziano said.

Cancer experts said the results need to be confirmed by another study before recommending multivitamins to the public. These participants were healthier — only 4% smoked, for example.

For people who do want to take multivitamins, doctors suggest:

— Be aware that they are dietary supplements, which do not get the strict testing required of prescription medicines.

— Ask your doctor before taking any. Vitamin K can interfere with common heart medicines and blood thinners, and vitamins C and E can lower the effectiveness of some types of chemotherapy. For people having surgery, some vitamins affect bleeding and response to anesthesia.

— Current and former smokers should avoid multivitamins with lots of beta-carotene or vitamin A; two studies have tied them to increased risk of lung cancer.

Copyright 2012 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story was very cautious in its framing of the results, quoting a researcher who called the effect “very mild” and who said he wasn’t sure it’s significant enough to recommend to anyone. The story also took the time to explain exactly what the benefit looked like in absolute terms: “After about 11 years, there were 2,669 new cancers, and some people had cancer more than once. For every 1,000 men per year in the study, there were 17 cancers among multivitamin users and more than 18 among those taking the placebo pills. That worked out to an 8% lower risk of developing cancer in the vitamin group.” The competing Reuters coverage didn’t provide these details.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NICOSIA/LONDON (Reuters) - Pregnant women may soon be able to have a blood test to predict whether their babies are likely to have Down’s Syndrome instead of undergoing risky, invasive tests, scientists said on Sunday.

In a study in the Nature Medicine journal researchers from Cyprus said a trial on 40 pregnancies using the test, which involves analyzing the woman’s blood to detect DNA differences between the mother and the fetus, showed it accurately predicted which fetuses were at risk of developing the syndrome.

Philippos Patsalis, medical director of the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, who led the study, said the results were “very exciting” and the test now needed to be trialed in a larger study of about 1,000 pregnancies, but could lead to changes in clinical practice within two years.

“We believe we can modify this test and make it much easier and simple... (and then) we can have something ready to be introduced into the clinic,” he told Reuters in Nicosia.

Down’s Syndrome is the most common genetic cause of mental retardation, occurring in 1 out of 700 live births worldwide.

The risk of having a baby with Down’s — which occurs when a child has three copies of chromosome 21 instead of the normal two — increases sharply as women get older. The risk for a 40-year-old mother is 16 times that for one who is 25.

Doctors currently use a test known as amniocentesis to check whether a baby is likely to be born with Down’s. This test is generally done at about 15 or 16 weeks gestation and involves taking amniotic fluid from the mother by inserting a hollow needle into the uterus.

Since amniocentesis carries a small risk of spontaneous miscarriage — Patsalis put it at around one or two percent — scientists have been looking for new less invasive ways to test for Down’s and other potential genetic problems.

Patsalis’ method takes advantage of differences in the DNA methylation patterns — which are important to control levels of genes — between mother and fetus.

It involves taking a small amount of blood from the mother when she is between the 11th and 13th week of her pregnancy and detecting extra copies chromosome 21 in the fetus by analyzing the maternal blood.

In a small trial, Patsalis’ team were able to correctly diagnose 14 cases where there were extra copies of the chromosome, and 26 normal fetuses — results they said highlighted its clinical potential.

“Such a non-invasive approach will avoid the risk of miscarriages of normal pregnancies caused by current, more invasive procedures,” the scientists wrote in their paper.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story stated that the researchers “were able to correctly diagnose 14 cases where there were extra copies of the chromosome and 26 normal fetuses.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A scientifically based approach that includes a tooth-decay risk assessment, aggressive preventive measures and conservative restorations can dramatically reduce decay in community dental practices, according to a study by researchers at UC San Francisco.

The findings, which support earlier research demonstrating positive results of the assessment and treatment method in a university setting, have the potential to transform dental care for high-risk patients at a lower cost to both patients and dental clinics and practices. Results appear online Jan. 22, 2018, in Advances in Dental Research.

"We put the 2012 UCSF clinical study into the real world and showed it works," said lead author Peter Rechmann, DMD, PhD, professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences in the UCSF School of Dentistry. "The patients at high caries risk who used prescription products went down significantly over time in their risk level. Those in the control group also reduced their risk to a lesser degree, simply by using over-the-counter products that also protect teeth and affect the bacteria."

Dental caries (tooth decay) is caused by bacteria on the tooth surface feeding on carbohydrates, then making acids as waste. These acids destroy the protective tooth enamel and the dentin layer beneath it. If not halted or reversed, this leads to a cavity.

CAries Management By Risk Assessment (CAMBRA?) is an evidence-based approach to preventing or treating dental caries at its earliest stages. It was launched in 2003 through the UCSF School of Dentistry by the paper's senior author, John Featherstone, PhD, MSc, former dean of the school and distinguished professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences.

A dentist who uses CAMBRA obtains the patient's dental and medical history and conducts a clinical exam to assess caries early enough to reverse or halt progression and to determine caries risk factors. These factors include, among other things, acid-producing bacteria, frequent eating and drinking of fermentable carbohydrates ("snacking"), and abnormally low saliva flow and function.

From this assessment, the dentist utilizes behavioral approaches and chemical treatments to optimize protective factors. The treatment plan typically incorporates remineralization through the use of fluoride and/or antibacterial therapies such as chlorhexidine and xylitol, minimally invasive restorative procedures to conserve tooth structure, and regular patient follow up.

The authors published their initial validation of CAMBRA for ages 6 through adult in 2006, followed by several additional years of data published in 2011, 2012, 2015 and 2016. Since then, more than half of the U.S. schools and colleges of dentistry have adopted CAMBRA in one form or another as part of their standard curriculum. The authors said now that this has been shown to be effective in a non-academic clinical setting, there also is potential for insurance companies to reimburse CAMBRA and other preventive therapies for adults, thereby lowering patient costs while increasing profits for dental practices.

In the Advances in Dental Research study, Rechmann and his colleagues recruited 20 dentists - 17 in private practice, three in community clinics - to participate in a two-year CAMBRA trial of 460 patients ages 12-65 years old, with 239 in a CAMBRA group and 221 in a control group.

In the CAMBRA group, high-risk patients received prescription fluoride toothpaste, chlorhexidine antibacterial rinse, xylitol mints and fluoride varnish. The control group received regular fluoride toothpaste, an assumed inactive mouth rinse, sorbitol candies and a non-fluoride varnish.

Follow-up visits occurred at six, 12, 18 and 24 months, in which new caries lesions or changes in caries risk level were recorded. Overall, the researchers found that a significantly greater percentage of high-risk participants were classified at lower risk after receiving CAMBRA preventive therapies. Dental decay was low in both groups.

Among 242 patients (137 intervention, 105 control) initially identified as high risk for caries, only a quarter of the patients remained at high risk in the CAMBRA group at 24 months, while just over half (54 percent) of the control group did. Of the 192 low-risk participants (93 intervention, 99 control), most participants remained low risk, indicating that the assessment correctly identifies who is at risk for caries.

The researchers said the risk reduction among the control group may have been caused by the fluoride toothpaste enhancing tooth repair, as well as the mouth rinse enhancing saliva flow and having bactericidal effects. While not as significant as the CAMBRA group in this study, the risk level of these patients dropped more dramatically over time than for those in the 2012 UCSF CAMBRA study.

"It was surprising to see the benefits gained by the control group," Rechmann said. "More research is needed to see if the products and treatment administered to this group function in the way we speculate, and if so, they might be made easily available to dental patients. Doing so can change the whole picture of caries control."

Among the study limitations, the researchers noted a high study attrition (65 percent), which partly may have contributed to observed declines in risk level at each subsequent recall visit.

Co-authors on the paper were Benjamin Chafee, DDS, MPH, PhD, assistant professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences and director of the Global Oral Health program, and Beate Rechmann, research associate, both from the UCSF School of Dentistry. Funding was provided by the National Institutes of Health National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, PacifiCare/United Healthcare, DentaQuest and California Dental Association. Proctor & Gamble, 3M Espe and Epic provided products for study participants at reduced or no cost.

UC San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with nationally renowned programs in basic, biomedical, translational and population sciences; and a preeminent biomedical research enterprise. It also includes UCSF Health, which comprises three top-ranked hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals in San Francisco and Oakland, and other partner and affiliated hospitals and healthcare providers throughout the Bay Area. Please visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release described benefits this way:
Among 242 patients (137 intervention, 105 control) initially identified as high risk for caries, only a quarter of the patients remained at high risk in the CAMBRA group at 24 months, while just over half (54 percent) of the control group did. Of the 192 low-risk participants (93 intervention, 99 control), most participants remained low risk.
As noted under Evidence criteria below, the release listed as a limitation the fact that only about one-third of the patients who started the study completed the 24 month checkup.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Treating stroke patients who have lost control and awareness of one side of their body with magnetic stimulation to the brain may improve their symptoms, researchers said today.

In a new, small study published in the journal Neurology, patients who were given quick bursts of stimulation over a couple of weeks improved by about 20 percent on tests of vision and attention, while those who got a fake stimulation treatment didn’t improve significantly.

But researchers said it’s still unclear what types of patients might benefit from the treatment and by how much.

About half of people who have a stroke end up with difficulty processing or reacting to things on one side of their body, most often on the left side after a stroke in the right side of the brain, said Dr. Anna Barrett, director of stroke rehabilitation research at the Kessler Foundation in West Orange, New Jersey, who wasn’t involved in the new study. That post-stroke condition is known as neglect.

“People that have that tend to do much worse in their eventual recovery,” Barrett said. “They’re less likely to become completely independent.”

Most of those patients can improve with therapy and exercises, she said, but the process is often slow, and keeping people in the hospital during it is costly.

She said that because of that, the new findings are “promising,” but added that brain stimulation is still an experimental technique, and not ready to be used as part of normal stroke rehabilitation.

For the study, Italian researchers randomly assigned 20 patients with neglect to get real or fake magnetic stimulation in ten sessions over two weeks, in addition to their conventional rehab program. The treatment involved an electromagnetic coil placed over the left side of the brain that transmitted pulses of electrical currents.

Similar types of stimulation treatment are used in some patients with depression or during spinal surgery, according to Barrett. The device costs about $50,000.

Nine people in each group completed all the treatment sessions.

Before treatment, right after and another two weeks later, stroke patients were given tests to measure their visual-spatial skills, as well as attention and concentration. Those including drawing and shape-copying tests, as well as menu reading and map navigating tasks.

Patients in both groups started out with an average mark of about 170 on the tests, which are scored from 0 to 227 combined.

The “real” magnetic stimulation group improved by about 16 percent right after the treatment and 23 percent at the later time point, while there was no significant benefit seen in patients given the fake stimulation.

The researchers said that it’s not clear what the amount of improvement they observed would mean for patients in their daily lives.

But, lead author Dr. Giacomo Koch said, “What we found is that the improvement was more marked in those patients that were more impaired.”

Koch, from the Santa Lucia Foundation in Rome, told Reuters Health he thinks those patients with more severe problems would likely see a benefit outside of just test results.

He said that larger studies at multiple treatment sites are needed to determine how helpful magnetic stimulation can be in stroke recovery. But he was optimistic about the treatment’s future.

“I think in a few years this could become another tool that could be used systematically in the neurorehabilitation wards,” Koch said. He added that the treatment isn’t painful, and only takes a few minutes for each session.

Close to 800,000 people in the U.S. suffer a stroke each year, mostly older adults. For those with neglect, doctors typically prescribe cognitive rehabilitation, in which therapists teach skills and help the patient become more aware of the affected side of the body.

Barrett, also from the University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, said that she wonders whether stimulation could help patients achieve the goals that are most important to regaining independence after a stroke, such as using the bathroom.

It’s also not clear if the treatment might help most neglect patients, or if the findings only apply to certain groups, she told Reuters Health.

The ideal option might end up being a combination treatment that involves stimulation in certain patients and other therapies that address a range of skills important for regaining function, Barrett added. But, she said, “That all remains to be investigated.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This story provides a more nuanced look at potential benefits of TMS than the competing WebMD coverage. In addition to providing statistics on the amount of improvement seen in the stimulation group, the story notes that “it’s not clear what the amount of improvement they observed would mean for patients in their daily lives.”  It also explains that the benefits were more pronounced among those with more serious symptoms. This is important context for patients or caregivers who want to know how the research findings might apply to them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - People who eat lots of magnesium-rich foods such as leafy green vegetables, nuts and beans have fewer strokes, according to an international analysis covering some 250,000 people.

But the authors of the study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, stopped short of recommending people take a daily magnesium supplement because their analysis focused on magnesium in food — and it may be another aspect of the food that is responsible for their finding.

“Dietary magnesium intake is inversely associated with risk of stroke, specifically ischemic stroke,” wrote lead author Susanna Larsson, a professor at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden.

The results suggest that people eat a healthy diet with “magnesium-rich foods such as green leafy vegetables, nuts, beans and whole grains,” she added.

Larsson and her colleagues combed through research databases spanning the last 45 years to find studies that tracked how much magnesium people took and how many of them had a stroke over time.

In seven studies published in the past 14 years, about 250,000 people in the United States, Europe and Asia were followed for an average of 11.5 years. About 6,500 of them, or three percent, had a stroke in the time they were followed.

For every extra 100 milligrams of magnesium a person ate per day, their risk of an ischemic stroke — the most common kind, typically caused by a blood clot — fell by nine percent.

The median magnesium intake for U.S. citizens included in the analysis was 242 milligrams a day. The United States recommends that men and women over age 31 eat 420 and 320 milligrams of magnesium daily, respectively.

Most of the studies allowed the researchers to rule out other factors, such as family history.

But Larsson told Reuters Health in an email that she could not say whether other aspects of what the people ate partially or entirely explained the finding.

More in-depth studies are needed before researchers can say that the magnesium was what actually reduced the stroke risk, she added.

Other experts said the results were consistent with dietary recommendations.

“It’s a diet that’s rich in fruits, vegetables and grains. Those are things that have low sodium, high potassium and high magnesium,” said Larry Goldstein, director of the stroke center at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, North Carolina.

"It's again the diet per se, not any one individual component of the diet." SOURCE: bit.ly/AhalBY
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provided the absolute number of strokes observed in the analysis, and the relative risk reduction observed. With a meta-analysis it is not statistically appropriate to pool absolute risk reductions, so the way the story treated the evidence is as good as can be done (showing the relative risk reduction and an “anchor” in terms of absolute risk.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON, September 26, 2016 -- High dose stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for men newly-diagnosed with low- or intermediate-risk prostate cancer results in shorter treatment times, low severe toxicity and excellent cancer control rates, according to research presented today at the 58th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO). The study is the first large, multi-institutional study of SBRT in prostate cancer with long-term follow-up.

Although prostate tumors generally respond well to radiation therapy (RT), the possibility of radiation exposure to healthy tissue in the genitourinary (GU) and gastrointestinal (GI) systems can be of concern. SBRT is an advanced technique that precisely targets high doses of RT to the tumor in a small number fractions, simultaneously avoiding surrounding tissue and reducing toxicity to non-cancerous cells. The technique has become the standard of care for many non-surgical lung cancer patients, as it limits exposure to the heart and surrounding lungs. When treating tumors in the prostate, SBRT avoids the adjacent bladder, sex organs and rectum.

“Single-institution studies on the use of SBRT as the primary treatment for prostate cancer have illuminated the treatment as a cost-effective and faster alternative to IMRT,” said Robert Meier, MD, lead author of the study and a radiation oncologist at Swedish Medical Center in Seattle. “Our study is the first to contribute multi-center data that support the use of SBRT as front-line therapy for men with prostate cancer.”

A total of 309 men with newly diagnosed prostate cancer were enrolled in the trial at 21 community, regional and academic hospitals across the U.S. Eligible patients had either low-risk disease (CS T1-T2a, Gleason 6, PSA < 10) (n = 172) or intermediate-risk disease (CS T1c-T2b with either Gleason 7 and PSA < 10, or Gleason 6 and PSA 10-20). All of the men received SBRT via a non-isocentric robotic platform, with an RT dose to the prostate of 40 Gy administered in five treatment sessions of 8 Gy each. Intermediate risk patients received a dose of 36.25 Gy to the seminal vesicles. Concurrent and adjuvant androgen ablation therapy were prohibited among study participants.

Primary outcomes included GU and GI toxicities and relapse-free survival (RFS). Researchers measured toxicity using the National Cancer Institute’s Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 3.0. Biochemical failure was assessed using the ASTRO-consensus and the nadir+2 definitions. Overall survival (OS) was measured as a secondary outcome for the study. Actuarial OS and RFS were calculated with the Kaplan-Meier statistical method. Median follow-up was 61 months.

At five years following SBRT, 97 percent of patients were free from prostate cancer progression. In low-risk patients, the cancer control rates was superior to historical controls. Specifically in the low-risk group, the five-year RFS rate was 97.3 percent, which is superior to the 93 percent historical comparison DFS control rate (p = 0.014). Actuarial five-year OS was 95.6 percent for the entire cohort. Actuarial five-year nadir+2 RFS was 97.1 percent for all patients, representing 97.3 percent of low-risk and 97.1 of intermediate-risk patients. Actuarial five-year ASTRO RFS was 92.3 percent and 91.3 percent for low- and intermediate-risk groups, respectively.

Fewer than two percent of all patients experienced serious side effects in the five years following SBRT. Five grade three GU side effects were reported in four of the 309 study participants. There were no reported grade four or five toxicities nor any grade three GI toxicities. Between half and two-thirds of patients experienced less serious side effects, with rates of 53 and 59 percent for grade one GU and GI toxicities and rates of 35 and 10 percent for grade two GU and GI toxicities, respectively. These side effects were usually temporary.

“Our results illustrate how advanced technology has radically improved our ability to target cancer,” said Dr. Meier. “After following patients for more than five years, we found that serious side effects from a brief course of SBRT were uncommon and that cancer control rates were very favorable compared to historical data. Our trial confirms that SBRT may be preferable to other treatment approaches for newly-diagnosed cases of prostate cancer, including more aggressive disease.”

The abstract, “Five-Year Outcomes from a Multi-Center Trial of Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy for Low- and Intermediate-Risk Prostate Cancer,” will be presented in detail during a scientific session at ASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting at 7:45 a.m. Eastern time on Monday, September 26, 2016. To speak with Dr. Meier or obtain a copy of the abstract, please contact ASTRO’s media relations team on-site at the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center September 25 through 28, by phone at 703-286-1600 or by email at press@astro.org.

ATTRIBUTION TO THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF RADIATION ONCOLOGY (ASTRO) ANNUAL MEETING REQUESTED IN ALL COVERAGE.

This news release contains updated data from the study author(s).

ABOUT ASTRO’S ANNUAL MEETINGASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting, the nation’s premier scientific meeting in radiation oncology, will be held September 25-28, 2016, at the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center in Boston. The 2016 Annual Meeting is expected to attract more than 11,000 attendees from across the globe, including oncologists from all disciplines and members of the entire radiation oncology team. Led by ASTRO president David C. Beyer, MD, FASTRO, the 2016 meeting will feature keynote addresses from Kathleen Sebelius, former U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services; Thomas James Lynch Jr., MD, Chair and CEO, Massachusetts General Physicians Organization; and Jason Ragogna, general manager, SMS and Safety Alliances, Corporate Safety, Security, and Compliance, Delta Air Lines, Inc. The Presidential Symposium, “Prostate Cancer: Defining Value and Delivering It,” highlights the meeting’s theme of “Enhancing Value, Improving Outcomes” and will feature recent practice-changing studies and current developments in value-based care for prostate cancer. ASTRO’s four-day scientific meeting will feature a record number of abstracts, including 368 oral presentations, 1,760 posters and 180 digital posters in more than 50 educational sessions and 20 scientific panels for 20 disease-site tracks. For more information about ASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting, visit www.astro.org/AnnualMeeting. For press registration and news briefing information for ASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting, visit www.astro.org/AMpress.

ABOUT ASTROASTRO is the premier radiation oncology society in the world, with more than 10,000 members who are physicians, nurses, biologists, physicists, radiation therapists, dosimetrists and other health care professionals who specialize in treating patients with radiation therapies. As the leading organization in radiation oncology, the Society is dedicated to improving patient care through professional education and training, support for clinical practice and health policy standards, advancement of science and research, and advocacy. ASTRO publishes three medical journals, International Journal of Radiation Oncology
• Biology
• Physics (www.redjournal.org), Practical Radiation Oncology (www.practicalradonc.org) and Advances in Radiation Oncology (www.advancesradonc.org); developed and maintains an extensive patient website, RT Answers (www.rtanswers.org); and created the Radiation Oncology Institute (www.roinstitute.org), a nonprofit foundation to support research and education efforts around the world that enhance and confirm the critical role of radiation therapy in improving cancer treatment. To learn more about ASTRO, visit www.astro.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release gives a lot of data. It states that 97 percent of patients were free from prostate cancer progression after five years, exceeding a historical control of 93 percent. It also says that fewer than 2 percent of patients experienced severe toxicities in their gastrointestinal, reproductive, and urinary systems, and no patients reported life-threatening or fatal toxicity. However, the news release does not attempt to say how these rates compare with other treatment options, which would help readers put the data in perspective. There are important caveats left out in the description of findings that are discussed under the evidence criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most angioplasties not necessary, study finds

NEW ORLEANS — More than half a million people a year with chest pain are getting an unnecessary or premature procedure to unclog their arteries because drugs are just as effective, suggests a landmark study that challenges one of the most common practices in heart care.

The stunning results found angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevent heart attacks and give lasting chest-pain relief.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

Drugs are better today than they used to be and do a surprisingly good job, said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

"It may not be as bad as we thought" to leave the artery alone, she said.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

It involved 2,287 patients throughout the U.S. and Canada who had substantial blockages, typically in two arteries, but were medically stable. They had an average of 10 chest pain episodes a week — moderately severe. About 40 percent had a prior heart attack.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation. Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4 1/2 years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group — about 19 percent of each.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.

At the start of the study, 80 percent had chest pain. Three years into it, 72 percent of the angioplasty group was free of this symptom as was 67 percent of the drug group. That means you would have to give angioplasties to 20 people for every one whose chest pain was better after three years — an unacceptably high ratio, Nissen said.

After five years, 74 percent of the angioplasty group and 72 percent of the medication group were free of chest pain — "no significant difference," Boden said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefits of treatment, reduction in chest pain, rates of heart attack and death, were presented.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pregnant women are at higher risk for serious illness and complications, including death, from influenza. For expectant mothers hospitalized with flu, early treatment with the influenza antiviral drug oseltamivir may shorten their time in the hospital, especially in severe cases, suggests a new study published in The Journal of Infectious Diseases and available online. The findings also underscore the importance of flu vaccination for this risk group.

"Treating pregnant women who have influenza with antiviral drugs can have substantial benefit in terms of reducing length of stay in the hospital," said Sandra S. Chaves, MD, MSc, of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and senior author of the study. CDC recommends treatment of suspected cases of flu among pregnant women with antiviral drugs as soon as possible, without waiting for test results to confirm influenza. "The earlier you treat, the better chances you have to modify the course of the illness."

Past studies have suggested that flu antiviral therapy is safe and beneficial for pregnant women. The current study, based on data from a nationwide flu surveillance network including 14 states, focused on pregnant women hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed flu over four recent flu seasons, from 2010 to 2014. During the study period, 865 pregnant women were hospitalized with flu. Sixty-three of these patients, or about 7 percent, had severe illness.

After adjusting for underlying medical conditions, vaccination status, and pregnancy trimester, the researchers found that early treatment with the antiviral drug oseltamivir was associated with a shorter hospital stay. Among pregnant women with severe flu illness who were treated early -- within two days of the start of symptoms -- the median length of stay was about five days shorter compared to hospitalized pregnant women with severe flu illness who were treated later (2.2 days vs. 7.8 days). Pregnant women hospitalized with less severe illness who were treated early also had a shorter hospital stay than those treated later, but the difference was not as great.

In the study, pregnant women hospitalized with severe flu illness were half as likely to have been vaccinated as women hospitalized with milder illness (14 percent vs. 26 percent). CDC recommends annual flu vaccination for everyone 6 months of age and older, including pregnant women during any trimester of their pregnancy. Earlier studies have suggested that immunization during pregnancy may protect not only the mother from flu, but also her newborn baby during the first 6 months of life.

"All pregnant women should receive annual influenza vaccination to prevent influenza and associated complications for themselves and their infants," the study authors wrote.

A related editorial commentary by Alan T. N. Tita, MD, PhD, and William W. Andrews, PhD, MD, of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, accompanies the new study in The Journal of Infectious Diseases.

"Overall, considering the accumulating evidence of fetal benefit and safety, influenza vaccination of pregnant and postpartum women should be a public health priority in accordance with national recommendations," the commentary authors wrote. "Prompt initiation of antiviral therapy if infection occurs, preferably within two days of suspected or confirmed influenza infection, is encouraged."
• Among pregnant women hospitalized with severe flu who were treated early with an antiviral medication, the median length of their hospital stay was about five days shorter compared to similar patients treated later.
• Pregnant women who were hospitalized with severe cases of flu illness were half as likely to have been vaccinated as women with non-severe illness.
• Annual vaccination against flu is recommended for everyone 6 months of age and older, including pregnant women, who are at high risk of serious flu illness and complications.

Editor's Note: The study authors' and editorial commentary authors' affiliations, acknowledgments, and disclosures of financial support and potential conflicts of interests are available in the study and the commentary, which are embargoed until 12:01 a.m. EST on Thursday, Feb. 4. For an embargoed copy of the study and the commentary, please contact Emily Zaideman (312-558-1770, ezaideman@pcipr.com).

Published continuously since 1904, The Journal of Infectious Diseases is the premier global journal for original research on infectious diseases. The editors welcome major articles and brief reports describing research results on microbiology, immunology, epidemiology, and related disciplines, on the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of infectious diseases; on the microbes that cause them; and on disorders of host immune responses. The journal is an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA). Based in Arlington, Va., IDSA is a professional society representing nearly 10,000 physicians and scientists who specialize in infectious diseases. For more information, visit http://www. . Follow IDSA on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release is a mixed bag here. The release adequately describes some aspects of the benefits. For example, pregnant women hospitalized with severe flu that were given oseltamivir within two days of exhibiting flu symptoms spent a median of 2.2 days in the hospital; as compared to 7.8 days for pregnant women hospitalized with severe flu that were given oseltamivir more than two days after exhibiting flu symptoms. In addition, the release addresses the benefit of vaccination by saying: “pregnant women hospitalized with severe flu illness were half as likely to have been vaccinated as women hospitalized with milder illness (14 percent vs. 26 percent).” But the release would have been stronger if it had done a couple additional things.
First, the release notes that “Pregnant women hospitalized with less severe illness who were treated early also had a shorter hospital stay than those treated later, but the difference was not as great.” If you’re going to mention this benefit at all, even using modest language, it would be better to put a number to it. (Was it a difference of a day? 0.2 days?) Also, the release specifically mentions “serious illness and complications, including death” in its opening paragraph — but never tells readers whether the study found any potential connection between early antiviral treatment and reduced risk of complications for mother or child. Even if the study didn’t find any such relationship, the release could have said that.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A seaweed-based fiber supplement, taken daily before meals, helped people lose weight in a new study.

But that was only the case among people who stuck with the diet study over a few months. More than one-fifth of people dropped out when they couldn’t tolerate the supplement’s taste, texture and side effects.

Researchers have explored the potential of seaweed as an appetite suppressant, but so far products haven’t panned out.

“There have been problems in the past to develop something (that tastes) acceptable,” said Dr. Arne Astrup, one of the study’s authors from the University of Copenhagen and a member of the advisory board to S-Biotek, a Danish company that provided funding for the study.

Previous seaweed-based supplements were slimy and caused bloating, and they also had a fishy taste. The new supplement used in this study is less unpleasant — but there’s still room for improvement, said Astrup.

The supplement is based on the seaweed extract alginate, a thickening agent and a common ingredient in foods like soups and jellies. It’s also increasingly used by the weight-loss industry, marketed as an appetite suppressant.

Packaged in powder form and mixed with liquid, alginate expands in the stomach to form a thick gel, mimicking the effect of a large meal.

“This gel is really like a pudding that will last in the stomach for hours, gradually degrading and disappearing,” Astrup said.

For the study, the researchers randomly divided 96 generally healthy but obese people, aged 20 to 55, into two groups.

One group was given packets of the gel supplement, containing 15 grams of fiber, and the other got a seaweed-free placebo drink. Neither the researchers nor the participants knew who was receiving the seaweed supplement.

In terms of calories, flavor and appearance, the placebo and treatment drink were identical.

For three months, study participants drank the supplements, dissolved in two cups of water, 30 minutes before each meal. They were also told to cut back on calories. By the end of the trial, sixteen people had dropped out of the study, including 10 out of 48 from the seaweed group, according to findings published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

Among people who stuck with the trial, those on the fiber supplement lost 15 pounds, on average, compared to 11 pounds in the placebo group. But when all 96 original participants were included in the analysis, the researchers found no significant difference in weight loss between the two treatment groups.

Previous studies have shown eating a high-fiber diet can help reduce the hunger pangs that may lead to over-eating and derail a healthy diet plan.

Still, the new results should be treated with caution, according to Dr. Maria Vazquez Roque, who has worked on alginate-based gels at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida, but was not involved in the study. Just looking at the effect of the supplement on people who finished the treatment can bias the findings, she said.

For Mette Kristensen, one of the study’s authors, the message seems clear: “If you actually comply with the treatment, you do have the improvement in weight loss.”

However, effects on blood pressure were less promising. Systolic blood pressure — the top number on a blood pressure reading — fell by almost six points on average in the placebo group over the 12-week study, but by just over one point in the treatment group. At times during the trials, systolic blood pressure increased in the alginate group by one to two points.

According to the researchers, the higher sodium content of the alginate drink — a little over one gram per dose, or about half a teaspoon of salt — could have offset any potential blood-pressure reducing effect of the supplement. The American Heart Association recommends that adults eat less than 1.5 g of sodium per day.

Questions remain about the safety of the fiber supplement over the long term. Five people taking the fiber gel left the study due to problems with stomach bloating, nausea and diarrhea. Two people taking a placebo supplement, which didn’t contain the seaweed fiber, experienced similar problems.

There are many different types of alginate, said Richard Mattes, who has studied the effect of alginate fiber on appetite at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana — so the trick is to find the right alginate in the right dose.

And just feeling less hungry due to a supplement won’t make you lose weight unless you eat fewer calories, said Mattes, who was not involved in the new study.

The research group is working on a new supplement that uses 80 percent less alginate, with less sodium, better taste and fewer side effects than the current formula, Astrup told Reuters Health.

Alginate as an aid to weight loss is already commercially available in pill form and costs around $45 for a seven-day supply. These supplements are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration, said Vazquez Roque.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantified the weight loss, with caveats about “no significant difference between the two treatment groups when all 96 original participants were included in the analysis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Feb. 26, 2018 -- A lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet, which includes eggs and dairy but excludes meat and fish, and a Mediterranean diet are likely equally effective in reducing the risk of heart disease and stroke, according to new research in the American Heart Association's journal Circulation.

Previous separate studies have shown that a Mediterranean diet reduces certain risk factors for cardiovascular disease, as does a vegetarian diet; however, this was the first study to compare effects of the two distinct eating patterns

Current study authors said they wanted to evaluate whether switching to a lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet would also be heart-healthy in people who were used to eating both meat and fish. "To best evaluate this issue, we decided to compare a lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet with a Mediterranean diet in the same group of people," said Francesco Sofi, M.D., Ph.D, lead study author and professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Florence and Careggi University Hospital in Italy.

The study included 107 healthy but overweight participants, ages 18-75, who were randomly assigned to follow for three months either a low-calorie vegetarian diet, which included dairy and eggs, or a low-calorie Mediterranean diet for three months. The Mediterranean diet included poultry, fish and some red meat as well as fruits, vegetables, beans and whole grains. After three months, the participants switched diets. Most participants were able to stay on both diets.
• lost about 4 pounds of weight overall; and
• experienced about the same change in body mass index, a measure of weight in relationship to height.

Authors said they did find two differences between the diets that may be noteworthy. The vegetarian diet was more effective at reducing LDL (the "bad") cholesterol, while the Mediterranean diet resulted greater reductions in triglycerides, high levels of which increase the risk for heart attack and stroke.

Still, "the take-home message of our study is that a low-calorie lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet can help patients reduce cardiovascular risk about the same as a low-calorie Mediterranean diet," Sofi said. "People have more than one choice for a heart-healthy diet."

In an editorial accompanying the study, Cheryl A. M. Anderson, Ph.D., M.P.H., M.S., an associate professor of preventive medicine at the University of California, San Diego, in California, wrote that there were similarities between the two diets that may explain the results. Both follow "a healthy dietary pattern rich in fruits and vegetables, legumes [beans], whole grains and nuts; focusing on diet variety, nutrient density and appropriate amount of food; and limiting energy intake from saturated fats."

Anderson, who was not involved in the study, added that promoting both diets by healthcare professionals "offer a possible solution to the ongoing challenges to prevent and manage obesity and cardiovascular diseases."

Study limitations include the fact that participants were at "relatively low" risk of cardiovascular disease. Anderson said future research should compare the diets in patients at higher risk for heart disease and should also explore "whether or not healthful versions of traditional diets around the world that emphasize fresh foods and limit sugars, saturated fats, and sodium can prevent and manage obesity and cardiovascular diseases."

Co-authors are Monica Dinu, MSc.; Giuditta Pagliai, MSc.; Francesca Cesari, MSc., Ph.D.; Anna Maria Gori, MSc.; Alice Sereni, MSc.; Matteo Becatti, MSc., Ph.D.; Claudia Fiorillo, MSc., Ph.D.; Rossella Marcucci, M.D., Ph.D.; and Alessandro Casini, M.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
• Available multimedia located on the right column of the release link: https:/
• After February 26, view the manuscript and editorial online
• For updates and new science from the Circulation journal follow @CircAHA

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations and health insurance providers are available at http://www. .

The American Heart Association is devoted to saving people from heart disease and stroke - the two leading causes of death in the world. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat these diseases. The Dallas-based association is the nation's oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke. To learn more or to get involved, call 1.800.AHA.USA1, visit heart.org or call any of our offices around the country. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Both the lacto-ovo vegetarian diet (Vd) and the Mediterranean diet (Md) were effective in reducing body weight, body fat, and body mass index with no significant differences between them. The release presents these benefits in absolute numbers. However, the Md led to greater reductions in triglyceride levels, while the Vd led to greater reductions in low-density lipoproteins (so called “bad” cholesterol). These were well covered in the news release.
But the latter benefits are changes in surrogate markers measured over just 3 months in people at a low risk for cardiovascular disease. Whether these results translate into meaningful, sustained, and clinically relevant outcomes that actually affect people’s risk for developing heart or vascular disease can not be answered by this small randomized, controlled study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hematology researchers have used a single injection of gene therapy to correct a rare bleeding disorder, factor VII deficiency, in dogs. This success in large animals holds considerable potential for a safe, effective and long-lasting new treatment in humans with the same bleeding disorder.

"Our finding has great clinical relevance for patients with factor VII deficiency," said study leader Paris Margaritis, D. Phil., a hematology researcher at the Raymond G. Perelman Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics (CCMT) at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). "These dogs have the type of mutation found in the majority of patients with this disorder, so this approach could lead to a sustained gene therapy in people."

The Margaritis team collaborated with University of North Carolina (UNC) scientists, led by Tim Nichols, M.D., professor of Medicine and Pathology at the UNC School of Medicine.

Factor VII deficiency is rare, found in about one in 300,000 to one in 500,000 people. Because a gene mutation impairs normal production of a blood clotting factor, patients may suffer excessive bleeding in the central nervous system or GI tract, or after surgery or an injury. Female patients may suffer excessive menstrual bleeding.

Factor VII (FVII) deficiency has a range of severity, with about 40 percent of patients having severe disease. They are most commonly treated with regular infusions of clotting factor. Unlike hemophilia, a better-known bleeding disorder that predominantly affects males, factor VII deficiency strikes males and females equally.

Gene therapy proposed for bleeding disorders involves introducing DNA carrying the code to produce the specific clotting factor lacking in patients. Researchers at CHOP and elsewhere have bioengineered an adeno-associated virus (AAV), which does not cause disease, as a vector to deliver DNA into cells where it can express enough factor to make the blood clot normally. Over the past 15 years, CHOP hematology researchers have performed clinical trials of gene therapy for hemophilia B that have helped define efficacy and dosing levels in humans.

The CCMT at CHOP houses a clinical-grade laboratory that manufactures gene therapy vectors, including the AAV vectors used in the current study. Margaritis, a member of the CHOP group long engaged in hemophilia research, currently leads a laboratory focused on factor VII deficiency as well as hemophilia.

"We developed a unique animal model of this disease after identifying dogs with naturally occurring factor VII deficiency," said Margaritis. "Our investigations enabled us to design the corrective gene to insert into our virus vector in the current study."

The CHOP team collaborated with scientists at UNC who have a long-established colony of dogs for hematology research. Based on previous work by Margaritis, the UNC team identified dogs for this gene therapy study.

Nichols, the director of UNC's Francis Owens Blood Research Laboratory, characterized factor VII deficiency in four individual dogs. Using the AAV vectors supplied by Margaritis, Nichols injected the dogs with varying dosages and monitored their health outcomes and biological markers over several years.

The treated dogs had expressed levels of clotting factor VII that would be therapeutic in humans, with long-term stability. In one dog, the effects persisted nearly three years. Based on kidney function, liver function, and blood measurements in the dogs, the treatment was safe, and did not elicit unwanted immune responses.

The current study sets the stage for clinical trials in humans. This gene therapy may especially benefit young children with severe bleeding from factor VII deficiency, such as patients receiving care in CHOP's hematology program.

"This work is very exciting and promising," said Nichols, who added, "The FVII-deficient dogs tolerated the initial gene therapy infusions very well and have had no adverse side effects over several years of follow up. In other related studies in dogs with hemophilia B, similar positive findings have translated to people with hemophilia B." Both Nichols and Margaritis agreed: "The table is now set to propose clinical trials that would treat people who suffer from FVII deficiency."

The National Institutes of Health (grants HL064190 and HL63098), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Pennsylvania Department of Health supported this study. In addition to his CHOP position, Margaritis is a faculty member at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

"Sustained correction of FVII deficiency in dogs using AAV-mediated expression of zymogen FVII," Blood, published online Dec. 23, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release squeaks by on this. There are no numbers used to quantify, but this excerpt at least touches on the method of measurement and the three-year follow up. “The treated dogs had expressed levels of clotting factor VII that would be therapeutic in humans, with long-term stability. In one dog, the effects persisted nearly three years.”  The release could have explained what a “therapeutic” expression level of clotting factor actually means. A closer look at the paper reveals that a clinically therapeutic level is greater than or equal to 15% of normal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Epclusa to treat adult patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) both with and without cirrhosis (advanced liver disease). For patients with moderate to severe cirrhosis (decompensated cirrhosis), Epclusa is approved for use in combination with the drug ribavirin. Epclusa is a fixed-dose combination tablet containing sofosbuvir, a drug approved in 2013, and velpatasvir, a new drug, and is the first to treat all six major forms of HCV.

“This approval offers a management and treatment option for a wider scope of patients with chronic hepatitis C,” said Edward Cox, M.D., director of the Office of Antimicrobial Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

Hepatitis C is a viral disease that causes inflammation of the liver that can lead to diminished liver function or liver failure. There are at least six distinct HCV genotypes, or strains, which are genetically distinct groups of the virus. Knowing the genotype helps inform treatment recommendations and the duration of treatment. Approximately 75 percent of Americans with HCV have genotype 1; 20-25 percent have genotypes 2 or 3; and a small numbers of patients are infected with genotypes 4, 5 or 6. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, HCV infection becomes chronic in approximately 75 to 85 percent of cases. Patients who suffer from chronic HCV infection over many years may have complications, such as bleeding, jaundice (yellowish eyes or skin), fluid accumulation in the abdomen, infections, liver cancer and death.

The safety and efficacy of Epclusa for 12 weeks was evaluated in three Phase III clinical trials of 1,558 subjects without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis (mild cirrhosis). Results demonstrated that 95–99 percent of patients who received Epclusa had no virus detected in the blood 12 weeks after finishing treatment, suggesting the patients’ infections had been cured. The safety and efficacy of Epclusa was also evaluated in a clinical trial of 267 subjects with decompensated cirrhosis (moderate to severe cirrhosis), of whom 87 subjects received Epclusa in combination with ribavirin for 12 weeks, and 94 percent of these patients had no virus detected in the blood 12 weeks after finishing treatment.

The most common side effects of Epclusa include headache and fatigue. Epclusa and ribavirin combination regimens are contraindicated for patients for whom ribavirin is contraindicated.

Epclusa carries a warning for patients and health care providers that serious slowing of the heart rate (symptomatic bradycardia) and cases requiring pacemaker intervention have been reported when amiodarone is used with sofosbuvir in combination with another HCV direct-acting antiviral. Co-administration of amiodarone with Epclusa is not recommended. Epclusa also carries a warning not to use with certain drugs that may reduce the amount of Epclusa in the blood which could lead to reduced efficacy of Epclusa.

Epclusa was reviewed under the FDA’s priority review program, which provides for an expedited review of drugs that treat serious conditions and, if approved, would provide significant improvement in safety or effectiveness.

Epclusa is manufactured and marketed by Gilead Sciences, Inc., of Foster City, California.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency is also responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release includes results from Phase III clinical trials in about 1,600 patients showing a benefit.
“Results demonstrated that 95–99 percent of patients who received Epclusa had no virus detected in the blood 12 weeks after finishing treatment, suggesting the patients’ infections had been cured.”
The release also notes that after 12 weeks, 94 percent of patients with more advanced disease who received Epclusa in combination with ribavirin showed no virus in their blood.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Nov. 4, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Obese patients who swallowed balloon capsules that helped them eat less lost an average of 15 pounds, roughly two times more weight than patients who just dieted and exercised, researchers report.

The capsule was inflated with gas via a catheter when it reached the stomach. As many as three balloons were placed over three months, and all of the balloons were removed after six months. The balloons made patients feel full, the researchers explained.

In addition to the balloons, patients followed a moderate diet and behavior modification program. Whether the weight loss will last over the long term isn't known, said lead researcher Dr. Aurora Pryor, director of the Bariatric and Metabolic Weight Loss Center at Stony Brook University in New York.

The study lasted a year, but "we don't know what happens after that," Pryor said.

"If they are able to stick to their newfound lifestyle with their diet and exercise program, they could maintain their weight loss," she said. "The long-term results are dependent on patients keeping their motivation to stay with their diet and exercise programs."

The balloon treatment will be available starting in January, but the cost hasn't been announced, Pryor said. The device, called the Obalon Balloon System, was approved in September by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

An advantage of the balloons is that patients have no downtime and can go back to work the same day, the researchers said.

"There is no sedation or recovery time when the balloons are placed, but there is sedation when the balloons are removed, so you wouldn't want to go back to work after that," Pryor added.

Pryor believes balloons are a better option for patients who are candidates for weight loss surgery but don't want surgery. "For people who want to lose some weight but don't feel they are heavy enough for surgery or they're afraid of surgery, this is a really good next step to help them jump start their weight loss," she suggested.

The findings were to be presented Friday at the annual meeting of the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery and the Obesity Society in New Orleans. Research presented at meeting is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

One weight-loss expert expressed some doubts about the findings.

"I still question the efficacy of balloons," said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of obesity surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "While there is potentially easier insertion that does not require sedation, I still doubt after removal there will be weight loss," he said.

Roslin said patients who have other treatments that restrict their ability to eat -- such as bands and bypass operations that reduce the size of the stomach -- often regain lost weight over time. "As time goes on, weight loss will be about lifestyle changes," he said.

The only argument for the balloon is that it starts the lifestyle changes, Roslin said. "It may make it easier to become motivated," he said. "But I believe that few will maintain weight loss two years after any balloon."

For the study, Pryor and her colleagues randomly assigned nearly 400 obese patients to receive a real or sham device. All patients also had 25 minutes of lifestyle therapy every three weeks. After six months, patients with the Obalon balloons had them removed.

During the time patients had the balloons, and for six months after, the researchers monitored their weight loss. The investigators also followed those who had not received the balloon therapy.

People treated with the balloons lost an average of 7 percent of their weight, compared to less than 4 percent for those who received the sham device, the researchers found. Six months after the balloons were removed, nearly 90 percent maintained the weight loss they achieved during treatment, Pryor said.

As for side effects, one patient had a bleeding stomach ulcer while taking high doses of pain pills after a knee replacement. Most patients (91 percent) suffered from stomach cramps and nausea, which nearly 100 percent said were mild or moderate.

The results were also presented at a medical meeting in May.

One health and nutrition expert noted that a balloon does not equal a lifestyle change.

"A gastric balloon may help with weight loss, but will do nothing to improve diet quality and overall health," said Dr. David Katz. He is director of the Yale-Griffin Prevention Research Center in Derby, Conn., and president of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine.

The role for such technology-based approaches to weight control should be a small one, he said.

"Such devices may be alternatives to bariatric surgery in some cases. But they should not distract us from the far better solution at the population level: practices, programs and policies that make eating well and being active a cultural norm," Katz said.

Visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for more on obesity.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantified benefits by stating:
Obese patients who swallowed balloon capsules that helped them eat less lost an average of 15 pounds, roughly two times more weight than patients who just dieted and exercised, researchers report.
and:
People treated with the balloons lost an average of 7 percent of their weight, compared to less than 4 percent for those who received the sham device, the researchers found. Six months after the balloons were removed, nearly 90 percent maintained the weight loss they achieved during treatment, Pryor said.
In addition to reporting the weight loss results announced by researchers and that, unlike other balloons, this device doesn’t require patients to be sedated during placement, the story adds important context by including comments from independent sources who are skeptical that many patients will maintain their lower weight long after the device is removed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
January 30, 2018 - For older women undergoing mastectomy for breast cancer, direct-to-implant (DTI) breast reconstruction provides good outcomes in a single-step procedure, while avoiding some of the inconvenience and risks of staged approaches to breast reconstruction, reports a study in the February issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery®, the official medical journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS).

"The DTI approach is a powerful tool for breast reconstruction in elderly patients," comments ASPS Member Surgeon Andrea Moreira, MD, of the Cleveland Clinic. The researchers believe the DTI technique may expand the options for older women, who are less likely to undergo breast reconstruction.

Good Results with DTI Breast Reconstruction in Women over 65

Direct-to-implant breast reconstruction has emerged as a single-stage approach to immediate breast reconstruction after mastectomy. So far, however, most studies of DTI have focused on younger women.

"Half of all breast cancers occur in women over 65, yet only four to 14 percent of these women undergo reconstruction," Dr. Moreira and coauthors write. Most studies of breast reconstruction in older women have focused on multiple-step techniques such as tissue expander implant (TEI) reconstruction.

The researchers identified women over age 65 who underwent DTI reconstruction at the Cleveland Clinic between 2012 and 2015. They identified a total of 24 breasts reconstructed by DTI in 19 patients, all with at least 30 days' follow-up and most with one year of follow-up

Patient characteristics and outcomes were compared to those of 109 breasts with TEI reconstruction in 98 patients. The women undergoing DTI reconstruction were older (73.5 versus 69.2 years) and had a higher body mass index, compared to the TEI group.

Both DTI and TEI were safe and effective options for breast reconstruction. Complication rates were similar between groups, including blood and fluid collections (hematoma and seroma), infection, unplanned surgery, and failed reconstruction.

However, DTI had some important advantages. Women in the DTI group were less likely to be readmitted to the hospital and spent fewer total days in the hospital. In the year after surgery was completed, women in the DTI group made an average of 6.5 office visits, compared to about 12 visits in the TEI group.

The DTI group also spent fewer days with a surgical drain in place: average about 13 days, compared to 23 days in the and had fewer total days in the hospital. That's an important consideration, as drains require antibiotic treatment to prevent infection, in addition to causing discomfort for the patient.

The authors note some important limitations of their study--particularly the fact that it was a review study of one hospital's experience with a relatively new procedure. Dr. Moreira and colleagues write, "These reported cases include our learning curve patients as we familiarized ourselves with appropriate patient selection and surgical technique."

The researchers emphasize that DTI isn't an option for every patient, depending on breast shape and other factors. Despite these limitations, their experience suggests that complications of the DTI approach in older women are similar to those of the more commonly used TEI technique. Dr. Moreira adds, "In appropriately selected cases, DTI reconstruction is a viable alternative to staged techniques requiring multiple surgeries."

Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® is published by Wolters Kluwer.

Click here to read "Direct-to-Implant Breast Reconstruction in Women Older than 65 Years: A Retrospective Analysis of Complication Rate and Overall Outcomes."

For more than 70 years, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® (http://www. ) has been the one consistently excellent reference for every specialist who uses plastic surgery techniques or works in conjunction with a plastic surgeon. The official journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® brings subscribers up-to-the-minute reports on the latest techniques and follow-up for all areas of plastic and reconstructive surgery, including breast reconstruction, experimental studies, maxillofacial reconstruction, hand and microsurgery, burn repair and cosmetic surgery, as well as news on medico-legal issues.

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons is the largest organization of board-certified plastic surgeons in the world. Representing more than 7,000 physician members, the society is recognized as a leading authority and information source on cosmetic and reconstructive plastic surgery. ASPS comprises more than 94 percent of all board-certified plastic surgeons in the United States. Founded in 1931, the society represents physicians certified by The American Board of Plastic Surgery or The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.

Wolters Kluwer N.V. (AEX: WKL) is a global leader in information services and solutions for professionals in the health, tax and accounting, risk and compliance, finance and legal sectors. We help our customers make critical decisions every day by providing expert solutions that combine deep domain knowledge with specialized technology and services.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2016 annual revenues of €4.3 billion. The company, headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands, serves customers in over 180 countries, maintains operations in over 40 countries and employs 19,000 people worldwide.

Wolters Kluwer Health is a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry. For more information about our products and the organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.

For more information about Wolters Kluwer's solutions and organization, visit http://www. , follow us on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Multiple follow-up benefits (measured at 30 days and 1 year) are cited, with the DTI group having fewer readmissions, fewer days with a drain in place (13 vs 23), fewer days in hospital after the procedure, and fewer follow-up office visits (6.5 office visits vs 12 visits for the non-DTI group.)
The news release highlights the following benefit: “avoiding some of the inconvenience and risks of staged approaches to breast construction.” So, It would have been helpful to clarify for readers what the staged approach with tissue expanders involves; mainly inserting an inflatable expander in the space left by the removed breast, gradually filling the expander with saline over weeks or months, and eventually placing an implant once the area can safely and comfortably accommodate it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At workshops and conferences across the country, students, counselors and psychologists in private practice throng lectures on mindfulness. The National Institutes of Health is financing more than 50 studies testing mindfulness techniques, up from 3 in 2000, to help relieve stress, soothe addictive cravings, improve attention, lift despair and reduce hot flashes.

Some proponents say Buddha’s arrival in psychotherapy signals a broader opening in the culture at large — a way to access deeper healing, a hidden path revealed.

Yet so far, the evidence that mindfulness meditation helps relieve psychiatric symptoms is thin, and in some cases, it may make people worse, some studies suggest. Many researchers now worry that the enthusiasm for Buddhist practice will run so far ahead of the science that this promising psychological tool could turn into another fad.

“I’m very open to the possibility that this approach could be effective, and it certainly should be studied,” said Scott Lilienfeld, a psychology professor at Emory. “What concerns me is the hype, the talk about changing the world, this allure of the guru that the field of psychotherapy has a tendency to cultivate.”

Buddhist meditation came to psychotherapy from mainstream academic medicine. In the 1970s, a graduate student in molecular biology, Jon Kabat-Zinn, intrigued by Buddhist ideas, adapted a version of its meditative practice that could be easily learned and studied. It was by design a secular version, extracted like a gemstone from the many-layered foundation of Buddhist teaching, which has sprouted a wide variety of sects and spiritual practices and attracted 350 million adherents worldwide.

In transcendental meditation and other types of meditation, practitioners seek to transcend or “lose” themselves. The goal of mindfulness meditation was different, to foster an awareness of every sensation as it unfolds in the moment.

Dr. Kabat-Zinn taught the practice to people suffering from chronic pain at the University of Massachusetts medical school. In the 1980s he published a series of studies demonstrating that two-hour courses, given once a week for eight weeks, reduced chronic pain more effectively than treatment as usual.

Word spread, discreetly at first. “I think that back then, other researchers had to be very careful when they talked about this, because they didn’t want to be seen as New Age weirdos,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn, now a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Massachusetts, said in an interview. “So they didn’t call it mindfulness or meditation. “After a while, we put enough studies out there that people became more comfortable with it.”

One person who noticed early on was Marsha Linehan, a psychologist at the University of Washington who was trying to treat deeply troubled patients with histories of suicidal behavior. “Trying to treat these patients with some change-based behavior therapy just made them worse, not better,” Dr. Linehan said in an interview. “With the really hard stuff, you need something else, something that allows people to tolerate these very strong emotions.”

In the 1990s, Dr. Linehan published a series of studies finding that a therapy that incorporated Zen Buddhist mindfulness, “radical acceptance,” practiced by therapist and patient significantly cut the risk of hospitalization and suicide attempts in the high-risk patients.

Finally, in 2000, a group of researchers including Dr. Segal in Toronto, J. Mark G. Williams at the University of Wales and John D. Teasdale at the Medical Research Council in England published a study that found that eight weekly sessions of mindfulness halved the rate of relapse in people with three or more episodes of depression.

With Dr. Kabat-Zinn, they wrote a popular book, “The Mindful Way Through Depression.” Psychotherapists’ curiosity about mindfulness, once tentative, turned into “this feeding frenzy, of sorts, that we have going on now,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn said.

Mindfulness meditation is easy to describe. Sit in a comfortable position, eyes closed, preferably with the back upright and unsupported. Relax and take note of body sensations, sounds and moods. Notice them without judgment. Let the mind settle into the rhythm of breathing. If it wanders (and it will), gently redirect attention to the breath. Stay with it for at least 10 minutes.

After mastering control of attention, some therapists say, a person can turn, mentally, to face a threatening or troubling thought — about, say, a strained relationship with a parent — and learn simply to endure the anger or sadness and let it pass, without lapsing into rumination or trying to change the feeling, a move that often backfires.

One woman, a doctor who had been in therapy for years to manage bouts of disabling anxiety, recently began seeing Gaea Logan, a therapist in Austin, Tex., who incorporates mindfulness meditation into her practice. This patient had plenty to worry about, including a mentally ill child, a divorce and what she described as a “harsh internal voice,” Ms. Logan said.

After practicing mindfulness meditation, she continued to feel anxious at times but told Ms. Logan, “I can stop and observe my feelings and thoughts and have compassion for myself.”

Steven Hayes, a psychologist at the University of Nevada at Reno, has developed a talk therapy called Acceptance Commitment Therapy, or ACT, based on a similar, Buddha-like effort to move beyond language to change fundamental psychological processes.

“It’s a shift from having our mental health defined by the content of our thoughts,” Dr. Hayes said, “to having it defined by our relationship to that content — and changing that relationship by sitting with, noticing and becoming disentangled from our definition of ourselves.”

For all these hopeful signs, the science behind mindfulness is in its infancy. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which researches health practices, last year published a comprehensive review of meditation studies, including T.M., Zen and mindfulness practice, for a wide variety of physical and mental problems. The study found that over all, the research was too sketchy to draw conclusions.

A recent review by Canadian researchers, focusing specifically on mindfulness meditation, concluded that it did “not have a reliable effect on depression and anxiety.”

Therapists who incorporate mindfulness practices do not agree when the meditation is most useful, either. Some say Buddhist meditation is most useful for patients with moderate emotional problems. Others, like Dr. Linehan, insist that patients in severe mental distress are the best candidates for mindfulness.

A case in point is mindfulness-based therapy to prevent a relapse into depression. The treatment significantly reduced the risk of relapse in people who have had three or more episodes of depression. But it may have had the opposite effect on people who had one or two previous episodes, two studies suggest.

The mindfulness treatment “may be contraindicated for this group of patients,” S. Helen Ma and Dr. Teasdale of the Medical Research Council concluded in a 2004 study of the therapy.

Since mindfulness meditation may have different effects on different mental struggles, the challenge for its proponents will be to specify where it is most effective — and soon, given how popular the practice is becoming.

The question, said Linda Barnes, an associate professor of family medicine and pediatrics at the Boston University School of Medicine, is not whether mindfulness meditation will become a sophisticated therapeutic technique or lapse into self-help cliché.

“The answer to that question is yes to both,” Dr. Barnes said.

The real issue, most researchers agree, is whether the science will keep pace and help people distinguish the mindful variety from the mindless.

A variety of meditative practices have been studied by Western researchers for their effects on mental and physical health.

An active exercise, sometimes called moving meditation, involving extremely slow, continuous movement and extreme concentration. The movements are to balance the vital energy of the body but have no religious significance.

Studies are mixed, some finding it can reduce blood pressure in patients, and others finding no effect. There is some evidence that it can help elderly people improve balance.

Meditators sit comfortably, eyes closed, and breathe naturally. They repeat and concentrate on the mantra, a word or sound chosen by the instructor to achieve state of deep, transcendent absorption. Practitioners “lose” themselves, untouched by day-to-day concerns. Studies suggest it can reduce blood pressure in some patients.

Practitioners find a comfortable position, close the eyes and focus first on breathing, passively observing it. If a stray thought or emotion enters the mind, they allow it to pass and return attention to the breath. The aim is to achieve focused awareness on what is happening moment to moment.

Studies find that it can help manage chronic pain. The findings are mixed on substance abuse. Two trials suggest that it can cut the rate of relapse in people who have had three or more bouts of depression.

Enhanced awareness through breathing techniques and specific postures. Schools vary widely, aiming to achieve total absorption in the present and a release from ordinary thoughts. Studies are mixed, but evidence shows it can reduce stress.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story notes the evidence of potential benefit for some patients, and a lack of evidence for use  of mindfulness mediation with certain populations.  However, benefit from psychotherapy is difficult to quantify as endpoints are not always standardized. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Peramivir is given intravenously, making it usable by hospitalized patients who are too ill to take two approved flu drugs that work against the virus in similar ways — Tamiflu by Roche, which is typically given as a pill, or Relenza from GlaxoSmithKline, which is inhaled.

Late Thursday, the government announced orders for intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, which are much cheaper — a development that could force shares of BioCryst to give up some of their gains on Friday.

Peramivir, still being tested in clinical trials, is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for general use. But on Oct. 23, the F.D.A. granted authority for the drug to be used in emergencies for patients hospitalized with H1N1 flu who cannot take or do not benefit from Tamiflu or Relenza.

Before that, peramivir had been available only through a more cumbersome “compassionate use” procedure. Of the 32 patients who received the drug that way, 29 were still alive, BioCryst said in late October.

Although there are still questions about peramivir’s true effectiveness, some critics say the government moved too slowly to make the drug available, and that even now, access is too restricted. For each patient, doctors must call an 800 number or fill out a form on a Web site run by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The drug is then sent overnight from a central stockpile.

“If you have a critically ill patient, to delay therapy, it’s just incomprehensible to me,” said Dr. Richard Whitley, a professor at the University of Alabama and the president of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. He said the drug should be distributed so that hospitals could have it in stock.

But Dr. Nicole Lurie, assistant secretary for preparedness and response at the Department of Health and Human Services, said the limited supplies made more general distribution impossible. Some doctors said they were satisfied with the existing system.

“I think it’s fairly accessible,” said Dr. Thomas M. File Jr., chief of infectious diseases at Summa Health System in Akron, Ohio, who has treated a pregnant woman with peramivir. Some of the push to make the drug more widely available is coming from investors in BioCryst, including Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, the prominent Silicon Valley venture capital firm. John Doerr, the company’s technology guru, was in Washington this week making the case for greater availability of peramivir, according to a person who met with him there.

Other investors — both supporters of BioCryst stock and those betting the price will fall — have commented at government meetings on flu preparations, often without revealing their financial interests.

Anecdotes like Ms. Gurno’s aside, the efficacy of peramivir is still in question, according to the government. While some clinical trials showed the drug had an effect in resolving flu symptoms, others did not show statistically significant differences between peramivir and either a placebo or Tamiflu.

The question for both investors and federal authorities is how much more of the drug BioCryst can sell. So far, the order has been far less than some investors had hoped, though the price of the order announced Thursday was higher than expected.

Dr. Lurie, the federal official, said there had been 237 requests to use the drug since the emergency use authorization was granted nearly two weeks ago. Many doctors want to provide the treatment for 10 days instead of the recommended 5, she said, so the 10,000 courses the government ordered might actually treat as few as 5,000 patients.

The government has the right to buy up to 30,000 more treatment courses at the same price.

BioCryst says it will have perhaps 40,000 more treatment courses available within a few weeks, and a total of 120,000 by the end of the year. It also says it has signed up partners to try to win sales in Brazil, Mexico, Israel and China.

“We’re getting a lot of interest from countries outside the United States,” Jon P. Stonehouse, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview Thursday.

Shionogi, a Japanese drug company with licensing rights from BioCryst, ran its own clinical trials and this week applied for approval to sell the drug in Japan as a treatment for everyday flu, in competition with Tamiflu.

But in the United States, BioCryst plans to try to win approval for treatment only of hospitalized patients. It is now beginning phase 3 trials — the last stage before seeking F.D.A. approval.

Virtually all the money to develop the drug comes from $180 million in grants from the Department of Health and Human Services. Yet the company gets to keep as profit anything it makes from selling the drug to the federal government or to other governments. Mr. Stonehouse defended the price of the drug, saying it would save the health system money by getting patients out of intensive care earlier. “The cost of being in the I.C.U. and on a ventilator is extremely high,” he said.

But peramivir will soon have competition. The federal government said late Thursday that it had also ordered 10,000 treatment courses each of intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, with options to buy 30,000 more courses of each.

Those drugs could not be used, however, until they received emergency use authorizations from the F.D.A.

The government is paying an average of only $450 a course for those other drugs — only one-fifth of what it is paying for peramivir.

Right now, Dr. Lurie said, peramivir is the only drug that can be used intravenously so the government had to pay a high price. “I would say that one of the things that happens in the market when you have competition is that the price drops.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 


 
The story points out that the benefits of peramivir have yet to be proven and that it is being offered only because some patients are not helped by approved drugs or are they are so sick they need a drug that can be given intravenously. The approved antiviral drugs are currently available only in pill or inhaled form.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Older people who use olive oil in their cooking and on their salads may have a lower risk of suffering a stroke, researchers reported Wednesday.

In a study that followed older French adults for five years, researchers found that those who regularly used olive oil were 41 percent less likely to have a stroke than those who never used the oil.

The findings, reported in the journal Neurology, hint that the well-known connection between olive oil and heart disease might extend to stroke as well. Olive oil is a key ingredient in the so-called Mediterranean diet. And some clinical trials have suggested that the diet helps control risk factors for heart disease, like high blood pressure, abdominal obesity and elevated levels of “bad” LDL cholesterol.

High olive oil intake is also linked to a lower risk of heart attack, and a longer lifespan among heart attack survivors. These latest findings support the general advice that people replace dubious dietary fats — namely, saturated fats and “trans” fats — with olive oil and other unsaturated fats, according to an expert not involved in the study. But he also stressed that the study does not prove that olive oil, per se, helps prevent strokes.

“We need to remember that this is an observational study,” said Dr. Nikolaos Scarmeas, a neurologist at Columbia University Medical Center in New York who wrote an editorial published with the study.

The study found a correlation between people’s olive oil use and their stroke risk, he told Reuters Health — but that doesn’t necessarily translate into cause-and-effect.

“People who use a lot of olive oil may be very different from people who don’t,” Scarmeas said.

Olive oil users may, for example, have higher incomes, eat better overall or exercise more often than people who never use the oil. The researchers on the new study, led by Cécilia Samieri of the French national research institute INSERM, tried to account for those differences. And after they did, olive oil was still linked to a lower stroke risk.

But it’s impossible to fully account for all those variables, Scarmeas noted. What’s needed, he said, are clinical trials where people are randomly assigned to use olive oil or not, then followed over time to see who suffers a stroke. Such clinical trials are considered the “gold standard” of medical evidence.

The current study included 7,625 French adults age 65 and older who reported on their diets and other lifestyle factors. People who said they used olive oil for both cooking and as a dressing were considered “intensive users.”

Over the next five to six years, those intensive users suffered strokes at a rate of 0.3 percent per year. That compared with just over 0.5 percent among non-users, and 0.4 percent among moderate users.

When the researchers factored in other diet habits, exercise levels and major risk factors for stroke — like high blood pressure and diabetes — heavy olive oil use was tied to 41 percent reduction in the odds of stroke.

Samieri’s team also took blood samples from another 1,245 older adults, measuring their levels of oleic acid — a monounsaturated fat that accounts for most of the fatty acids in olive oil. The one-third of participants with the highest oleic acid levels were 73 percent less likely to suffer a stroke than the one-third with the lowest levels.

The findings, according to Scarmeas, argue for more research into olive oil’s potential benefits against not only heart disease, but stroke and other neurological diseases as well.

For now, he suggested that people choose olive oil and other unsaturated fats over saturated fats (found largely in meat and dairy) and trans fats (found in some processed foods, like crackers, cookies and chips).

“It’s better to rely on this type of fat for your overall health,” Scarmeas said.

That said, no single food is consumed in isolation, he points out in his editorial. Olive oil is one part of the Mediterranean diet that has been tied to heart benefits. The diet also boasts plenty of fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, fish and moderate amounts of red wine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This story did the best job of the three stories we reviewed in quantifying the potential benefits observed in the study.
“Over the next five to six years, those intensive users suffered strokes at a rate of 0.3 percent per year. That compared with just over 0.5 percent among non-users, and 0.4 percent among moderate users.
When the researchers factored in other diet habits, exercise levels and major risk factors for stroke — like high blood pressure and diabetes — heavy olive oil use was tied to 41 percent reduction in the odds of stroke.”
There are better ways to try to communicate numbers of less than one percent.  But we applaud the detail provided.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A swollen lymph node on the neck was the only symptom Karen Anderson noticed.

The 47-year-old pre-school teacher from Eugene was stunned when her biopsy came back positive for melanoma –the most life-threatening form of skin cancer. Malignant cells had spread throughout her body.

Surgeons removed affected lymph nodes but within months tumors appeared in her liver, breast, skull and other lymph nodes. "My oncologist said this is going to kill you and you need to think about preparing for that," Anderson says.

Two years ago, she gained access to an experimental immune-enhancing treatment in clinical trials at Providence Cancer Center in Portland. Called ipilimumab, it unleashes an all-out immune system attack on cancer cells. At first, the injections caused only side-effects: widespread itching, fatigue, and diarrhea. Worse, Anderson says, "I could feel the tumors getting bigger. They felt hot to me."

Then after several months the tumors began to shrink. After one year, the once palpable tumors were no longer detectable in diagnostic scans. While far from a cure, the treatment is the first to improve survival in people with melanoma that has spread, or metastasized, says Dr. Walter Urba, director of cancer research at the Providence Cancer Center. Urba is a co-author of the

on ipilimumab published in the New England Journal of Medicine Saturday.

Success in a cancer as deadly and difficult to treat as advanced melanoma is raising hopes that the treatment may also prove useful in staving off other tumors, including lung and prostate cancer. Drug companies are racing to develop competing versions of the immune-enhancing therapy, an antibody produced through genetic engineering.

"I would not be here today without it," says Anderson, who is undergoing a second round of treatment for resurgent tumors. "It's given me time with my kids, my husband, my family – and it's been quality time."

Melanoma is a rare skin cancer, but accounts for most of the 66,000 annual deaths from skin cancer worldwide. If caught early, before cancer cells break off and spread, surgery can stop melanoma. But most people diagnosed after melanoma has metastasized die within a year.

"For years and years, we've been looking for an effective therapy," Urba says.

Ipilimumab, nicknamed Ippy, is one of the first antibody-based therapies that use the body's immune defenses to destroy cancer cells. The antibodies bind to a specific protein studding the surface of T cells, immune system cells that seek and destroy virus-infected and cancerous cells. The surface protein works like a switch, inactivating T cells after a few days to prevent the immune system from running amok and destroying healthy tissue. The antibodies temporarily jam the switch, allowing T cells to continue attacking cancer tissue for weeks or months – for as long as patients continue to receive injections of the engineered antibody.

More than 600 melanoma patients took part in the ipilimumab clinical trial at 125 cancer centers in 13 countries. All patients had inoperable cancers with widespread tumors after conventional treatment. Some patients received ipilimumab alone, others it combined with a cancer vaccine called gp100, and a third group received only the cancer vaccine.

Ipilimumab appeared to double survival compared with the gp100 vaccine alone. After one year, nearly half of patients given ipilimumab alone or in combination remained alive, compared with one quarter of patients given only the vaccine. After two years, 24 percent of patients treated with ipilimumab were alive, 22 percent of patients treated with the combination, while survival dropped to 14 percent among patients treated with the vaccine alone.

"Some of the people are now out 44 months and still remain free of disease," Urba says.

Serious side effects also became clear. Nearly two-thirds of patients on ipilimumab experienced side effects caused by over-active immunity, such as severe itching, intestinal irritation and diarrhea. Researchers linked 14 deaths to the study drugs, half caused by immune-system reactions.

Still, the study stands as "a major landmark in cancer immunotherapy," says Dr. Bernard Fox, president of the International Society for Biological Therapy of Cancer. He says the results highlight the potential for using the same approach to treat other cancers. Already, early studies in patients with lung cancer and prostate cancer have produced positive, though inconclusive results.

"There is no reason it can't be applied to any of the common tumor types," Urba says. "They all have antigens on their surface that T cells can recognize." Ongoing trials are testing ipilimumab with other cancer drugs, in different doses and against different cancers.

Drug company Bristol-Myers Squibb told investors the drug could gain regulatory approval as early as next year and become available to cancer patients in 2012. Ipilimumab was developed by Medarex, a New Jersey company owned by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Other drug companies are at work on competing versions of the immune-enhancing antibody therapy.

For now, federal regulators have authorized

to people who have serious or immediately life-threatening, inoperable melanoma that has spread, who have no alternative treatment options, and whose physicians believe the drug is appropriate. Providence Cancer Center is the only site in Oregon offering compassionate use of the drug. The Northwest's other participating centers are the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance and Swedish Cancer Institute in Seattle, Providence Cancer Center in Spokane, and Multicare Health System in Tacoma.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: good job providing absolute benefit data from the trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Folsom, Calif., (Nov. 19, 2015) - A new study published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition found that consuming tree nuts, such as walnuts, may lower the risk of cardiovascular disease.1 After conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis of 61 controlled trials, one of the authors, Michael Falk, PhD, Life Sciences Research Organization, found that consuming tree nuts lowers total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, and ApoB, the primary protein found in LDL cholesterol. These are key factors that are used to evaluate a person's risk of cardiovascular disease. Walnuts were investigated in 21 of the 61 trials, more than any other nut reviewed in this study.

"Our study results further support the growing body of research that tree nuts, such as walnuts, can reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases," said Dr. Falk. "Tree nuts contain important nutrients such as unsaturated fats, protein, vitamins and minerals. Walnuts are the only nut that provide a significant amount (2.5 grams per one ounce serving) of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), the plant-based form of omega-3s."

Beyond finding that tree nuts lower total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cholesterol and ApoB, researchers also found that consuming at least two servings (two ounces) per day of tree nuts, such as walnuts, has stronger effects on total cholesterol and LDL. Additionally, results showed that tree nut consumption may be particularly important for lowering the risk of heart disease in individuals with type 2 diabetes.

Of 1,301 articles surveyed, 61 trials met eligibility criteria for this systematic review and meta-analysis, totaling 2,582 unique participants. Trials directly provided nuts to the intervention group rather than relying solely on dietary advice to consume nuts. The dose of nuts varied from 5 to 100g/day and most participants followed their typical diet.

More than two decades of research has shown that walnuts may help lower cardiovascular risk factors by decreasing LDL (bad) cholesterol by 9-16%2 and diastolic blood pressure by 2-3 mmHg2, as well as reducing total cholesterol2,3,4, raising HDL cholesterol2,3, reducing inflammation as measured by C-reactive protein5, and improving arterial function2. These factors are major contributors to heart disease risk, and reducing them is a critical step toward a healthier heart. In addition to providing omega-3s, walnuts also deliver a convenient source of fiber (2 grams per ounce) and protein (4 grams per ounce).

Co-authors with Dr. Falk are Liana C. Del Gobbo, PhD, Robin Feldman, MBA, Kara Lewis, PhD, and Dariush Mozaffarian, MD, PhD.

This study was supported in part by funds from The International Tree Nut Council Nutrition Research and Education Foundation.

The California Walnut Commission, established in 1987, is funded by mandatory assessments of the growers. The Commission is an agency of the State of California that works in concurrence with the Secretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA). The CWC is mainly involved in health research and export market development activities. For more industry information, health research and recipe ideas, visit http://www. .

The California Walnut Commission (CWC) prohibits discrimination in all programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance programs. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact the CWC offices at (916) 922-5888. To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call 800-795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). CWC is an equal opportunity employer and provider.

The California Walnut Commission offices are located at 101 Parkshore Dr., Ste. #250, Folsom, CA 95630
• Del Gobbo, L., Falk, M.C., Feldman, R., Lewis, K., Mozaffarian, D. Effects of tree nuts on blood lipids, apolipoproteins, and blood pressure: systematic review, meta-analysis and dose-response of 61 controlled intervention trials. Am J Clin Nutr.2015; doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.110965.
• Kris-Etherton P. Walnuts decrease risk of cardiovascular disease: a summary of efficacy and biologic mechanisms. J Nutr. 2014; 10.39:2S-8S.
• Sabaté J, Fraser GE, Burke K, Knutsen SF, Bennett H, Lindsted KD. Effects of walnuts on serum lipid levels and blood pressure in normal men.N Engl J Med. 1993; 328:603-7.
• Banel HK, Hu FB. Effects of walnut consumption on blood lipids and other cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Am J ClinNutr. 2009 Jul;90(1):56-63.
• Zhao G, Etherton TD, Martin KR, et al. Dietary alpha-linolenic acid reduces inflammatory and lipid cardiovascular risk factors in hypercholesterolemic men and women. J Nutr 2004; 134: 2991-2997.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: While in most cases the release carefully states that the study analysis included “tree nuts, such as walnuts” without claiming the focus of the research was walnuts alone, in one paragraph the release says that decades of research have shown that walnuts can help reduce cardiovascular disease risk by decreasing LDL (bad) cholesterol by 9 to 16% and diastolic blood pressure by 2 to 3 mmHg.
But according to the study:
“Conclusions: Tree nut intake lowers total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, ApoB, and triglycerides. The major determinant of cholesterol lowering appears to be nut dose rather than nut type. Our findings also highlight the need for investigation of possible stronger effects at high nut doses and among diabetic populations.”
The release could have done a better job giving and explaining absolute risk reduction for the cholesterol findings. From the study: Of 2,582 volunteers involved in one of 61 studies, lowered total cholesterol was −4.7 mg/dL; 95% CI: −5.3, −4.0 mg/dL.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ILC 2017: The study evaluated the use of a direct-acting antiviral treatment in children aged 6 to 11, for whom the standard of care has been pegylated interferon plus ribavirin

April 21, 2017, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: A study presented today that evaluated an investigational dosage of once-daily ledipasvir 45 mg/sofosbuvir 200 mg (LDV/SOF) in children aged six to 11 years infected with the Hepatitis C virus (HCV), found that 99% of children (n=89/90) had undetectable levels of HCV-RNA 12 weeks after treatment. The study, presented at The International Liver Congress™ 2017 in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, also showed that the fixed-dose combination of LDV/SOF was well-tolerated, and no patients experienced a serious adverse event considered related to the study drug.

Around 180 million people globally have chronic HCV infection,1 including approximately 15 million people in the EU.2 The prevalence of HCV infection in children varies from 0.05%-0.36% in the United States and Europe and up to 1.8%-5.8% in some developing countries.3 While direct-acting antivirals have been used to treat and cure adult patients with HCV,4-7 until now children have been mainly treated for 24 to 48 weeks with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (RBV), an older treatment which causes severe side effects.8

"Direct-acting antivirals have transformed the treatment of adults with chronic HCV, however, studies of these new therapies in children are required," said Dr Karen Murray, University of Washington School of Medicine and Seattle Children's, Seattle, United States, and lead author of the study. "These data establish the use of the oral direct-acting antivirals as an important treatment option in HCV-infected children aged six to 11 years old."

This ongoing, open-label study enrolled 90 children aged between six and 11 years with chronic HCV, mostly genotype 1 (n=86). Children with HCV genotype 1 infection received 12 weeks of treatment (n=85) or 24 weeks of treatment if they had cirrhosis and failed prior treatment with pegylated interferon plus RBV (n=1); genotype 3 patients received LDV/SOF plus RBV for 24 weeks (n=2); genotype 4 patients received LDV/SOF for 12 weeks (n=2). Most children were male (59%), white (79%), treatment naïve (80%), and vertically infected (97%). Of the study population, 89/90 achieved a sustained virologic response 12 weeks after treatment (SVR12); one treatment-naïve genotype 1 patient with cirrhosis relapsed. No children discontinued the study due to side effects or had a severe or life-threatening adverse event related to the study drug. The most common side effects reported in 10% or more of patients were headache, fever, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, cough, fatigue, sore throat and nausea.

"This study is a breakthrough for the management of children aged six to 11 years old with Hepatitis C, demonstrating that the new DAA regimen is highly efficacious and, more importantly, safe in this group of HCV-infected children", said Prof Frank Tacke, University Hospital Aachen, Germany, and EASL Governing Board Member.

This annual congress is the biggest event in the EASL calendar, attracting scientific and medical experts from around the world to learn about the latest in liver research. Attending specialists present, share, debate and conclude on the latest science and research in hepatology, working to enhance the treatment and management of liver disease in clinical practice. This year, the congress is expected to attract approximately 10,000 delegates from all corners of the globe. The International Liver Congress™ 2017 will take place from April 19 - 23, at the RAI Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

About The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL)

Since its foundation in 1966, this not-for-profit organisation has grown to over 4,000 members from all over the world, including many of the leading hepatologists in Europe and beyond. EASL is the leading liver association in Europe, having evolved into a major European Association with international influence, with an impressive track record in promoting research in liver disease, supporting wider education and promoting changes in European liver policy.

For more information, please contact the ILC Press Office at:

Session title: Parallel session: Advances in the treatment of HCV 

Time, date and location of session: 16:00 - 18:00, Friday 21 April, Hall 5 

Presenter: Karen Murray, United States of America 

Abstract: Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir ± ribavirin for 12 or 24 weeks is safe and effective in children 6-11 years old with chronic hepatitis C infection (PS101), 17:30 - 17:45

1 EASL Recommendation on Treatment of Hepatitis C 2016. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

2 World Health Organization. Global Alert and Response - Hepatitis C. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

3 Pawlowska M, Malgorzata et al. What's new in hepatitis C virus infections in children? WJG. 2015;21(38):10783-10789.

4 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for untreated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1889-98.

5 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for previously treated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1483-93.

6 Kowdley KV, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 8 or 12 weeks for chronic HCV without cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1879-88.

7 Sulkowski MS, et al. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir for previously treated or untreated chronic HCV infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 16;370(3):211-21.

8 Jara P, Hierro L. Treatment of Hepatitis C in children. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;4(1):51-61.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that 99 percent, or 89 out of 90, children treated with the ledipasvir/sofosbuvir combination had undetectable levels of hepatitis C virus 12 weeks after treatment.
We do caution that sustained virological response (SVR) and the reduction in viral load, which is what this study measured, may or may not reflect outcomes that people care about. As discussed in another review on a different hepatitis C drug announcement, “Patients care most about conditions that affect them and not how many virus particles are in their blood.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alcoholics see hope in new pill Migraine drug may curb drinking but comes with some side effects

CHICAGO — A migraine pill seems to help alcoholics taper off their drinking without detox treatment, researchers report, offering a potential option for a hard-to-treat problem.

The drug, Topamax, works in a different way than three other medications already approved for treating alcoholism.

Experts said the drug is likely to appeal to heavy drinkers who would rather seek help from their own doctors, rather than enter a rehab clinic to dry out. The drug costs at least $350 a month, plus the price of doctor's visits.

It's unclear whether the findings will make a dent in an addiction that affects millions of Americans.

Addiction specialists not involved in the study said the findings are promising, although side effects such as trouble concentrating, tingling and itching caused about one in five people to drop out of the study. Drowsiness and dizziness are also problems.

"The size of the treatment effect is larger than in most of the other medications we've seen," said Dr. Mark Willenbring of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. "And all the drinking variables changed in the right direction."

The study, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, was funded by the maker of the drug, Johnson & Johnson Inc.'s Ortho-McNeil Neurologics.

The study followed 371 heavy drinkers for 14 weeks. About half were randomly assigned to take Topamax, also called topiramate, in gradually increasing doses. The others took dummy pills.

All volunteers were encouraged — but not required — to stop drinking.

At the start of the study, they drank, on average, 11 standard drinks daily. That's about two six-packs of beer each day, or two bottles of wine, or a pint of hard liquor.

By the end of the study, 27 of the 183 people, or 15 percent, who took Topamax had quit drinking entirely for seven weeks or more. That compared to six out of 188, or 3 percent, in the placebo group.

Others cut back. The Topamax group cut back to six drinks a day, on average, assuming everyone who dropped out of the study relapsed into heavy drinking. That compared to seven drinks a day for the placebo group.

"You can come in drinking a bottle of scotch a day and get treatment without detox," said Dr. Bankole Johnson of the University of Virginia, who led the study, which was conducted at 17 U.S. sites from 2004-2006.

It's unclear how many relapsed after quitting the pill.

Tom Wolfe, 44, a carpenter from Earlysville, Va., said he felt "a little light-headed" at first until he got used to the drug. "It's been a miracle to me," Wolfe said.

The drug works by inhibiting dopamine, the brain's "feel-good" neurotransmitters that are involved in all addictions, said Stephen Dewey, a neuroscientist at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provided some idea of the magnitude of benefit from the use of this drug – significantly more people using this medication were able to abstain from drinking entirely for at least 28 days out of the 98 days of the study.  Similarly, there was also a reduction of the average 11  drinks per day to 6 1/2 drinks per day for those using this medication as compared with 7 1/2 for those in the placebo group.
The inclusion of the anecdotal report of someone who remained sober years after taking the drug implies a duration of effect well beyond the duration of this study: 3 1/2 months.  While there is no formal exaggeration of the effect, a cheery anecdote may falsely raise expectations in the reader.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A long-awaited postmortem released this morning of Pfizer's (NYSE: PFE) failed heart drug held out hope for the discovery of a safe version of the revolutionary heart pill.

The study said there were still many unanswered questions about Pfizer's pill, torcetrapib, the first in a new class of heart medicines known as a CETP inhibitors, which raise HDL, or good cholesterol, and lower LDL, or bad cholesterol.

Pfizer suspended development of the tablet, its most important experimental drug, after it caused an increase in deaths and heart problems in clinical trial volunteers. Cardiologists had hoped it would reduce the buildup of plaque in blood vessels that can cause heart attacks.

It was unclear what the mixed bag of data presented at the American Heart Association's Scientific Session in Orlando would mean for CETP drugs under development by Merck and Roche, and another candidate in early-stage development by Pfizer.

The study, presented by Australian heart researcher Philip Barter, who oversaw Pfizer's torcetrapib clinical trials, concluded torcetrapib caused "off-target" effects, including deaths, elevated blood pressure, cardiovascular problems and a possible link to cancers.

Of the 15,067 patients in seven countries taking part in the randomized clinical trial, called Illuminate, 82 patients taking a combination of torcetrapib and Lipitor died, compared with 51 taking Lipitor alone, which was the control group, according to the study.

At 12 months in patients receiving torcetrapib, there was a 72 percent increased in good cholesterol and a 24.9 percent decrease in bad cholesterol.

However, the study found the tablet triggered an increase in the hormone Aldosterone, which helps regulate both blood pressure and bodily fluids. Torcetrapib, the study found, decreased potassium and increased bicarbonate and sodium in the bloodstream, resulting in an increase in blood pressure.

The study suggested a "clean" version of torcetrapib could increase so-called good cholesterol without raising blood pressure and causing adverse cardiovascular events.

"It is still possible that CETP inhibitors without off-target effects of torcetrapib could be viable as a therapy for cardiovascular disease," said an editorial published in today's edition of the New England Journal of Medicine, which concluded: "It is possible that CETP inhibition might be better suited to certain subgroups of patients, such as those with impaired clearance of LDL cholesterol or low levels of HDL cholesterol at base line," the editorial said. "In any case, it is premature to announce the death of CETP inhibitors on the bases of the torcetrapib experience alone."

There are other mechanisms for raising HDL cholesterol, such as Kos Life Sciences' Niaspan, and Merck's niacin-based drug.

George E. Jordan may be reached at gjordan@starledger.com or (973) 392-1801.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of presenting the harms of the failed drug in terms of natural frequencies (actual numbers) instead of relative rates.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new migraine drug that can halve the length of attacks has been hailed as “the start of real change” in how the condition is treated.

Erenumab, a laboratory-made antibody that blocks a neural brain pathway called CGRP, is the first drug in 20 years proven to prevent migraine attacks.

Phase three trial data on nearly 1,000 patients showed that it typically cut between three and four “migraine days” per month. In half the patients treated, migraine duration was reduced at least by half.

Migraines are characterised by an intense, throbbing headache, sensitivity to light and noise, nausea, vomiting, low energy, and visual disturbances. Attacks can last anything from four to 72 hours.

Each year more than 8.5 million people in the UK are thought to experience migraine – more than the number affected by asthma, diabetes and epilepsy combined.

The condition is linked to depression and sick days caused by migraine are estimated to cost the UK economy more than £2bn per year.

The trial, called Strive, compared patients taking erenumab for six months with others given a non-active placebo dummy drug. 



The research revealed that by months four to six, at least a 50% reduction in mean migraine days per month was achieved for just over 43% of patients injected under the skin with 70-mg of erenumab each month, while half of patients injected with the higher dose of 140-mg had such results. However, those given a placebo also saw benefits, with 26.6% of participants in this group experiencing such a reduction.



Lead investigator Prof Peter Goadsby, from King’s College hospital, London, said: “Strive … represents an incredibly important step forward for migraine understanding and migraine treatment.”

The findings, reported in the New England Journal of Medicine, clearly showed that blocking the CGRP pathway could reduce the impact of migraine, he said. “The results of Strive represent a real transition for migraine patients from poorly understood, re-purposed treatments, to a specific migraine-designed therapy.”

Simon Evans, chief executive of the charity Migraine Action, said: “Migraine is too often trivialised as just a headache when, in reality, it can be a debilitating, chronic condition that can destroy lives. The effects can last for hours, even days in many cases.

“An option that can prevent migraine and that is well tolerated is therefore sorely needed, and we hope that this marks the start of real change in how this condition is treated and perceived.” 



“Broadly speaking I think this is a very interesting study and I think it is a good step forward for the field and I think it is a good day for migraine sufferers,” said professor Zameel Cader, Director of the Oxford Headache Centre who was not involved in the research, pointing out that the results were on a par with currently available therapies for migraine.

“Placebo responses [in migraine studies] are quite high and I think that is partly due to the subjective nature of pain and because of the strong psychological effects that being treated have on that experience of pain and those symptoms,” he said, adding that injections generally result in an even stronger placebo effect than tablets.



Cader said that he too was looking at running trials using antibodies, and said he was excited about the approach since it might result in fewer side effects than current therapies, and would mean individuals would not have to remember to take a table every day.

“This is probably the first example of a migraine preventing drug that was rationally designed, rather than serendipitously found,” he added.

Amgen and Novartis, the codevelopers of erenumab, funded the trial, while Amgen also supplied the drug and conducted the data analyses.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This story does a decent job summing up the study design and presenting key results from the study, down to the differences between dosage and even placebo groups.
While we give the story a satisfactory score on this criterion, we also suggest that the numbers could have been explained far more clearly. Our heads are still spinning a bit from this paragraph in the story:
The research revealed that by months four to six, at least a 50% reduction in mean migraine days per month was achieved for just over 43% of patients injected under the skin with 70-mg of erenumab each month, while half of patients injected with the higher dose of 140-mg had such results. However, those given a placebo also saw benefits, with 26.6% of participants in this group experiencing such a reduction.
A sidebar infographic would have helped, breaking down precisely how many days, how many people, and on what dose. Yes, the results were quantified, but in a less than optimal way.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jan. 13, 2010 - A new anticlotting drug works better than Plavix, one of the most prescribed and most profitable drugs in the world, a huge clinical trial finds.

The new kid on the block is AstraZeneca's ticagrelor, to be named Brilinta if the experimental drug gets FDA approval.

That approval seems likely, given the results of a new clinical trial that compared Plavix to Brilinta in patients with acute coronary syndromes who had stents placed in their arteries to improve blood flow. Such patients need anticlotting drugs because blood clots can be a deadly complication of getting a stent.

Plavix is the drug most often used to prevent this complication. But there's a problem with Plavix, and with a newer, stronger drug in the same class called Effient.

Both drugs increase the risk of dangerous bleeding. And since the drugs irreversibly bind to blood-clotting platelets, a patient has to stop taking these drugs for five to seven days before the body can make enough new platelets.

Brilinta lets go of platelets more quickly than Plavix -- in about two or three days. And in the new study, patients had less bleeding after stent installation.

That's probably why the 6,732 study patients who got Brilinta were 16% less likely to die, or have a heart attack or stroke, than were the 6,676 patients who got Plavix. Brilinta reduced overall death rates by 1.1% .

"We estimate that use of [Brilinta] instead of [Plavix] for one year in 1,000 patients with acute coronary syndromes and who are planning to undergo an invasive strategy at the start of drug treatment would lead to 11 fewer deaths, 13 fewer myocardial infarctions, and six fewer cases of stent [clotting] without an increase in the rates of major bleeding or transfusion," conclude study researcher Christopher P. Cannon, MD, and colleagues.

The findings impress Columbia University researcher Gregg W. Stone, MD. Stone has in the past received honoraria from the makers of both Plavix and Brilinta and serves on the advisory boards of Boston Scientific and Abbott Vascular.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story highlighted the potential benefits of this drug over the current medication as reducing overall death rates by 1.1% 


<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A large waistline more than doubles the risk that people in their 40s will develop precancerous cells in the colon, according to Korean researchers.

The chances of finding abnormal cells during a screening test were just as good in younger men with too much belly fat as in slimmer men over 50.

As a result, the researchers recommend lowering the age of colon cancer screening from 50 years to 45 in men with weight problems.

But US experts say it’s too soon to change the current recommendations.

“The idea that you’re tailoring screening to age and some combination of risk factors is entirely reasonable,” said Robert Smith, the director of cancer screening at the American Cancer Society. “But attempts to draw those conclusions now is a bit premature, because most colorectal polyps don’t become cancers.”

The Korean researchers, at Konkuk University in Seoul, examined more than 1,700 men and women, aged 40 to 59, who had no signs of colon cancer and no family history for the disease.

As part of their employer-provided health benefits, each participant in the study underwent screening colonoscopy at Konkuk University, which also sponsored the research.

One in 40 of those younger than 50 years had late-stage polyps, but no one actually had colon cancer. By contrast, two of those over 50 did, and late-stage polyps were almost twice as common in this age group.

To find a late-stage polyp, which may or may not turn into cancer, the researchers calculated they would have to test 23 of the people who were in their 50s.

That number was the same in younger people who had large waistlines, and even lower in those with metabolic syndrome, a combination of risk factors including belly fat, high blood pressure and high blood sugar.

“It may be reasonable to offer colonoscopic screening to these individuals,” Dr. Sung Noh Hong and colleagues write in the journal Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.

One gastroenterologist said the results were “important” but should not change practice.

“This paper substantiates what we suspected, that people who are obese have higher risk of colon cancer,” Dr. John Allen, a colon cancer expert and a community practice counselor with the American Gastroenterological Association, told Reuters Health.

Allen, of Minnesota Gastroenterology PA, said this risk factor might be taken into consideration when deciding when to screen, but that so far more studies were needed before recommending colonoscopy at younger ages.

During colonoscopy, the doctor inserts a slim, flexible tube into the rectum. A camera at the tip shows the inside of the gut, so that unusual cell clumps can be found and removed.

At this point, colon cancer screening is only recommended by the American Cancer Society and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force in people under 50 if a first-degree relative developed cancer at a young age.

In younger people, it is unclear that the benefits of screening offset the risks. During widely used colonoscopy, for instance, bleeding or perforation of the colon may happen in rare cases.

“You want to make sure that the advantages are going to outweigh the harms,” said the American Cancer Society’s Smith.

Colonoscopy, used in millions of Americans every year, is just one of many methods to detect abnormalities. There are cheaper methods such as testing stool for blood, Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, of the University of Missouri in Columbia, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre, a member of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally appointed expert panel, said the chances that a polyp turns into cancer is currently a matter of debate. As a result, he said, it is hard to know whether removing polyps in younger people would in turn lower their risk of getting cancer.

“If we back screening down to age 45, does that affect mortality?” he said. “From a task force perspective, this article alone would not prompt us to look at the screening guidelines.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantifies the number of people who would need to be screened in order to find one late-stage polyp (and is clear to point out that they may or may not develop into cancer).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Sept. 27, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- In a head-to-head comparison of drug-coated stents -- the metal mesh tubes used to keep clogged arteries open -- the well-established model using the drug sirolimus came out on top, South Korean researchers report.

A newer version, one coated with zotarolimus, fell short, the study found.

Coating stents with time-released drugs can help prevent infection or clogging in stents, but researchers have questioned the safety and effectiveness of different coatings.

"Drug-coated stents have reduced re-stenosis rates compared to bare metal stents, but require prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy to prevent clotting of the drug-coated stent," said Dr. Gregg Fonarow, an American Heart Association spokesman. "There has been great interest in developing stents coated with alternative drugs and different polymers," he explained.

The study was released online Sept. 27 ahead of print publication in the Oct. 5 issue of the Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

In preventing major cardiac events, the researchers found that zotarolimus-coated stents, the new entry in the field, were less effective than the sirolimus-eluting stents, but better than stents coated with paclitaxel.

"Similar to other comparative stent trials, the sirolimus-eluting stent seemed to come out ahead in safety and efficacy," said Fonarow, who is also a cardiology professor at the University of California, Los Angeles.

For the study, a team led by Dr. Duk-Woo Park from the University of Ulsan College of Medicine and Asan Medical Center in Seoul randomly assigned 2,645 patients undergoing angioplasty, a procedure to restore blood flow through the artery, to one of the three stents.

After a year, Park's team tallied the number of adverse cardiac events the patients experienced, including death, heart attack and the need for a new angioplasty on the same artery in which the stent was placed.

The researchers found that 10.2 percent of the patients who received zotarolimus-coated stents suffered a major adverse cardiac event, compared with 8.3 percent of the patients who received sirolimus-coated stents and 14.1 percent of those with paclitaxel-coated stents.

The number of heart attacks and deaths was about the same in each group, but the rate of blood clots in the stents was significantly lower with sirolimus-eluting stents, Park's team also found.

"In this large-scale, practical randomized trial, the use of zotarolimus-eluting stents resulted in similar rates of major adverse cardiac events compared with sirolimus-eluting stents and in fewer major adverse cardiac events compared with paclitaxel-eluting stents at 12 months," the researchers concluded in their report.

However, they said a limitation of their study is the one-year follow-up period, and noted that a longer, ongoing study pitting zotarolimus-eluting stents against sirolimus-eluting stents will provide more safety information.

The trial was partially funded by Medtronic, maker of the zotarolimus-eluting stent.

Fonarow said the study results can help cardiologists arrive at treatment decisions. "These studies help to better inform interventional cardiologists in the optimal choice of drug-eluting stents for their patients being treated for coronary artery disease," Fonarow said.

For more information on stents, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article gives the absolute rates of major adverse cardiac events for each treatment group. 
Also, while this is likely not a major issue for most readers and not an official strike against the article, as an FYI we point out that there are some interwoven concepts that can be confusing. The article’s headline is that SES won this contest. If you want to get technical, there are two buts. First, while SES did have the fewest cardiac events of the 3 stents, the difference with ZES wasn’t statistically significant. In other words, the apparent superiority of SES may have been do to chance. Or not. We don’t know. Researchers call this a trend but not significant evidence.  Second, this contest, the study, wasn’t designed to answer whether SES was the best. The researchers concluded, as quoted in the story, that this study answered two main questions: ZES and SES were similar, and ZES fared better than PES did. Notice it didn’t say SES was the best. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A new study bolsters the case that daily aspirin may help protect against cancer, although the effect seems weaker than previously thought.

And the final chapter on the popular but controversial drug has yet to be written, experts say, because like earlier research the new work has considerable limitations.

“News about the cancer potential of aspirin use has been really encouraging lately,” said Dr. Michael Thun of the American Cancer Society, who worked on the study. “Things are moving forward, but it is still a work in progress.”

Medical guidelines in the U.S. already urge people to take low doses of aspirin to prevent heart disease if the predicted benefits outweigh the risk of side effects, or if they have already suffered a heart attack.

Whether those recommendations should be broadened to include cancer prevention is still up in the air, however.

Earlier this year, an analysis of previous clinical trials showed that people on aspirin were less likely to die of cancer than those not on the medication, with a 37-percent drop in cancer deaths observed from five years onwards.

The new report, published Friday in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, is based on real-life observations instead of experiments. It includes a decade’s worth of data from more than 100,000 men and women in the U.S., most over 60 and all of them non-smokers.

People who said they took daily aspirin - whether ‘baby’ or adult strength - had a 16-percent lower risk of dying from cancer than non-users overall, Thun and his colleagues found.

For men, the difference came out to 103 fewer cancer deaths a year per 100,000 people; for women, the number was 42.

The effect was strongest for gastrointestinal cancers, such as colon cancer and stomach cancer. But it didn’t seem to matter whether people had been on aspirin for more or less than five years.

Because the study wasn’t a clinical trial, it’s hard to know if the findings can be chalked up to aspirin or if something else is at play.

Still, Thun said the results would favor broadening the aspirin guidelines to include cancer prevention based on an individual risk-benefit assessment. But he added that it will take scientists a few years to mull over all of the existing evidence.

Other researchers are more skeptical. Dr. Kausik Ray of St. George’s University of London, who has studied aspirin, said the new study did not look at overall death rates or side effects such as serious stomach bleeds.

“This is not a drug without side effects, so what you have to look at is net benefit,” he told Reuters Health.

Earlier this year, Ray’s team published an analysis of previous aspirin trials showing the medication did not prevent deaths from heart disease or cancer, and was likely to cause more harm than good.

One of the problems with the new study as well as with previous aspirin trials, he said, is something called detection bias. People who develop stomach bleeding from aspirin are likely to get their bowels checked out by a doctor. As a result, doctors may find and remove tumors or precancerous polyps, which could prolong the patient’s life - the idea behind colon cancer screening.

So far, most aspirin trials have been designed to test the drug’s effect on heart disease. Ray called for trials that specifically check people for new cancers at given intervals to weed out the selection bias marring the previous research.

“I don’t think we have enough hard evidence suggesting everybody should be taking” aspirin, Ray said.

When it comes to cancer, the government-backed U.S. Preventive Services Task Force agrees. It discourages the use of aspirin to stave off colorectal cancer in people at average risk for the disease.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Much better than the competing WebMD story, this story appropriately stated:
“People who said they took daily aspirin – whether ‘baby’ or adult strength – had a 16-percent lower risk of dying from cancer than non-users overall, Thun and his colleagues found.
For men, the difference came out to 103 fewer cancer deaths a year per 100,000 people; for women, the number was 42.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The debate over coronary bypass surgery versus stenting goes back decades.

Studies have been inconclusive, but doctors and patients have voted with their feet in favor of the less-invasive procedure — clearing clogged arteries and propping them open with tiny scaffolds called stents.

U.S. doctors do at least two stenting procedures these days for every coronary bypass operation.

Now the biggest collection of cases so far comes out in favor of surgery on the all-important question of mortality. Four years after the procedure, patients over 65 who had coronary artery bypass surgeries (called CABG or "cabbages") were almost 20 percent less likely to die.

Put another way, 21 percent of stented patients had died after four years compared with 16 percent of surgery patients.

Is that a big difference? Well, the study's lead author tells Shots that it might be enough to "tip the balance a little bit, but not overwhelmingly so."

The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, which funded the study with new "stimulus" money from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, is more bullish on the implications.

"We would hope a study as powerful as this one will inform decision-makers to rethink the direction they're going in," the NHLBI's Dr. Michael Lauer told Shots. He says it's been worrying that so many doctors have been opting for stenting over surgery.

Study author Dr. William Weintraub, chief of cardiology at Christiana Care Health System in Newark, Del., is presenting the data at the annual meeting of the American College of Cardiology in Chicago. The study also appears online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

It draws on data from more than 86,000 patients across the nation who underwent CABG operations and nearly 104,000 patients who had coronary stenting. They had blockages in either two or three coronary arteries but did not require emergency procedures.

Although the pro-surgery outcome is not a game-changer, Weintraub says it might cause some doctors and patients to consider surgery. And he says it supports those who now opt for CABGs.

"It's a very big deal to recommend coronary surgery to patients," Weintraub says. "I think doctors work very hard to weigh what's best for their patients. When doctors recommend surgery, these data suggest that that decision is a good one."

But Dr. Laura Mauri says in an accompanying editorial that the new study can't settle any debates. Only studies that randomly assign comparable patients to surgery or stenting can do that. Mauri is an interventional cardiologist – i.e., a specialist who does coronary stenting – at Brigham and Women's Hospital inBoston.

Weintraub notes it's "very difficult and expensive" to do randomized studies on this question – and to make the comparison groups truly comparable. And while such a study is being done, the technology (especially stenting technology) changes. That can call into question the ultimate relevance of the findings.

So the new data may be the best that doctors and patients in this situation can expect for the foreseeable future.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantified the benefits two different ways. It says, “Four years after the procedure, patients over 65 who had coronary artery bypass surgeries (called CABG or “cabbages”) were almost 20 percent less likely to die. Put another way, 21 percent of stented patients had died after four years compared with 16 percent of surgery patients.”
This would have been a good time to use the Number Needed to Treat statistic.  Overall, the story made a good effort to give readers numbers in a way they could easily understand.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a small, phase I clinical trial, Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center researchers say they show for the first time that the experimental drug guadecitabine (SGI-110) is safe in combination with the chemotherapy drug irinotecan and may overcome resistance to irinotecan in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Results of the study are expected to be presented April 17 at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Annual Meeting 2016 in New Orleans (abstract CT017).

Guadecitabine works to reverse a so-called epigenetic change in cancer cells known as methylation, which may alter genetic activity in cells in a way that can block the action of tumor-suppressing genes, pushing cells to become cancerous and resistant to therapy. By reversing this change in cancer cells, the drug restores cancer cells' vulnerability to drugs such as irinotecan.

The clinical trial included 22 patients with metastatic colorectal cancer who had been treated previously with irinotecan and whose disease was progressing. The patients were divided into four groups, each receiving different doses of guadecitabine in combination with irinotecan, over an average period of four months.

During the study, 15 patients had at least one imaging scan to retest the extent and location of their cancers -- with 12 patients experiencing stable disease -- for more than the four-month period, on average, and one patient experiencing a partial response to the treatment (measured as at least a 30 percent reduction in the size of the tumors.)

Although the study's main purpose was to test the safety rather than the effectiveness of guadecitabine doses, "we were very happy to see some patients who benefited from the combination of the therapies for many months to more than a year," says Nilofer Azad, M.D., professor of oncology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

The study also showed signs that guadecitabine reduced methylation among the cancer cells. "We did see that giving a higher dose of the drug seemed to produce a better methylation response among patients," says Valerie Lee, M.D., a fellow at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center. "However, it seemed that patients were responding at all levels of the drug."

Among the side effects of the combined treatment, 16 patients experienced neutropenia, a low count of the infection-fighting white blood cells called neutrophils; five patients with neutropenia had fevers; three patients became anemic; and two patients developed thrombocytopenia, a lowered count of blood-clotting platelets. Other side effects included diarrhea (three patients), fatigue (two patients) and dehydration (two patients). There was one death during the study, possibly resulting from febrile neutropenia caused by the treatment.

The current study was based on previous studies in the laboratory of Nita Ahuja, M.D., director of the Sarcoma and Peritoneal Surface Malignancy Program and professor of surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, which showed that guadecitabine limited the growth of colorectal cancer cell lines when combined with irinotecan, says Azad.

The drug combination is being tested in an ongoing phase II clinical trial (NCT01896856) in a larger group of metastatic colorectal cancer patients at multiple institutions to determine the effectiveness of the dual therapy compared with chemotherapy regimens that do not include guadecitabine, says Azad.

Scientists leading the new study will also look for biomarkers in patients that could help determine which of them are most likely to benefit from guadecitabine and irinotecan. Lee says the research team will measure the amount of methylation in patients' cells when they begin their treatment and the presence of genes associated with irinotecan resistance, among other possible biomarkers.

In 2015, there were more than 130,000 people in the U.S. diagnosed with colon cancers. Five-year survival rates among people with localized colon cancers are more than 90 percent, but they are only 20 percent in those with metastatic cancer.

Guadecitabine is an experimental drug that has not been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. It is manufactured by Astex Pharmaceuticals, a supporter of the Johns Hopkins-led study. The research was also supported by the Van Andel Research Institute SU2C/AACR Epigenetics Dream Team.

Other scientists who contributed to the research include Judy Wang, Anup Sharma, Zachary Kerner, Stephen Baylin, Ellen Lilly, and Thomas Brown from Johns Hopkins; Anthony El Khoueiry from the University of Southern California; Henk Verheul and Elske Gootjes from Vrije Universiteit in the Netherlands; and Peter Jones from the Van Andel Research Institute.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job here in two ways. First, the release makes clear that the goal of this study was not to assess benefits, but to assess potential harms. That places the findings — and the study design — in context. Second, the release notes that 15 of the 22 patients had at least one imaging scan to track the extent and location of their cancers. Twelve of those 15 patients had “stable” disease, while one saw a 30 percent decrease in the size of the tumors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 17, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug that raises HDL, or "good," cholesterol seems to have passed an initial hurdle by proving safe in preliminary trials.

Although the trial was primarily designed to look at safety, researchers scheduled to present the finding Wednesday at the American Heart Association's annual meeting in Chicago also report that anacetrapib raised HDL cholesterol by 138 percent and cut LDL, HDL's evil twin, almost in half.

"We saw very encouraging reductions in clinical events," said Dr. Christopher Cannon, lead author of the study, which also appears in the Nov. 18 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

A big study to confirm the results would take four to five years to complete so the drug is still years away from market, said Cannon, who is a cardiologist with Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

Other experts are intrigued by the findings, but note that the research is still in very early stages.

"There are a lot of people in the prevention/lipid field that are simultaneously excited and leery," said Dr. Howard Weintraub, clinical director of the Center for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

Added Dr. John C. LaRosa, president of the State University of New York (SUNY) Downstate Medical Center in New York City: "It's very preliminary but it's important because the last drug out of the barrel of this type was not a success. This looks like a better drug, but it's not definitive by any means. Don't take this to the bank."

LaRosa was referring to torcetrapib, which, like anacetrapib, belongs to the class of drugs known as cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP) inhibitors.

A large trial on torcetrapib was killed after investigators found an increased risk of death and other cardiovascular outcomes.

"I would be more excited [about anacetrapib] if I hadn't seen what happened to its cousin torcetrapib," Weintraub said. "Torcetrapib raised HDL astoundingly but that was entirely neutralized by the increase in cardiovascular events."

In the new trial, anacetrapib actually showed a tendency toward fewer cardiovascular problems and fewer angioplasty or bypass procedures, although the study only lasted 18 months.

It also didn't result in the blood pressure increases that helped doom torcetrapib.

To assess the safety of the trial, investigators randomly chose 1,623 adults with coronary heart disease who were taking cholesterol-lowering statins to receive either anacetrapib or a placebo for 18 months.

At the end of six months, LDL cholesterol was cut 81 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dl) of blood to 45 mg/dl, a reduction of about 40 percent. In the placebo group, LDL levels only declined from 82 mg/dl to 77 mg/dl.

Meanwhile, HDL levels increased from 41 mg/dl of blood to 101 mg/dl in the treatment arm, versus a small jump from 40 mg/dl to 46 mg/dl in the placebo group.

"We have 94 percent confidence that this drug doesn't have the harmful effect that torcetrapib had, but we didn't prove a reduction in events," said Brigham and Women's Cannon. "That will be the subject of a larger study."

Such a study is in the works, he added.

Dr. Neil Coplan, director of clinical cardiology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, stressed that this was a "safety trial, not a trial which is saying in any way that people should take these medications nor are the drugs approved."

Still, he added, "the trial demonstrated safety and it demonstrated a tremendous effect on altering the lipid profile in a good direction. It's very promising but, as the authors note themselves, it's a first step."

Experts are still divided as to whether raising HDL levels will actually result in any meaningful improvements in clinical outcomes.

"Currently, we're not convinced that manipulation of HDL matters, though certainly it's promising," said Weintraub, who added that results should be available relatively soon from other trials exploring the issue. "The fact that LDL was also reduced also makes it promising."

"We've never been able to satisfactorily demonstrate that raising HDL actually changes risk," added LaRosa.

The only drug currently available to raise HDL is nyacin.

The American Heart Association has more on understanding your cholesterol levels.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story emphasizes the safety questions that were at the heart of this trial. It also tells readers plainly that it is unknown whether the changes in cholesterol levels seen in this trial have beneficial health effects. It does an impressive job in describing the uncertainties associated with drug manipulation of HDL blood levels. After reporting that the HDL cholesterol numbers rose from 41 mg/dl to 101 mg/dl, the story quotes an independent source saying, “Currently, we’re not convinced that manipulation of HDL matters, though certainly it’s promising.” Unlike some other stories about these trial results, this report repeatedly tells readers that any discussion of real health benefits will have to wait at least until after a trial designed specifically to measure such outcome is conducted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The effect was so marked that the trial was stopped early for ethical reasons, so that patients in the control group could be offered the new drug. Because of that, researchers do not yet know the median survival.

“You don’t need to wait for 50 percent of 675 patients to die to conclude that one drug is much better than the other,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas of the University of California, Los Angeles, who was an investigator in the trial and has been a consultant to the developer of the drug.

The other new drug, ipilimumab (pronounced ip-ee-LIM-yoo-mab), when combined with dacarbazine, extended median survival to 11.2 months compared with 9.1 months for those who received dacarbazine alone. After three years, 20.8 percent of those who got that new drug were alive, compared with 12.2 percent of those in the control group.

The results of both trials were published online by The New England Journal of Medicine in addition to being presented here.

To be sure, more than half of patients with metastatic melanoma would not be helped all that much by either drug. Experts say more needs to be done, especially since melanoma affects more young adults than many other types of cancer.

Even if the new drugs allow patients with metastatic melanoma to live two years, “Two years is nothing when you’re 30,” said Dr. Anna C. Pavlick, head of the melanoma program at New York University.

Still, doctors and patient groups welcomed the progress because until now treatment of melanoma that had spread beyond the skin to distant organs “was terrible even by routine cancer standards,” said Dr. Vernon K. Sondak, chairman of cutaneous oncology at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Fla.

Also, the number of melanoma cases has been rising, unlike for many other types of cancer. Doctors say that is because of unprotected sun exposure years ago, the proliferation of tanning salons and perhaps more attention to detecting the disease.

There were about 68,000 new cases of melanoma and about 8,700 deaths last year in the United States, up from 48,000 cases and 7,700 deaths in 2000, according to the American Cancer Society. Particularly fast increases have occurred among people older than 65 and among women 15 to 39 years old.

Vemurafenib is the latest so-called targeted therapy, which inhibits the effects of genetic mutations that spur tumor growth and spread. In particular, the drug counters the effect of a mutation in a gene called B-RAF that was discovered in 2002 to be common in melanomas. (The drug’s name comes from V600E mutation in RAF.)

The drug, which is taken orally twice a day, would be used only by the roughly half of melanoma patients whose tumors have this mutation. The drug significantly shrinks tumors in about half of these patients — or about a quarter of all melanoma patients.

It was developed by Roche and Plexxikon, a biotechnology company in Berkeley, Calif., that was recently acquired by Daiichi Sankyo of Japan. The drug is expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration within a few months.

Ipilimumab, the other new drug, releases a brake on the body’s immune system, allowing it to more effectively attack the tumor. Developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, it was approved in March and is sold under the name Yervoy.

A series of articles in The New York Times last year followed the development of vemurafenib, then known as PLX4032, and recounted how some patients close to death seemed to make miraculous recoveries.

The effect, however, typically lasts only about seven months before the cancer starts to grow again, though some patients benefit for more than two years.

S. Taylor Chance, a 67-year-old real estate agent in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., has been taking vemurafenib in a clinical trial since March 2010. “If it weren’t for the trial I wouldn’t be here,” she said.

It has not been all good. Ms. Chance said the drug caused such extreme pain at one point that “I called in the children and said, ‘I’m done, I can’t do this any more.’ ” But she had her dose reduced and took other medications for the pain.

In the trial, sponsored by Roche and led by Dr. Paul B. Chapman of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, 38 percent of participants had to stop taking the drug or lower the dose because of side effects, including rash and joint pain. Many patients get minor skin cancers that can be removed by dermatologists.

The trial of ipilimumab, paid for by Bristol-Myers, involved 502 patients with late-stage melanoma.

Last year at this conference, researchers presented results of a trial showing a survival advantage for patients who had undergone a previous treatment. The new trial of this drug, by contrast, involved patients who were getting treated for the first time.

While the extension of median survival of two months, from about 9 months to about 11 months, was less than some experts expected, researchers said the real benefit was that a small number of patients, perhaps 10 to 20 percent, could live a long time.

Because it unleashes the immune system, ipilimumab can have serious side effects. In the latest trial, a big one was liver damage.

A course of treatment of ipilimumab costs $120,000. The price of vemurafenib has not been announced, but is expected to be at least tens of thousands of dollars per year.

Doctors are eager to try the two drugs together. Roche and Bristol-Myers said Thursday that they would conduct such tests.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Good job describing the benefits reported in the two drug studies. The two papers present a bewildering array of statistics. This story did a nice job distilling the information into a couple of very understandable sentences.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There may be a seed of truth amidst the many health claims for pomegranate juice, researchers from Israel said Thursday, at least for kidney patients on dialysis.

They found that such patients who gulped a few cups of the tart liquid every week lowered their chances of infections, the second-leading killer of the more than 350,000 Americans on dialysis.

The findings were presented at the American Society of Nephrology’s meeting in Denver — aka Renal Week — and have not yet been vetted by independent experts.

“It’s a very intriguing study,” said Dr. Frank Brosius, who heads the nephrology division at the University of Michigan Health System and was not involved in the research.

“I certainly don’t know of anything else that would have such a profound effect,” he told Reuters Health, cautioning at the same time that the study needed to be replicated by other centers.

The results come in the wake of a U.S. crackdown on allegedly false advertising by POM Wonderful, which claims its pomegranate products can help everything from heart disease to prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction.

The Israeli researchers, led by Dr. Batya Kristal of Western Galilee Hospital in Nahariya, did not use POM juice, but a brand sold by Naturafood.

In lab tests, Kristal told Reuters Health, that brand ranked highest in polyphenol antioxidants, which can reduce cell damage caused by so-called free radicals.

Antioxidants are found in different levels in fruits and vegetables, such as blueberries or broccoli.

“Pomegranate juice was shown in the last three years to contain the highest levels of polyphenols among a variety of products,” Kristal said. “Much higher than red wine, for instance.”

The researchers figured an antioxidant-rich diet might help patients with kidney failure, because the level of free radicals in their blood increases as the blood circulates through the dialysis device. That, in turn, may rev up inflammation in their tissues.

In the study, funded by the Israeli Ministry of Health, 101 patients were randomly assigned to either a concoction without pomegranate juice, or the real thing.

After downing about half a cup three times a week over a year, those who drank the real thing had a reduction of inflammatory molecules in their blood.

They also made fewer trips to the hospital.

“We found significant reductions in hospitalization due to infections, with more than 40 percent reduction in the first hospitalization and 80 percent in the second,” said Kristal.

However, the researchers were only able to rule out chance as the cause of the reduction in the second visit to the hospital.

According to the findings, among 50 patients drinking pomegranate juice for a year, about two would have to go to the hospital at least twice. By comparison, that number would be nearly 11 in patients not drinking the juice.

The researchers say they don’t know if their results extend to other brands as well, and suggest squeezing your own juice. A 16-oz bottle of POM Wonderful sells for about $4.

She said her team had found no side effects, but added that kidney patients should be aware of the high potassium content in the juice, given the delicate balance of nutrients in their blood, and talk to their doctor if they consider drinking it.

Brosius was skeptical of the benefits, although he said the juice was unlikely to cause harm.

“I would prefer to see this validated at other centers before we come out and say this is the thing to do,” he said. Even if the findings hold up, he said, it is still unclear what accounts for them. “Who the heck knows what the active ingredients are?”

Marion Nestle, a nutrition expert at New York University, said the effects might not be unique to pomegranate juice.

“This study does not demonstrate anything special about pomegranate juice,” she told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “The effects of juice were compared to a placebo, not to any other kind of juice that might have exactly the same effect.”

“The pomegranate people are spending millions to prove what I could have told them in the first place,” she added. “Pomegranate juices — like most if not all fruit and vegetable juices — have antioxidant activity. Does this make pomegranates better than any other fruit? Investigators have yet to show this.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Good use of absolute risk reduction:
“According to the findings, among 50 patients drinking pomegranate juice for a year, about two would have to go to the hospital at least twice. By comparison, that number would be nearly 11 in patients not drinking the juice.”
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Robert Bush has multiple sclerosis (MS), which sapped his ability to walk five years ago. Joseph McGlynn suffered a stroke that seriously impaired his left side, also five years ago.

Using technology designed by Case Western Reserve University and the Advanced Platform Technology and Functional Electrical Stimulation centers at the Louis Stokes Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, the two men got their feet back under them.

Two studies, published in the American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, show that functional electrical stimulation (FES) significantly helped McGlynn and Bush to effectively walk at the medical center.

"I went in there and I could barely take two steps," said Bush, 42, who researchers believe is the world's first MS patient to "test-drive" an implanted FES system. The proof-of-feasibility test lasted 90 days. "At the end," said Bush, of Columbus, Ohio, "I was walking down the hallway. To me, it was monumental." A video of him walking with and without the system can be found at: https:/ .

McGlynn, 69, of North Royalton, Ohio, could walk with a cane, but not easily. With the technology switched on, he covered far more ground and his pace was twice as fast during his 30-week study.

"It's helped with balance and confidence," said McGlynn, who used to tread a lot of stairs maintaining equipment at a steel plant. "I'm confident now that I can walk without stumbling and falling." A video of him walking with and without aid of the system can be found here: https:/ .

Nathan Makowski, an investigator at the Cleveland FES Center, created by Case Western Reserve and the Cleveland VA, said that FES technology has been used primarily for therapy in stroke patients in the past. "This, though, is a more long-term assistive system," he said.

The researchers hope these studies will lay the foundation for implanted systems that restore some independence to people with MS or who have suffered a stroke.

Their numbers are substantial. The National Multiple Sclerosis Society estimates that more than 2.3 million people have the disease worldwide. Surveys have found that 93 percent suffer gait impairment within 10 years of diagnosis and 13 percent report they are unable to walk twice a week. Other research has found that 6 million to 7 million people live with stroke nationally and nearly 30 percent require assistance to walk.

"In both cases, there is a disconnect between the brain and muscles," said Stephen Selkirk, MD, a neurologist at the VA's Spinal Cord Injury Division and assistant professor of neurology at Case Western Reserve School of Medicine. "This system replaces the lost connection."

The system includes implanted electrodes that tie into nerves that control muscles collectively, called hip and knee flexors and ankle dorsoflexors. In healthy people, the muscles work in seamless coordination each step they take.

When Bush or McGlynn walks, he pushes a button on an external controller, which sends signals to a pulse generator, which then sends electrical pulses to the electrodes. The pulses stimulate the nerves, which in turn stimulate the muscles in both of Bush's legs and McGlynn's left leg.

"Both guys were taking steps the first time we turned the systems on," said Ron Triolo, a professor of orthopaedics and biomedical engineering at Case Western Reserve and executive director of the Advanced Platform Technology (APT) Center. "When Robert Bush took a step, it wasn't' pretty, but we saw the potential."

In each patient, "the pulses are sent in a pattern that is close to how normal muscles work," said Rudi Kobetic, a principal investigator at the Stokes Cleveland VA and APT Center. "We try to time the pattern to stimulation so that it's integrated with their ability. Similar to regular physical therapy, we can see results."

Both men gained strength and endurance through repeated use of the systems and fine-tuning by the researchers.

Bush went from the two steps to consistently walking more than 30 yards during the trial. In that time, he used a walker to help maintain his balance.

"When they turned it on the first time, I was surprised how well it worked," said Bush, who had to give up his construction career due to the disease. "I lifted my knee like I was high-stepping. Once we got it fine-tuned and I got walking, I thought it was amazing. I still think it's amazing."

McGlynn's gait became noticeably more symmetrical and energetic, the researchers said. His gait without the system was about 19 yards per minute; with the system, 47 yards per minute. Training with the system improved McGlynn's speed when it was turned off to 23 yards per minute, indicating therapeutic benefit.

"Distance is a challenge," he said. Initially, he could walk 83 yards but improved to 1,550 yards--nearly a mile--at the faster gait. "I work up a good sweat and that makes me feel good," he said.

Due to his improvements, the research team is developing a system that McGlynn can use at home and outside.

"I'll be able to walk for exercise and hopefully be able to walk into church and into a restaurant," McGlynn said.

When Bush's trial ended, surgeons removed his implanted electrodes. The researchers are seeking funding to fit him with a permanent FES system in a clinical trial.

In the meantime, Bush is now back to using a wheelchair but working to maintain his strength and flexibility, repeatedly standing and sitting while holding onto a rail or standing for long periods of time. "I'm keeping things ready for when they get the green light," he said.

Other researchers who contributed to the two studies are the APT Center's Lisa Lombardo, physical therapist; Kevin Foglyano, biomedical engineer; and Gilles Pinault, MD, a surgeon and co-director of the center.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release describes both men’s improvement in terms of distance walked with the aid of electronic nerve stimulation. For example, the stroke patient’s ability to move “without the system was about 19 yards per minute; with the system, 47 yards per minute,” the news release states, while training improved his speed with the system turned off to “23 yards per minute, indicating therapeutic benefit.” His distance improved from 83 yards to 1,550 yards, almost a mile.
It states that the multiple sclerosis patient “went from the two steps to consistently walking more than 30 yards during the (90-day) trial. In that time, he used a walker to help maintain his balance.”
The news release also provides quotes from the men and links to videos that show the men’s abilities to walk with and without electronic stimulation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - - Exhausted shift workers may be safer driving home at night when they’re exposed to bright light before they hit the road, a small study suggests.

To test the effect of light therapy on driving, researchers did a series of three experiments with 19 adults. In two scenarios, participants spent a night being sleep-deprived in a lab and then spent 45 minutes in dim or bright light before a driving test. For a third test, people got a good nights’ sleep at home and then went to the lab for 45 minutes of bright light exposure before a driving test.

After sleep deprivation in the lab, five people exposed to dim light therapy got in car accidents during the driving simulations. None of the people who slept at home crashed, and neither did any of the sleep-deprived people who got bright light therapy before getting behind the wheel, the study found.

“We experience severe sleepiness toward the end of the night shift, and this may overlap with our commute time,” said senior study author Dr. Ralph Mistlberger of Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, Canada.

“Sleep deprivation makes this worse of course, and together with the clock, this conspires to impair our ability to sustain attention to task (e.g., driving), and avoid distraction, and react quickly to external stimuli like traffic lights, brake lights in front of you, road signs, etc,” Mistlberger added by email.

Sleepiness is a leading risk factor for automobile accidents because it can make drivers less vigilant, slow reaction times and dull cognitive abilities, researchers note in Sleep Medicine.

Shift workers with chronic sleep deprivation also face an increased risk of accidents. Strategies like drinking coffee or soda, napping before a drive or blasting music or rolling down the windows in the car may help increase alertness behind the wheel, but none of these strategies is fool-proof.

For the current study, researchers wanted to see if bright light might help reduce driving impairments related to sleep deprivation.

They found participants had lower body temperatures after spending a sleep-deprived night in the lab, as well as longer reaction times and increased sleepiness.

Exposure to bright light didn’t appear to improve reaction times or sleepiness. But light was associated with better driving.

Beyond its small size, other limitations of the study include the reliance on lab conditions for sleep deprivation and light exposure, which may not match what shift workers would experience on the job, the authors note.

“There is evidence that the use of bright light at the office (or even at home directly prior to beginning the work shift) may be beneficial in preventing sleep deprivation-related motor vehicle collisions,” said Russell Griffin, a researcher at the University of Alabama at Birmingham who wasn’t involved in the study.

“That said, there is not enough evidence to date to fully suggest the use of bright light therapy to avoid collision,” Griffin added by email.

The proven way to avoid the effects of sleepiness on the road is to consistently get enough sleep, said Dr. Flaura Koplin Winston, a researcher at the University of Pennsylvania and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia who wasn’t involved in the study.

“Drowsy driving is perhaps the most under-recognized cause of serious crashes and sadly, the evidence is not there on how to counter it,” Winston said by email.

More research is needed on the potential of bright light therapy to make exhausted drivers safer, said Dr. Donald Redelmeier, a researcher at the University of Toronto who wasn’t involved in the study.

But there are still things drivers can do now to stay safer on the road.

“Safety strategies while driving can include minimizing distractions, stopping at stop signs, respecting speed limits, yielding right-of-way, buckling a seatbelt, signaling all turns and not driving after drinking alcohol,” Redelmeier said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story is specific about the number of sleep-deprived participants who crashed their simulated cars after exposure to dim light (5) compared to those whose simulated drive home was preceded by 45 minutes of bright light (0).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE



Newswise — The latest in a series of studies led by researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine shows that addition of a widely available, noninvasive imaging test called 99mTc-sestamibi SPECT/CT to CT or MRI increases the accuracy of kidney tumor classification. The research team reports that the potential improvement in diagnostic accuracy will spare thousands of patients each year in the United States alone from having to undergo unnecessary surgery.

In a recent report on ongoing work to improve kidney tumor classification, published in the April issue of the journal Clinical Nuclear Medicine, the team reports that the sestamibi SPECT/CT test—short for 99mTc-sestamibi single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography(CT) — adds additional diagnostic information in conjunction with conventional CTs and MRI and improves physicians’ ability to differentiate between benign and malignant kidney tumors.

“Sestamibi SPECT/CT lets radiologists and urologists ‘see’ the most common benign kidney tumor, something CT and MRI have not succeeded in doing alone,” says Mohamad E. Allaf, M.D., MEA Endowed Professor of Urology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “This noninvasive scan may prevent patients with a potentially benign kidney tumor from having to undergo a surgery to remove the tumor or potentially the entire kidney, along with its associated risks and high costs. At Johns Hopkins, use of this test has already spared a number of our patients from unnecessary surgery and unnecessary removal of a kidney that would require them to be on dialysis. These results are hugely encouraging, but we need to do more studies.”

For this study, 48 patients who were diagnosed with a kidney tumor on conventional CT or MRI were imaged with sestamibi SPECT/CT at Johns Hopkins prior to surgery. Radiologists, who were not allowed to talk to each other or know the results of the surgeries, graded the conventional and sestamibi SPECT/CT images benign or malignant using a 5-point scale (1 = definitely benign, 5 = definitely cancerous).

Following surgery, similarly ‘blinded’ pathologists analyzed the tumors without knowing the radiologists’ imaging results. Pathology results of surgically removed tumors showed that 8 of the 48 were benign. The remaining 40 were classified as a variety of other tumor types, including malignant renal cell carcinomas.

Reviewing sestamibi SPECT/CT scan results in conjunction with CT or MRI changed the initial rating levels from cancerous (score 3, 4, 5) toward benign (score 1 and 2) in 9 cases, and changed reviewers’ score from likely cancerous (score 4) to definitely cancerous (score 5) in 5 cases, or about 10 percent of all cases. The addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT increased the reviewers’ diagnostic certainty in 14 of the 48 patients, or in nearly 30 percent of all cases.

Overall, the investigators said, adding sestamibi SPECT/CT helped identify 7 of 9 benign tumors, and conventional imaging with added sestamibi SPECT/CT outperformed conventional imaging alone, as measured by a statistical analysis that measures tradeoffs between sensitivity and specificity. On this measure, a value of 0.50 indicates that a diagnostic test is no better than chance. Conventional imaging combined with sestamibi SPECT/CT had a value of 0.85, while conventional imaging alone had a value of 0.60.

Even for patients whose tumors were not reclassified, the addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT increased physicians’ ability to more confidently classify malignant tumors, which reduces the risk of misdiagnosis and unnecessary surgery for all patients, the researchers say.

Radiologists and urologists have been frustrated for decades by the inability of conventional imaging tests, such as CT and MRI, to distinguish benign from malignant kidney tumors. At Johns Hopkins, multispecialty teams work together to determine the best care for patients and as partners on research innovations and quality improvement initiatives. “This collaborative venue enabled two then-residents [Drs. Michael Gorin and Steven Rowe] from different departments and specialties to design a clinical trial based on a few reports in the literature suggesting a potential role for sestamibi SPECT/CT in this diagnostic conundrum, and their hypothesis proved correct,” says Mehrbod Som Javadi, MD, assistant professor of radiology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and the senior author on the paper. Pamela T. Johnson, MD, associate professor of radiology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine notes, “these types of advances are critical to our precision medicine initiative, Hopkins inHealth, designed for individualized patient management, and to our mission of high-value health care, where the highest quality care is safely delivered at the lowest personal and financial cost to the patient.”

“As radiologists, we have struggled to find noninvasive ways to better classify patients and spare unnecessary surgery, but this has not been easy,” says Steven P. Rowe, M.D., Ph.D., one of the two former residents who developed this approach, and now assistant professor of radiology and radiological science at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “Sestamibi SPECT/CT offers an inexpensive and widely available means of better characterizing kidney tumors, and the identical test is now being performed as part of a large trial in Sweden, for which the first results have just recently been published and appear to confirm our conclusions.”

Although further study is needed to validate the accuracy of sestamibi SPECT/CT, this test appears to be a less expensive, faster, noninvasive alternative to surgery, says Michael A. Gorin, M.D., the other resident involved in developing this approach and now chief resident with The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “In the absence of diagnostic certainty, surgeons tend to remove kidney tumors in an abundance of caution, leading to an estimated 5,600 surgically removed benign kidney tumors each year in the United States.”

Other authors on this paper include, Sara Sheikhbahaei, Christopher S. Jones, Kristin K. Porter, Alex S. Baras, Phillip M. Pierorazio, Mark W. Ball, Lilja B. Solnes, Jonathan I. Epstein, and Mehrbod S. Javadi, all of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and Takahiro Higuchi of Wurzburg University in Germany.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release states that “The addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT increased the reviewers’ diagnostic certainty in 14 of the 48 patients, or in nearly 30 percent of all cases,” and that “Conventional imaging combined with sestamibi SPECT/CT had a value of 0.85, while conventional imaging alone had a value of 0.60.” The release offers that “a value of 0.50 indicates that a diagnostic test is no better than chance,” to give readers a benchmark for comparison.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- For Carlton Davis, "the" always seemed to come out as "hte." Frequently having problems in school, he once threw a typewriter out of his fourth-floor window at college after making the "hte" mistake yet again.

Abby Schwartz can relate. She would often mix up the letters d and b, sounding out certain words to make make sense of them. Things have gotten better, but she'll still make the occasional "b-d" or "5-2" flip. Davis, now 66, also still mixes up the digits of phone numbers.

"(Reading) would be slow. It wouldn't be enjoyable. I would lose my place," said Abby, 13, of Lexington, Massachusetts. "There were times when I would yell at myself: 'I can't do this. I can't do this. I can't do this.' "

Abby and Davis, like an estimated 5 percent to 20 percent of the population, have struggled with dyslexia, a condition that, broadly speaking, hinders a person's ability to interpret language.

Scientists have recently made headway in understanding what's going on in the brain of a person with dyslexia, which has not been well understood. New research suggests it may be possible to tell from a brain scan whether a dyslexic child's reading ability will improve over a few years. It goes along with the general trend of personalized medicine, in which genetic tests, brain scans and other tests can increasingly help predict the conditions for which a particular individual is at risk.

And a separate recent study found that some dyslexics may have a heightened understanding of space, despite an impairment in language.

In dyslexia, also called developmental reading disorder, the brain doesn't properly recognize or process symbols. Children with this condition may find reading comprehension difficult because they don't connect sounds with letters and can't recognize words well. Celebrities including Whoopi Goldberg, Cher and Henry Winkler (the "Fonz") have made their dyslexia publicly known, and great artists such as Pablo Picasso are said to have had it.

Some children with the disorder can "compensate," or read fairly normally, but perhaps more slowly than their peers, by adulthood. It is hard to know who will be able to improve reading skills over time, and how much extra help is necessary.

A study led by Fumiko Hoeft, psychiatry researcher at Stanford University School of Medicine, used brain imaging to answer this question. Her study followed 25 children with dyslexia and 20 children without dyslexia over a 2½-year period.

The researchers found greater activation and connectivity in the brain's right hemisphere among dyslexic children who showed greater improvement in reading after the 2½ years. They used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study this phenomenon.

In general, much of the language comprehension and processing that goes on in the brain happens in the left hemisphere, but there is some right hemisphere involvement also. Hoeft's study suggests that people with dyslexia who go on to read fairly normally are using a part of the right hemisphere in reading tasks more than the average person would.

If made widely available, this kind of brain scan could be an important complement to the assessments -- based on reading and behavior -- already available for diagnosing dyslexia, Hoeft said. As this usage of fMRI becomes more useful and commonplace, the high cost per scan would go down, she said.

Rebecca Branstetter, psychologist who blogs at Notes from the School Psychologist, says this dyslexia brain scan could provide useful information, but it doesn't highlight environmental factors -- such as the quality of instruction in the child's classroom -- that could contribute to reading problems.

Abby's father, Edward Schwartz, fears that this tool would just add to a child's anxiety about the testing process. The potential to alarm a child isn't worth it, and he doesn't trust that this method would offer definitive information.

"The kids (are) much more likely to feel like they're broken in some way," Schwartz said. Abby, he recalls, "didn't like it to be referred to as a 'learning disability.' She was happy when people offered her alternative ways to think about it."

Guillermo Tilley, the father of 7-year-old Nate, who has dyslexia, similarly would not want his son to have the fMRI.

"It would taint my interpretation of who Nate is and his struggle with dyslexia," Tilley said.

Of course, the results of the study are only preliminary. Participants included 25 children with dyslexia and 20 children without dyslexia, which is too small a sample size to prove anything, although still respectable when it comes to neuroimaging studies. Another important limitation in the study is that some children in the study did receive tutoring or reading interventions, to which they were not randomly assigned. A larger trial that controlled for remediations would offer more conclusive results. But this one found that receiving a remediation did not appear to affect improvement in reading abilities.

Here's another insight about dyslexia: men with the condition may have enhanced visual-spatial abilities, according to a study in the journal Learning and Individual Differences. This was another small study -- 20 dyslexic volunteers and 21 participants without the condition -- testing how people identify shapes, navigate a virtual environment, and do other tasks involving spatial reasoning.

Davis, a noted architect and writer in the Los Angeles area, believes he fits that category. He gets thrown off by pure mathematics, but he's good at anything involving spatial relationships and design.

And those kinds of skills should be taken advantage of in school, said Wendy Weiner, principal of the arts-focused Conservatory Prep in Davie, Florida, and mother of a dyslexic child.

"If they can create projects -- instead of drawing a picture of a room, if they can make a model of a room -- they will generally do it pretty much to scale because they can visualize things very clearly," she said.

Because of this, Weiner said, three-dimensional letters and numbers, perhaps made out of plastic or clay, help a dyslexic child grasp the shapes better. Holding a "7" upright in your hand, you're less likely to view it sideways as a "V," she said.

The most important intervention is a direct, explicit teaching of phonics, or how symbols correspond with sounds, Branstetter said. The sooner it can be detected, the better. A child's personality can also factor in: Some persist despite frustration better than others. Parents should speak to their school psychologists about the best plan of action, she said.

For Abby, a breakthrough moment came at age 9: She started reading voraciously, and today reads well above the seventh-grade level. She'd had good tutors and plenty of support from her parents, but it also took self-confidence for her to make herself read on her own, she said.

As for Davis, he'd never heard of dyslexia until a friend brought it up when he was 34, and then went through training at a learning development center. Using computers for writing has helped him tremendously -- especially spell-check.

"I know a lot of people who have trouble reading, as I did when I was a kid, are dyslexic," he said. "It is an issue that certainly holds back a lot of kids, because of their inability to do certain things."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 



We will give this story a satisfactory rating because it portrays this research as providing information for researchers seeking to understand dyslexia, rather than offering important direct benefits to individuals. However, most of the story is about what it is like to live with dyslexia. These anecdotes have little or nothing to do with the research. The list of celebrities who may have or had dyslexia also seems irrelevant and distracting. Then the story tosses in discussion of a study that looked at correlations between dyslexia and spatial skills; again, unrelated to the topic of the primary study reported here. The jumble of extraneous personal tales and other research muddles the point of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A popular dietary supplement called SAMe may help depressed patients who don’t respond to prescription antidepressant treatment, a new study shows.

SAMe stands for S-adenosyl methionine, a naturally occurring molecule that is widely used in Europe for depression, arthritis and other ailments. It is found throughout the human body, with high concentrations in the liver, adrenal glands and brain.

The latest research, conducted by investigators at Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, is important not only because it suggests another treatment option for patients with depression, but because it also offers news clues into the physical pathways of depression that could ultimately lead to more effective treatments.

“There are many directions in research that this opens up,” said Dr. George I. Papakostas, director of treatment resistant depression studies at Mass General and the study’s lead author. “It provides clues to new treatments, and it provides clues to understanding what causes depression as well as what goes on biochemically when people get better from depression.”

The researchers studied the use of SAMe or a placebo in 73 adults with depression who were not responding to prescription antidepressant treatment. All of the study subjects continued to take the prescription antidepressant, but 39 of them were randomly assigned to receive SAMe for six weeks. The remaining 34 patients received a placebo in addition to their regular prescription treatment.

After six weeks of treatment, 36 percent of the patients taking a combination of SAMe and an antidepressant showed improvement, compared to just 18 percent of those taking the antidepressant and placebo. And about 26 percent of patients in the SAMe group experienced a complete remission of symptoms, compared to just 12 percent in the placebo group, according to a report published in The American Journal of Psychiatry.

The research offers hope to patients who haven’t been helped by traditional antidepressant treatment. Studies suggest that for more than half of depressed patients, antidepressants alone don’t eliminate symptoms. As a result, doctors are looking for additional treatments to help these patients, referred to as “nonresponders.”

Modern antidepressants essentially work by building up concentrations of neurotransmitters, which amplifies their effect on the brain. It’s not clear exactly how SAMe works to curb depression, but researchers have several theories. SAMe may influence the expression of genes involved in depression or alter the function of different receptors and structures that transport neurotransmitters in the brain. The molecule also may be directly involved in the creation of neurotransmitters.

“Most antidepressants we use are acting on neurotransmitters in the brain,” said Dr. J. Craig Nelson, professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, and author of an editorial accompanying the study. “It may be that SAMe is facilitating the synthesis of the neurotransmitters that the drugs then act on. That’s probably the best hypothesis.”

Other studies have suggested that SAMe can relieve symptoms of depression. A 2002 analysis of depression trials conducted by the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality found that SAMe use resulted in clinically meaningful benefits to depressed patients compared to placebo, and that the supplement worked as well as tricyclic antidepressants, a category of prescription drugs.

In his editorial, Dr. Nelson notes that SAMe is typically not covered by insurance companies, and that although the cost is relatively low, it is still more than the drug co-payments required by most health plans. A monthly supply of the same brand of supplement studied would be about $143, the editorial notes.

Dr. Nelson, who was not involved in the Harvard study, said the results need to be replicated in a larger study, and that more information is needed on dosing, side effects and long-term treatment with SAMe, among other things. Dr. Papakostas agrees the study “needs replication” but said he is hopeful about the potential for future research.

“It’s a huge advancement in terms of expanding the types of medications we have to treat depression,” Dr. Papakostas said. “In the last 60 years of depression research, all the treatments have focused on similar mechanisms of action. This is one of the first few studies that suggests a different mechanism. It’s a medication that works differently than everything else.”

The study was funded by a grant from the National Institutes of Mental Health, but the SAMe pills and placebo pills were provided by the dietary supplement maker Pharmavite. Dr. Papkostas, Dr. Nelson and other researchers involved in the study all disclosed several financial relationships with makers of prescription antidepressants.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’re given the proportions of the active and control groups who showed improvement and experienced complete remission. The piece could’ve been more specific about what improvement meant.
 It was too vague when summarizing the 2002 AHRQ analysis that found “clinically meaningful benefits” and that SAMe worked “as well as tricyclic antidepressants.” (See our comments on Novelty.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pediatricians Decide Boys Are Better Off Circumcised Than Not

The American Academy of Pediatrics on Monday announced its first major shift on circumcision in more than a decade, concluding that the health benefits of the procedure clearly outweigh any risks.

"There is clear evidence that supports the health benefits of circumcision," said Susan Blank, who led the 14-member task force that formulated the new policy being published in the journal Pediatrics.

The statement, and accompanying technical report, marks the first revision of the organization's position since 1999, when the academy backed away from circumcision. At that time, the group, which represents about 60,000 pediatricians nationwide, concluded that there was no clear evidence for or against circumcising newborns. The group affirmed that position in 2005.

Since then, the popularity of circumcision in the United States has declined. Only about 56 percent of newborn males are circumcised.

The academy's task force spent seven years combing through the latest research, analyzing more than a thousand studies. Their conclusion?

For starters, Blank says, circumcision helps baby boys pretty much immediately.

"The health benefits of male circumcision include a drop in the risk of urinary tract infection in the first year of life by up to 90 percent," she says.

But there's a much bigger reason to do it, Blank said. Circumcised males are far less likely to get infected with a long list of sexually transmitted diseases.

"It drops the risk of heterosexual HIV acquisition by about 60 percent. It drops the risk of human papillomavirus [HPV], herpes virus and other infectious genital ulcers," she says.

It also reduces the chances that men will spread HPV to their wives and girlfriends, protecting them from getting cervical cancer.

"We've reviewed the data and, you know, we have gone through them with a fine-tooth comb, and the data are pretty convincing," she says.

Critics, however, were not convinced. They liken the procedure to female genital mutilation.

"We have no right as parents or as physicians or adults to strap them down and chop off a normal part of their body. To do that is a human rights violation and an ethical travesty," says Georgeanne Chapin of the anti-circumcision group Intact America.

Chapin and other critics argue that the scientific evidence is questionable. For one thing, the studies about HIV have only been done in Africa, where AIDS is much more common among heterosexuals.

"They're cherry-picking their evidence," she says. "They act as though there's this huge body of literature. It's all the same couple of studies that have been regurgitated and reprogrammed. Over the past 150 years, all kinds of medical benefits have been proposed as resulting from cutting off the foreskin, and they have all been disproven."

Critics also question the safety of the procedure, saying too many boys are damaged for life by botched circumcisions.

But many experts say the academy is making the right call. They dismiss any comparison to female genital mutilation as grossly misleading and say male circumcision is about as safe as any procedure could be.

Some think the academy's position is long overdue, and that the group should have gone even further and more forcefully recommended circumcision.

"I think that all healthy newborn babies should be circumcised," says Edgar Schoen, a professor emeritus at the University of California, San Francisco. "I feel about newborn circumcision the way I do about immunization: It's a potent preventive health procedure that gives you a health advantage."

For its part, the pediatricians group hopes the new recommendations will encourage more parents to circumcise their sons — and more insurance plans to pay for it. As Shots reported last week, a lot of state Medicaid programs have stopped covering circumcision.

"Those families who choose circumcision should have access to circumcision. Cost should not be a barrier," Blank says.

The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been promising for years now to issue the government's first guidelines about circumcision. But the CDC keeps delaying it and still has not said when that will happen.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Only relative risk reduction figures were given for UTI and HIV risk reduction.
The AAP website notes: “A slightly lower risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs). A circumcised infant boy has about a 1 in 1,000 chance of developing a UTI in the first year of life; an uncircumcised infant boy has about a 1 in 100 chance of developing a UTI in the first year of life.”  This would have given readers a bit more of an idea of what the numbers are.
Nonetheless, the NPR story did a better job on this by giving some numbers than did the competing AP story, so we’ll give it a pass.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heart scan law could lead to 1,000s more cancer cases

Widespread use of a controversial heart disease test that Texas insurers will be required by law to cover by law could lead to thousands more cases of cancer in the United States, according to a new study.

The study offers the most definitive estimate yet of the cancer risk from the radiation exposure that comes with increasingly popular CT scans, which provide pictures of the heart's arteries and quantify the risk of heart attack in people without symptoms.

“This is an important reminder that there are always trade-offs when we talk about screening,” said Dr. Amit Khera, a cardiologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. “Doctors and patients need to think about the cancer risk when ordering this test.”

The study, published in the new edition of Archives of Internal Medicine, found a small but real risk from the average radiation — for every 100,000 men between 45 and 75 undergoing the test every five years, there would be 42 cancers; for every 100,000 women ages 55 to 75, there would be 62.

That translates into “about 5,600 individuals developing a radiation-induced cancer in the future,” the study said.

The study comes a month after Gov. Rick Perry signed legislation that will require Texas insurance companies to cover the test for men 45 to 75 years old, and for women between 55 and 75, at intermediate or greater risk of heart attack. The law, the first in any state, takes effect Jan. 1.

The legislation was introduced in 2007 and passed quietly this year. It eventually attracted attention in cardiology circles, where the scans' costs and benefits are the subject of much debate. The scans are sometimes criticized as an example of expensive new technologies being adopted before proof is established that they're better than cheaper existing methods — an issue at the heart of the health care reform debate.

The test, a CAT scan of the heart that measures plaque buildup in the arteries, is popular because heart disease, the nation's No. 1 killer, strikes many people without the sort of very high cholesterol that usually predicts it. Doctors say they get many patients who want to know more about their risk because their father suffered a heart attack and died young.

Critics note that no study has linked the use of CT scans with better patient outcomes. They say the test's value is limited because it doesn't identify which plaque are stable and which could rupture and cause a heart attack.

CT scanning, which costs from $100 to $500, has grown exponentially in recent years. One Houston doctor said that there was just one scanner in Houston in the mid-'90s, and now the $1 million machines are all over the city. The Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography estimates more than 200,000 Americans had the test in 2008 at a cost of about $50 million.

The American Heart Association did not endorse the legislation, which Khera estimates could result in millions of Texans being screened.

The Texas legislation was pushed by Screening for Heart Attack Prevention and Eradication, a private organization that has called for CT scans on all asymptomatic men 45 to 75 and all asymptomatic women 55 to 75 — or some 50 million Americans.

Texas Rep. Rene Oliveira, D-Brownsville, the bill's sponsor, stressed the state law won't result in such widespread testing.

“The bill was written to target those people most likely to benefit from it, not everyone,” said Oliveira, who credits the test for saving his life when it revealed blockages that led to double-bypass surgery two years ago.

But Khera, an advocate of the test in select cases, said the Texas law puts the cart before the horse. He questioned unsupported cutoffs of those covered under the law and said it would have been better to wait until more data is available on who really benefits from it.

Dr. William Zoghbi, director of Methodist Hospital's Cardiovascular Imaging Institute, said the cancer risk numbers reported in the study are actually fairly low compared to other tests that take X-rays of the chest area, such as a regular CAT scan or coronary angiography.

The Texas law will require insurance companies pay $200 of the bill for patients to get the test every five years.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 


 
As mentioned above, the story notes that while some experts recommend CT screening for coronary artery calcium deposits in order to increase the number of people receiving treatment to reduce the likelihood of a heart, others are skeptical about the real value of this type of screening for apparently health people. The reporter points out that many heart attacks strike people who do not have very high cholesterol levels or other indicators of elevated risk, but also that “no study has linked the use of CT scans with better patient outcomes.”
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People with psoriasis who haven’t seen improvement with standard treatments now have a new option. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the injectable drug Siliq (broadalumab) for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in adults.

Because of an association with suicidal thoughts and behaviors, Siliq will be sold with a “black box” warning and should be considered only for patients whose psoriasis has not responded—or has stopped responding—to phototherapy or to other systemic medicines taken orally or via injection.

Plaque psoriasis is an autoimmune condition that causes cells to build up on the surface of the skin, forming thick red patches and flaky silver-white scales. Current treatment options for psoriasis include topical treatments (like corticosteroids) phototherapy (using an ultraviolet light box or a laser) and systemic drugs—delivered via a pill, an injection or an IV infusion—that work throughout the body.

Siliq is unique because it binds to the receptor of a protein called interleukin-17, a known contributor to inflammation. By blocking the receptor from being activated, it keeps the body from receiving signals that can fuel inflammatory responses and psoriasis progression. Two other psoriasis drugs currently on the market work similarly, but instead bind to the protein itself.

This small difference is significant, says Dr. Richard Fried, a member of the National Psoriasis Foundation medical board, since responses to drug treatments can vary dramatically from person to person. “Having another agent in our armamentarium that works by a different mechanism is a welcome addition and may prove beneficial to many psoriasis suffers,” he says in an email. (Fried says he has no involvement with the drug or the drug company.)

In the three clinical trials considered for drug approval, more than 50% of patients who used Siliq achieved total skin clearance—the ultimate goal of psoriasis treatments—within a year. The most common side effects of the drug were joint and muscle pain, headache, fatigue, diarrhea, throat pain, nausea, flu, low white blood cell count, fungal infections and reactions at the injection site.

The drug also comes with a more serious warning, as well. In a total of six clinical trials totaling about 6,200 participants, six suicides were reported by people receiving Siliq. People with a history of suicide attempts or depression had an increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior.

Because of these events, the labeling for Siliq will include a Boxed Warning, and the drug will only be available through a restricted REMS (Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy) program. In order to prescribe it, doctors must be certified with the program and must counsel patients about this risk. Patients must also agree to seek medical attention should they experience new or worsening mood changes, anxiety or suicidal thoughts.

A causal association between Siliq and increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior has not been established. Fried, a dermatologist and clinical psychologist, points out that psoriasis itself can be associated with mental health problems.

“Effective treatment has consistently shown reduction in the incidence and severity of depression and reduced likelihood of suicide,” says Fried. He adds that the data on Siliq suggests that it is not only effective in treating psoriasis, but that many patients experience improvement in anxiety and depression, as well.

Siliq, like other psoriasis medications, also affects the immune system. It can raise patients’ risk of infections and shouldn’t be used by people with certain chronic conditions, such as Crohn’s disease or active tuberculosis infections. People should also avoid immunizations with live vaccines while being treated with Siliq.

“Patients and their health care providers should discuss the benefits and risks of Siliq before considering treatment,” said Dr. Julie Beitz, director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, in an agency press release.

The drug’s recommended dosage schedule is an injection once a week for the first three weeks, followed by an injection every other week. Valeant Pharmaceuticals, Siliq’s manufacturer, says that pricing information is not available at this time, and expects to begin sales and marketing in the second half of 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This also is a barely passing satisfactory. The story states that, “In the three clinical trials considered for drug approval, more than 50 percent of patients who used Siliq achieved total skin clearance—the ultimate goal of psoriasis treatments—within a year.”  It would have been more helpful to provide more data, but this statement at least gives us a sense of the scale of the benefit.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
April 29, 2016 - A modified surgical technique may provide a simpler approach to the surgical treatment for one type of chronic headache, according to an "Ideas and Innovations" paper in the May issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery®, the official medical journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS).

Using an incision originally designed for another purpose, surgeons can gain direct access to the nerves involved in some types of chronic temporal headache, according to the report by ASPS Member Surgeon Dr. Ziv M. Peled of Peled Plastic Surgery, San Francisco. He hopes his new technique will "lower the bar to adoption" of effective surgical treatment for patients with this debilitating headache condition.

In recent years, surgery has emerged as an effective treatment option for selected patients with chronic, severe headaches. Developed by plastic surgeons who noticed that some migraine patients had fewer headaches after cosmetic forehead-lift, these procedures address "trigger sites" linked to certain headache patterns.

Severe temporal headaches can result from muscle spasms or enlarged blood vessels putting pressure on specific nerves located on the side of the head--specifically, the zygomaticotemporal branch of the trigeminal nerve (ZTBTN) and sometimes the auriculotemporal nerve (ATN). During these operative procedures, surgeons seek to relieve pressure on these nerves or to disconnect the nerves in order to prevent them from triggering future headaches.

The technique is a new use of an approach that many surgeons are already familiar with: the Gillies incision, used for surgical repair of cheekbone fractures. Dr. Peled found that this short incision, placed in the temple behind the hairline, provides direct access to the ZTBTN and ATN. He describes his initial experience with the new approach in 19 patients.

All patients had chronic temporal headaches that did not improve with medications. They also had a positive result on preoperative testing--either injection of botulinum toxin (Botox) to temporarily block muscle activity, or local anesthetics to temporarily block the involved nerve. Before and after surgery, headache symptoms were assessed using a standard score, the Migraine Headache Index (MHI).

As in previous studies, surgery provided significant relief from chronic temporal headaches. Average MHI score decreased from about 132 points before surgery to 52 points afterward. Of the 19 patients, 16 had at least a 50 percent reduction in headache symptoms.

It's unclear why the three remaining patients didn't have good improvement, although Dr. Peled notes that two of the three had had temporal headaches for decades before surgery. None of the patients experienced complications, and there was little or no visible scarring.

The experience supports a growing body of research showing good outcomes with surgery for chronic temporal headaches. Most recently, a study in Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery reported similar results whether the nerve is decompressed or disconnected. However, previous studies have used technically more complex approaches to access the ZTBTN.

The simplified approach using the Gillies incision combines the advantages of other approaches to chronic temporal headache surgery while minimizing the disadvantages, Dr. Peled believes. He comments, "This is a straightforward technique and effective procedure that may make it easier for plastic surgeons to adopt and offer surgical options for patients with this debilitating condition."

Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® is published by Wolters Kluwer.

Click here to read "A Novel Surgical Approach to Chronic Temporal Headaches."

For more than 60 years, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® (http://journals. ) has been the one consistently excellent reference for every specialist who uses plastic surgery techniques or works in conjunction with a plastic surgeon. The official journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® brings subscribers up-to-the-minute reports on the latest techniques and follow-up for all areas of plastic and reconstructive surgery, including breast reconstruction, experimental studies, maxillofacial reconstruction, hand and microsurgery, burn repair, and cosmetic surgery, as well as news on medico-legal issues.

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) is the world's largest organization of board-certified plastic surgeons. Representing more than 7,000 Member Surgeons, the Society is recognized as a leading authority and information source on aesthetic and reconstructive plastic surgery. ASPS comprises more than 94 percent of all board-certified plastic surgeons in the United States. Founded in 1931, the Society represents physicians certified by The American Board of Plastic Surgery or The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada. ASPS advances quality care to plastic surgery patients by encouraging high standards of training, ethics, physician practice and research in plastic surgery. You can learn more and visit the American Society of Plastic Surgeons at http://www. or http://www. and http://www. .

Wolters Kluwer is a global leader in professional information services. Professionals in the areas of legal, business, tax, accounting, finance, audit, risk, compliance and healthcare rely on Wolters Kluwer's market leading information-enabled tools and software solutions to manage their business efficiently, deliver results to their clients, and succeed in an ever more dynamic world.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2015 annual revenues of €4.2 billion. The group serves customers in over 180 countries, and employs over 19,000 people worldwide. The company is headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands. Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions that headache symptoms were assessed using the Migraine Headache Index (MHI), which is calculated by multiplying together the frequency, intensity, and duration of migraine headache, according to another paper published by the American Society of Plastic Surgeons.
Out of the 19 patients mentioned in this news release, 16 had at least a 50 percent reduction in headache symptoms.  It also reveals the absolute numbers, pointing out that the average MHI score decreased from approximately 132 points before surgery to 52 points afterward.
Since the release communicates a quantitative estimate by giving both absolute and relative benefit data, we give it a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Over the past few decades, as breast cancer has increasingly been treated as a systemic disease, the number of surgeries performed on the most serious cases has plummeted. With better drugs and radiation techniques available, the proportion of women with Stage 4 breast cancer who had surgery dropped from 67.8 percent in 1988 to 25.1 percent in 2011, according to a study published Wednesday in the journal JAMA Surgery.

But the study raises an intriguing question about that approach. It shows that women who had surgery survived longer than those who didn't: a median of 28 months vs. 19 months. When the researchers examined a small subset of the group — those who survived 10 years — they found that 9.6 percent had chosen to have surgery while 2.9 percent had not.

"Maybe we need to revisit this question of surgery," said Mary C. Schroeder, an assistant professor in the College of Pharmacy at the University of Iowa and one of the authors of the study. "It may not be right for all women, but it may be better for some women than it was in 1995."

[He had a 3.5-pound tumor and months to live. Here's how he survived]

Previous research has reached the same conclusion, but a significant problem with this study and others like it is that they rely on retrospective data, looking back over any number of years, said Michael S. Sabel, the chief of surgical oncology at the University of Michigan, who was not involved in the newly published study. In retrospective research, it's impossible to filter out the countless reasons that a woman and her doctor might have made the decision to treat the cancer with or without surgery, leaving the conclusions unreliable for clinical decision-making, he said.

"It's premature to suggest, and it’s a difficult conversation to have with patients, that removing the breast will help them live longer in the face of Stage 4 disease," Sabel said.

Two small prospective studies have suggested no survival difference among women with Stage 4 breast cancer who have surgery and those who don't, he said. A large, randomized, prospective study currently being conducted by the Eastern Clinical Oncology Group should produce the most reliable data on the subject to date, he said.

In a Stage 4 case, cancer cells have left the breast, metastizing to bones or other organs, which presents a more dire and immediate threat to a woman's survival than the presence of the original tumor. Still there may be reasons to remove the cancer in the breast. Some evidence suggests that it may be influencing the woman's immunological response to her cancer. Or it could be continuously "seeding" the spread of cancer to other parts of the body.

In their study, Schroeder; Alexandra Thomas, a professor at Iowa's Carver College of Medicine, and others looked at 21,372 women from 1988 to 2011 who had Stage 4 breast cancer at the time of their original diagnosis and did not receive radiation as part of their first course of therapy. Their median age was 63.

[Cancer trials are changing. That could mean faster access to better drugs]

The researchers found that median survival for all of the women improved from 20 to 26 months as more sophisticated treatments and better imaging techniques developed over that time. As other research has shown, African American women were over-represented among women who have Stage 4 breast cancer at the time they are first diagnosed.

In interviews, Schroeder and Thomas stressed that each decision about whether to have surgery is based on many factors that only a woman and her doctors can assess, in particular how far the cancer has spread and how sick she is.

But with better therapies to control the cancer systemically and improved imaging that finds ever-smaller deposits of cancer in other parts of the body, it may be time to see whether surgery also can help increase the length of survival times, they said.

"Aggressive local therapy may benefit select women, such as those with an already established potential for durable remission," they wrote in their paper. That would include younger women whose cancers have not spread in great volume to other organs and who have certain kinds of cancers that respond better to drugs, Lisa Newman, medical director of the Henry Ford Health System's International Center for the Study of Breast Cancer Subtypes, said in an e-mail. Newman was not involved in the study.

"Theoretically...patients with metastatic breast cancer might benefit from surgery to remove the cancerous breast tumor in combination with medical therapies as a more complete reduction of their total body cancer burden," she added.

With $45 billion pledge to charity, Mark Zuckerberg and wife imagine ‘a world without suffering from disease’

The myth of sugar-free drinks, candy: Study shows they can wreak havoc on teeth, too

Modern men tend to overeat like cavemen as a way of showing off to women

For more health news, you can sign up for our weekly newsletter here.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The Washington Post story quantifies the potential benefits of surgery, detailing that women who underwent breast surgery had better survival rates than those that didn’t (median of 28 months versus 19 months). Despite the better outcomes, the article adds the number of surgeries dropped from 67.8 percent in 1998 to 25.1 percent in 2011, which it describes as an “intriguing question” about that approach.
Furthermore, the story is quick to point out early in the story that surgery may not be the right option for all women and “may be better for some women than it was in 1995.”
We applaud the fact that the benefits are reported in absolute terms and in a more cautionary manner, which is why we give it a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, March 20, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Tiny pellets could treat arthritic knee pain, delaying the need for knee replacement surgery, a small study has found.

Microparticles inserted into small blood vessels around the knee helped reduce the pain and improve function in eight arthritis sufferers, according to clinical trial results. The results were presented Monday at the Society of Interventional Radiology's annual meeting, in Los Angeles.

"Patients overall were able to improve their physical function in the knee after the procedure, and there were no adverse events related to this treatment," said lead researcher Dr. Sandeep Bagla.

Bagla is director of interventional radiology at the Vascular Institute of Virginia in Woodbridge. Boston Scientific, maker of the microparticles, funded the study.

Much of the pain that comes from knee arthritis actually stems from inflammation in the lining of the knee joint, also called the synovium, Bagla said. In fact, small blood vessels created by degenerative arthritis feed this inflammation by increasing blood flow to the lining.

To treat this, Bagla and his colleagues decided to try blocking those tiny blood vessels using microparticles -- spheres about a tenth of a millimeter in size made from a synthetic gel-like material.

The microparticles are inserted using a catheter run through a pinhole-sized incision, in a procedure that lasts between 45 and 90 minutes, Bagla said.

"It's an outpatient procedure, and no physical therapy is required before or after this procedure," he said.

The small pilot study -- the first U.S. clinical trial of this procedure -- involved 20 patients with moderate to severe arthritis pain. Only 13 had undergone the procedure by the time of Monday's annual meeting, and only eight had made it to the one-month follow-up, Bagla said.

Those eight patients averaged a 58-point decrease in pain, as measured on a 100-point visual scale used to estimate pain, Bagla said. They started with an average baseline of 72, which means their pain was brought down to manageable levels, he said.

Physical function of their knee also improved, based on an index used to judge the effects of osteoarthritis, Bagla added.

Overall, the two scales represented an 80 percent improvement in function, the researchers concluded.

Bagla said no side effects are expected because the procedure only blocks additional blood flow to the knee, rather than cutting it off altogether.

"You don't normally have this degree of increased blood supply to this lining. We're not blocking normal blood vessels to the knee or leg or bone or cartilage," he said.

Final results from this clinical trial are expected to be released this summer. Researchers are already kicking off a second, larger trial to better understand how the procedure works and which patients it might benefit, Bagla said.

They think it will be most appropriate for people between ages 40 and 70 who aren't ready to go through knee replacement, or people who are on chronic pain medication for their knee arthritis, Bagla said.

"Perhaps we can demonstrate and prove patients do not need to be on these medications and can alternatively go through a minimally invasive procedure like this to reduce their knee pain," Bagla said.

Dr. Suresh Vedantham, president of the Society of Interventional Radiology, called the new procedure "very promising," given that it focuses on the inflamed knee lining that causes the pain.

"This therapy is very well-targeted to that particular mechanism, and certainly it should be investigated further," said Vedantham, who wasn't involved with the study. He's a professor of radiology and surgery at the Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology at Washington University in St. Louis.

Research presented at medical meetings is typically considered preliminary until it is published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Arthritis Foundation has more about knee pain.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story passed muster by saying patients studied so far “averaged a 58-point decrease in pain, as measured on a 100-point visual scale used to estimate pain,” starting from an average baseline of 72. It said that meant pain was “brought down to manageable levels.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is such a radical change in thought that it’s been hard for many people to get their heads around it,” said Dr. Monica Morrow, chief of the breast service at Sloan-Kettering and an author of the study, which is being published Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association. The paid for the study.

Doctors and patients alike find it easy to accept more cancer treatment on the basis of a study, Dr. Morrow said, but get scared when the data favor less treatment.

The new findings are part of a trend to move away from radical surgery for breast cancer. Rates of , removal of the whole breast, began declining in the 1980s after studies found that for many patients, survival rates after and radiation were just as good as those after mastectomy.

The trend reflects an evolving understanding of breast cancer. In decades past, there was a belief that surgery could “get it all” — eradicate the cancer before it could spread to organs and bones. But research has found that breast cancer can begin to spread early, even when are small, leaving microscopic traces of the disease after surgery.

The modern approach is to cut out obvious tumors — because lumps big enough to detect may be too dense for drugs and radiation to destroy — and to use radiation and chemotherapy to wipe out microscopic disease in other places.

But doctors have continued to think that even microscopic disease in the lymph nodes should be cut out to improve the odds of survival. And until recently, they counted cancerous lymph nodes to gauge the severity of the disease and choose chemotherapy. But now the number is not so often used to determine drug treatment, doctors say. What matters more is whether the disease has reached any nodes at all. If any are positive, the disease could become deadly. Chemotherapy is recommended, and the drugs are the same, no matter how many nodes are involved.

The new results do not apply to all patients, only to women whose disease and treatment meet the criteria in the study.

The tumors were early, at clinical stage T1 or T2, meaning less than two inches across. Biopsies of one or two armpit nodes had found cancer, but the nodes were not enlarged enough to be felt during an exam, and the cancer had not spread anywhere else. The women had lumpectomies, and most also had radiation to the entire breast, and chemotherapy or hormone-blocking drugs, or both.

The study, at 115 medical centers, included 891 patients. Their median age was in the mid-50s, and they were followed for a median of 6.3 years.

After the initial node , the women were assigned at random to have 10 or more additional nodes removed, or to leave the nodes alone. In 27 percent of the women who had additional nodes removed, those nodes were cancerous. But over time, the two groups had no difference in survival: more than 90 percent survived at least five years. Recurrence rates in the armpit were also similar, less than 1 percent. If breast cancer is going to recur under the arm, it tends to do so early, so the follow-up period was long enough, the researchers said.

One potential weakness in the study is that there was not complete follow-up information on 166 women, about equal numbers from each group. The researchers said that did not affect the results. A statistician who was not part of the study said the missing information should have been discussed further, but probably did not have an important impact.

It is not known whether the findings also apply to women who do not have radiation and chemotherapy, or to those who have only part of the breast irradiated. Nor is it known whether the findings could be applied to other types of cancer.

The results mean that women like those in the study will still have to have at least one removed, to look for cancer and decide whether they will need more treatment. But taking out just one or a few nodes should be enough.

Dr. Armando E. Giuliano, the lead author of the study and the chief of surgical oncology at the Cancer Institute at St. John’s Health Center in , Calif., said: “It shouldn’t come as a big surprise, but it will. It’s hard for us as surgeons and medical oncologists and radiation oncologists to accept that you don’t have to remove the nodes in the armpit.”

Dr. Grant W. Carlson, a professor of surgery at the Winship Cancer Institute at , and the author of an editorial accompanying the study, said that by routinely taking out many nodes, “I have a feeling we’ve been doing a lot of harm.”

Indeed, women in the study who had the nodes taken out were far more likely (70 percent versus 25 percent) to have complications like infections, abnormal sensations and fluid collecting in the armpit. They were also more likely to have lymphedema.

But Dr. Carlson said that some of his colleagues, even after hearing the new study results, still thought the nodes should be removed.

“The dogma is strong,” he said. “It’s a little frustrating.”

Eventually, he said, genetic testing of breast tumors might be enough to determine the need for treatment, and eliminate the need for many node biopsies.

Two other breast surgeons not involved with the study said they would take it seriously.

Dr. Elisa R. Port, the chief of breast surgery at in Manhattan, said: “It’s a big deal in the world of breast cancer. It’s definitely practice-changing.”

Dr. Alison Estabrook, the chief of the comprehensive breast center at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt hospital in New York said surgeons had long been awaiting the results.

“In the past, surgeons thought our role was to get out all the cancer,” Dr. Estabrook said. “Now he’s saying we don’t really have to do that.”

But both Dr. Estabrook and Dr. Port said they would still have to make judgment calls during surgery and remove lymph nodes that looked or felt suspicious.

The new research grew out of efforts in the 1990s to minimize lymph node surgery in the armpit, called axillary dissection. Surgeons developed a technique called sentinel node biopsy, in which they injected a dye into the breast and then removed just one or a few nodes that the dye reached first, on the theory that if the was spreading, cancer cells would show up in those nodes. If there was no cancer, no more nodes were taken. But if there were cancer cells, the surgeon would cut out more nodes.

Although the technique spared many women, many others with positive nodes still had extensive cutting in the armpit, and suffered from side effects.

“Women really dread the axillary dissection,” Dr. Giuliano said. “They fear lymphedema. There’s numbness, , and some have limitation of motion. There are a fair number of serious complications. Women know it.”

After armpit surgery, 20 percent to 30 percent of women develop lymphedema, Dr. Port said, and radiation may increase the rate to 40 percent to 50 percent. Physical therapy can help, but there is no cure.

The complications — and the fact that there was no proof that removing the nodes prolonged survival — inspired Dr. Giuliano to compare women with and without axillary dissection. Some doctors objected. They were so sure cancerous nodes had to come out that they said the study was unethical and would endanger women.

“Some prominent institutions wouldn’t even take part in it,” Dr. Giuliano said, though he declined to name them. “They’re very supportive now. We don’t want to hurt their feelings. They’ve seen the light.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job providing some numbers on benefits, but we wish it had provided more and explained some things a bit more. It says, for example, “In 27 percent of the women who had additional nodes removed, those nodes were cancerous.” How many women had additional nodes removed and, of those, how many had cancerous nodes? A figure like 27% means 1 out of every 4 women had nodes that were, indeed, cancerous, which seems to conflict with other statements in the story about chemotherapy and radiation wiping out the cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Cannabidiol, which is found in marijuana plants, reduced the number of convulsive seizures in children with a severe and often fatal epilepsy disorder, according to research published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine . Among children taking cannabidiol, the decrease in the frequency of convulsive seizures -- which involve a loss of consciousness, stiffened muscles and jerking movements -- was 23 percentage points greater than the decrease in seizures among children taking a placebo.

The study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled human trial, which is considered the gold standard test for any new medicine.

GW Pharmaceuticals, a company that is developing cannabidiol medicines, helped subsidize the study.

"After 3,800 years of cannabis use for epilepsy ... we finally have solid evidence," said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, lead author of the study and director of NYU Langone's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center. His own previous research indicates that cannabis was used as early as 1800 B.C. in Sumeria to treat epilepsy; neurologists of the Victorian period used Indian hemp, which is rich in cannabidiol, for the same purpose.

Despite the generally positive results, most study participants reported side effects that included vomiting, fatigue, diarrhea and some liver issues.

A total of 120 patients with Dravet syndrome, ranging in age from nearly 2 to 18 years old, were randomly assigned to receive either an oral solution of cannabidiol or a placebo for a 14-week period.

"Dravet syndrome is a severe childhood-onset epilepsy that causes multiple kinds of seizures, developmental delays, speech and language problems, behavioral issues and movement and balance problems," said Brandy Fureman, vice president of research and new therapies at the Epilepsy Foundation. She was not involved in the new study.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that disrupts electrical communication between neurons in the brain. Considered a spectrum disorder, different epilepsy syndromes are defined by clusters of symptoms or features and treated accordingly.

Existing epilepsy medications usually don't work for patients with Dravet, so "up to 20% of these children die from seizures before age 20 years," Devinsky explained.

Within the study, individual participants experienced convulsive seizures at a rate ranging from four per month, on average, to 1,717 per month.

During the 14-week study, frequency of convulsive seizures decreased from an average of 12.4 to 5.9 per month in the cannabidiol group, compared with 14.9 to 14.1 in the placebo group. On average, the change in seizure frequency amounted to a 39% decrease for the cannabidiol group patients, compared with a roughly 13% decrease among the placebo group.

Five percent of the children became entirely seizure-free during the 14-week study. Overall, parents in the cannabidiol group felt that they witnessed "significantly greater" positive changes in their children than parents in the placebo group.

However, there was a downside. Most (93%) of the cannabidiol patients reported side effects, though three-quarters of the placebo group patients did as well. Nine out of 61 cannabidiol group patients dropped out of the study, eight of them because of side effects, compared with just three of the 59 placebo group patients.

"Tiredness (somnolence or fatigue) was most common; others were decreased appetite, diarrhea and vomiting," Devinsky explained.

Based on the overall results, Devinsky believes CBD should be evaluated for epilepsy types beyond Dravet syndrome, which is caused by a genetic mutation and affects about one in 20,000 to 40,000 children in the United States.

"No one study decides an issue; the sample size is still relatively small (because this is a rare syndrome and so hard to study large numbers of cases) and the duration of treatment so far has been relatively short," Hall, who was not involved in the research, wrote in an email.

Still, Hall said the research, which carefully measured safety and efficacy for a "substantial" number of children, showed "clear evidence of benefits in reducing seizure frequency and severity over the duration of the trial."

"Interestingly, it looks similar to our other seizure medications in terms of efficacy and tolerability," Porter said. "So, sadly, not a home run for most patients but another tool in our treatment regimen."

The marijuana plant is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance. Scientific researchers studying cannabidiol must meet federal security requirements and follow federal practices. Some scientists have said these federal requirements have slowed research supporting medicinal benefits of the plant.

Porter believes the study may open the door to having "more thoughtful discussions with our patients about the efficacy and the side effects" of cannabidiol. "Hopefully, the FDA will see this as a sign it should be moved off of Schedule I. If it stays on Schedule I, we will have trouble getting it to our patients when it does become available."

Changing the schedule of a drug falls to the Drug Enforcement Administration or the Department of Health and Human Services. An interested party, such as a drug company, may also petition for the process to begin. The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institute of Drug Abuse provide guidance to the DEA when reviewing scientific evidence on which to base a schedule change.

He noted that generating more evidence of effective use is "a good thing."

The University of Queensland's Hall believes that boundaries between medical use of cannabinoids and the recreational use of cannabis by adults should not be blurred. "If future clinical trials confirm these promising results, then appropriate regulation will enable the drug to be safely used for medical purposes," he said.

The Epilepsy Foundation's Fureman said, "before publication of this trial, much of the clinical evidence about CBD's effects on people's seizures was uncontrolled and anecdotal." She added that the new study is "critically important" for the epilepsy community, which believes a CBD-based medical product would be a first-in-class therapeutic option.

On the need for more scientific research, all these experts agree.

As Devinsky said, "natural substances are not necessarily safe and effective. They need to be evaluated rigorously."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story says in the first paragraph: “Among children taking cannabidiol, the decrease in the frequency of convulsive seizures — which involve a loss of consciousness, stiffened muscles and jerking movements — was 23 percentage points greater than the decrease in seizures among children taking a placebo.”
What exactly does this mean? That, for example, the children taking a placebo experienced seizures on 73 out of every 100 days during the trial and that those taking the drug experienced seizures on 50 out of every 100 days? We would need to know the actual number of children who did and did not experience seizures and then know more about the frequency of those seizures to understand this reduction.
Later in the story, there is a better explanation of the comparison of frequency of seizures, and the story does something that most stories don’t ever do. It explains the range of experiences during the trial, not just the average. It says, “Within the study, individual participants experienced convulsive seizures at a rate ranging from four per month, on average, to 1,717 per month. During the 14-week study, frequency of convulsive seizures decreased from an average of 12.4 to 5.9 per month in the cannabidiol group, compared with 14.9 to 14.1 in the placebo group. On average, the change in seizure frequency amounted to a 39% decrease for the cannabidiol group patients, compared with a roughly 13% decrease among the placebo group.”
That’s quite a range, and it would have been good for the story to include a sentence explaining that the sheer variety in the patient population would make it difficult to adequately assess the efficacy of the drug in a trial this small in size. We’re unclear on the math here, though. It looks to us that there was a 26 percentage point difference between the reduction in the drug group and the placebo group.
Still, this is a lot of data-driven detail we don’t normally see in news stories, so we appreciated this.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An injection of Botox works about as well as a surgically implanted device to help women with very severe incontinence, researchers reported Tuesday.

It’s good news for women with severe urge incontinence, who can choose between treatments based on preference, said Dr. Cindy Amundsen of Duke University, who led the study.

“What we have learned from the study is the treatments are both good and it will just help inform physicians and patients who are trying to make a decision between these two therapies,” Amundsen said.

“We are actually not surprised that there isn’t a big difference between the two because both therapies are effective at relaxing the overactive bladder muscles.”

Women can choose between a surgical procedure, which is more expensive at first, versus regular Botox injections, which are less costly and less invasive but which could add up over time, Amundsen said.

The team studied women with severe incontinence who could not be helped with drugs or other treatments. The women in the study had to suffer at least six episodes of incontinence over three days.

The Botox injections freed 20 percent of the women in the study of incontinence, compared to 4 percent who had a nerve stimulator implant, Amundesen and colleagues reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

“Forty-six percent in the onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) group and 26 percent in the sacral neuromodulation group had at least a 75 percent reduction in the number of episodes of urgency incontinence,” they added.

Incontinence may sound funny, but it’s no joke, the researchers said.

“The prevalence of this disruptive condition is common and increases with age, from 17 percent of women older than 45 years to 27 percent older than 75 years in the United States,” they wrote.

And, according to the National Institutes of Health, between 25 percent and 45 percent of all women have some degree of urinary incontinence.

“Women experience urinary incontinence twice as often as men,” the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, part of the NIH, says on its website.

“Pregnancy, childbirth, menopause, and the structure of the female urinary tract account for this difference.”

The researchers at nine medical centers did a head to head comparison of a single Botox injection to the implanted medical device, assigning 381 women to randomly get one or the other treatment. The women were asked to keep diaries for six months.

Both treatments calm down the nerves responsible for signaling the bladder to empty.

On average, both treatments cut the number of “accidents” – Botox by almost four times a day and the nerve stimulator by about three times a day.

But both groups of women reported equal satisfaction, and more women in the Botox group got urinary tract infections – 35 percent versus 11 percent in the surgery group. Amundsen said it’s not clear why but her team is studyingthis to find out.

They’re also studying the cost difference. Most women who get either treatment have insurance that pays, Amundsen said.

Incontinence is embarrassing and troubling to men and women alike, who are often unwilling to even tell a doctor. They end up staying close to home and avoiding travel, shopping and visits.

There are different types of incontinence. This study covered urge incontinence, but there’s also stress incontinence, which is caused by pressure on the bladder.

Overflow incontinence is caused when the bladder never really empties. That can be a problem for men with enlarged prostates.

Doctors usually try to start people off with lifestyle treatment, such as weight loss, drinking less caffeine and alcohol, and avoiding lifting heavy objects. Exercises to strengthen the pelvic floor muscles can help, as can “bladder training” to accustom the body to urinating at regular times.

Medications can help as well, although they often have unpleasant side effects such as extremely dry mouth.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefits are stated as such:
The Botox injections freed 20 percent of the women in the study of incontinence, compared to 4 percent who had a nerve stimulator implant, Amundesen and colleagues reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
“Forty-six percent in the onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) group and 26 percent in the sacral neuromodulation group had at least a 75 percent reduction in the number of episodes of urgency incontinence,” they added.
and
On average, both treatments cut the number of “accidents” – Botox by almost four times a day and the nerve stimulator by about three times a day.
This is sufficient for a Satisfactory rating on this criterion. We would have liked to have seen more discussion about actual improvements (perceived and otherwise) to patient quality of life. The closing line of the study brings this into question, i.e. how the work is of “uncertain clinical importance,” and good interview questions with both a study author and independent expert source could have greatly clarified the issue.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The test has the potential to help curb overtreatment in cancer care.

A new genetic test to gauge the aggressiveness of prostate cancer may help tens of thousands of men each year decide whether they need to treat their cancer right away or can safely monitor it.

The new test, which goes on sale Wednesday, joins another one that recently came on the market. Both analyze multiple genes in a biopsy sample and give a score for aggressiveness, similar to tests used now for certain breast and colon cancers.

Doctors say tests like these have the potential to curb a major problem in cancer care — overtreatment. Prostate tumors usually grow so slowly they will never threaten a man's life, but some prove fatal and there is no reliable way now to tell which ones will. Treatment with surgery, radiation or hormone blockers isn't needed in most cases and can cause impotence or incontinence, yet most men are afraid to skip it.

"We're not giving patients enough information to make their decision," said Dr. Peter Carroll, chairman of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. "You can shop for a toaster" better than for prostate treatment, he said.

A study he led of the newest test — the Oncotype DX Genomic Prostate Score — is set for discussion Wednesday at an American Urological Association meeting in San Diego.

The results suggest the test could triple the number of men thought to be at such low risk for aggressive disease that monitoring is a clearly safe option. Conversely, the test also suggested some tumors were more aggressive than doctors had believed.

Independent experts say such a test is desperately needed but that it's unclear how much information this one adds or whether it will be enough to persuade men with low-risk tumors to forgo treatment, and treat it only if it gets worse. Only 10 percent who are candidates for monitoring choose it now.

"The question is, what's the magnitude of difference that would change the patient's mind?" said Dr. Bruce Roth, a cancer specialist at Washington University in St. Louis.

One man may view a 15 percent chance that his tumor is aggressive as low risk "but someone else might say, 'Oh my God, let's set the surgery up tomorrow,'" he said. "I don't think it's a slam dunk."

Also unknown: Will insurers pay for the expensive test without evidence it leads to better care or saves lives?

The newest test was developed by Genomic Health Inc., which has sold a similar one for breast cancer since 2004. Doctors at first were leery of it until studies in more groups of women proved its value, and the same may happen with the prostate test, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, the American Cancer Society's deputy chief medical officer.

The company will charge $3,820 for the prostate test and says it can save money by avoiding costlier, unnecessary treatment. Another test for assessing prostate cancer risk that came out last summer — Prolaris by Myriad Genetics Inc. — sells for $3,400.

Both companies can sell the tests without Food and Drug Administration approval under separate rules that govern lab diagnostics. Myriad Genetics has published nine studies on Prolaris involving more than 3,000 patients. Genomic Health has not published any results on the prostate test, another thing that makes doctors wary. Yet it has a track record from its breast cancer test.

About 240,000 men in the U.S. are diagnosed with prostate cancer each year, and about half are classified as low risk using current methods. Doctors now base risk estimates on factors such as a man's age and how aggressive cells look from biopsies that give 12 to 14 tissue samples. But tumors often are spread out and vary from one spot to the other.

"Unless you can be sure your biopsy has hit the most aggressive part that's in the prostate, you can't be sure" how accurate your risk estimate is, explained Dr. Eric Klein, chief of urology at the Cleveland Clinic, who led early development of the Oncotype prostate cancer test.

For one study, researchers used prostates removed from 440 men. They measured the activity of hundreds of genes thought to be involved in whether the cancer spread beyond the prostate or proved fatal. A second study of biopsies from 167 patients narrowed it down to 81 genes, and researchers picked 17 that seemed to predict aggressiveness no matter the location in the tumor.

A third study used single needle-biopsy samples from 395 UCSF patients scheduled to have their prostates removed. The gene test accurately predicted the aggressiveness of their cancer once doctors were able to see the whole prostate after surgery.

Using one current method, 37 of the 395 men would have been called very low risk and good candidates for monitoring. Adding the gene test put 100 men into that category, said another study leader, Dr. Matthew Cooperberg of UCSF. The gene test shifted about half of the men into either a lower or a higher risk category.

"It went both ways — that was the remarkable thing. In any category of risk it added independent information compared to the standard criteria we use today," Carroll said. "More work needs to be done, but, in my opinion, this is a very good start."

However, Dr. Kevin McVary, chairman of urology at Southern Illinois University School of Medicine and a spokesman for the Urological Association, said the test must be validated in more men before it can be widely used.

"It's not there yet," he said.

UCSF just got a federal grant to see how men choose treatments and whether this test might sway them.

"We throw all these numbers at them. Are they really going to make a better decision?" Cooperberg said.

Dean Smith, 60, a retired marketing executive from Mill Valley, Calif., is following his doctor's advice to monitor the cancer he was diagnosed with in March. He said a gene test may have made him more comfortable with that decision.

At least six of his friends suffered side effects ranging from urinary leakage to inability to have sex after having their prostates removed.

"I would suspect that having cancer and having to live with it would be very difficult for them," but it doesn't bother him, Smith said. "I will die from something other than prostate cancer, I guarantee you."

Copyright 2013 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story carefully framed the potential benefits – “could triple the number of men thought to e at such low risk for aggressive disease that monitoring is a clearly safe option.  Conversely, the test also suggested some tumors were more aggressive than doctors had believed.”
It explained that one manufacturer had published 9 studies while the other had not published any results yet – “another thing that makes doctors wary.”
It explained that in one study:
“Using one current method, 37 of the 395 men would have been called very low risk and good candidates for monitoring. Adding the gene test put 100 men into that category, said another study leader, Dr. Matthew Cooperberg of UCSF. The gene test shifted about half of the men into either a lower or a higher risk category.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, May 8, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Countless people -- often men with enlarged prostates -- need to visit the bathroom during the night. But help could soon be at hand in the form of a nasal spray, new research suggests.

A spritz of a synthetic hormone, already used by bed-wetting kids, might benefit older people struggling with the problem called nocturia.

"Nocturia is very common in patients over 50 years old, and can cause significant problems by causing loss of sleep, and injury due to falls," said study lead author Dr. Jed Kaminetsky.

The millions of people with nocturia wake up two or more times a night to urinate. Besides an enlarged prostate, Kaminetsky said, common causes are bladder problems, poor circulation and obesity.

Kaminetsky is a clinical assistant professor of urology at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

In the United States there's no approved drug to treat the problem, the study authors said.

The new drug, while promising, is of concern because of its potential to lower blood sodium levels in the elderly, one doctor said. Meanwhile, another researcher suggested that exercise might help stave off nocturia.

Known as SER-120, the nasal spray contains desmopressin, a low-dose synthetic version of the naturally occurring hormone vasopressin. Vasopressin, an anti-diuretic, reduces urine production.

SER-120 appears to delay urine production for four to six hours during sleep, said Kaminetsky, "and wears off by morning when patients awaken and start to drink fluids."

He is scheduled to present his team's research Sunday in San Diego at a meeting of the American Urological Association. The research was funded by the spray's manufacturer, Serenity Pharmaceuticals.

Desmopressin is commonly used to treat bed-wetting among children ages 6 and up, the study authors pointed out.

To assess its potential in adults, the study team enlisted nearly 1,400 men and women, 50 and older, who had a history of nocturia.

For three months, participants were randomly assigned to use either the desmopressin spray (two doses were tried) or a non-medicinal spray (a placebo).

Patients kept three-day urination diaries, and filled out quality-of-life questionnaires.

Desmopressin spray prompted "a significant decrease" in the frequency of nightly bathroom trips compared with the untreated group, Kaminetsky said. On average, patients reported at least two fewer episodes a night.

The treatment group also experienced a "significant increase" in the length of time they could sleep before awakening to urinate. That uninterrupted sleep period extended to more than four hours, Kaminetsky said.

The researchers also found that those in the higher-dose spray group experienced a "significant improvement" in overall quality of life, compared with the untreated group.

Though SER-120 is still considered investigational, Kaminetsky said the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing the findings, with a possible decision late this year.

Dr. Tomas Griebling, a professor of urology at the University of Kansas, described the study results as "promising," but added a note of caution.

"Other researchers have examined the utility and safety of desmopressin for the treatment of nocturia in the past," he said. "However, there have been concerns about safety, particularly in elderly patients."

Griebling said the American Geriatrics Society includes desmopressin in the Beers Criteria for potentially inappropriate medications for older adults, primarily because of concerns about resulting low blood sodium levels.

But the lower doses used in this study (1.5 or 0.75 mcg) "may help to improve the overall safety profile, particularly for geriatric patients," he said. "Additional research will be needed to fully answer this question in the future."

The study team said two of the higher-dose patients developed significantly low blood sodium levels (hyponatremia) as did one person taking the placebo.

Dr. Julien Dagenais, a urologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, explored nocturia from another angle. He analyzed physical activity data reported by more than 10,000 men and women (aged 20 and older) in a U.S. health and nutrition survey conducted between 2005 and 2010.

People who reported higher levels of exercise were less likely to suffer from nocturia, Dagenais found. This suggests that the anti-inflammatory impact of routine exercise may minimize nocturia, he said.

These findings will also be presented at the American Urological Association meeting. Data and conclusions presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

There's more on nocturia at the National Association for Continence.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’re giving the benefit of the doubt on the rating, though we wish the story were more precise. The story says the results showed “a significant decrease,” and the average was “two fewer episodes” per night, but a reduction from how many episodes total is unclear.   The same lack of details complicate the discussion of the measured increase in uninterrupted sleep and quality of life. The numbers in the story, though a little vague, at least give some sense of the magnitude of the benefit in terms that are meaningful to people with this condition.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Rome, Italy, 13 June 2015: The results of a study presented today at the European League Against Rheumatism Annual Congress (EULAR 2015) showed that, in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, a good clinical response to maintenance treatment with a tumour necrosis factor inhibitor (TNFi) was maintained even when the dose was reduced by one-third.

Reducing the TNFi dose by two-thirds resulted in more flares (exacerbations of symptoms and signs) but these subsided when the higher dose of TNFi was restarted, and did not adversely affect subsequent progression of any disability. In some cases however, patients maintained a clinical response after stopping the TNFi altogether.

"The optimal management of RA involves achieving the lowest possible disease activity - ideally remission, and then maintaining this level of control," said lead author, Dr. James Galloway, Department of Rheumatology, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK. "Findings from our study have shown that adopting a TNFi dose reduction strategy can still meet this objective, with no compromise on symptom control for the patient and offering a more cost-effective option by substantially reducing the high drug costs associated with TNFi maintenance therapy."

RA is a chronic inflammatory disease characterised by joint inflammation and damage, functional disability and significantly increased mortality. Early intervention using a conventional synthetic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD) such as methotrexate is critical in preventing structural joint damage and progressive loss of function. For those patients who either fail to respond, or who develop an inadequate response to these drugs over time, a biologic DMARD is an effective add-on treatment option.2 The first choice of biologic therapy is usually a TNFi2 and currently identical dosing regimens of TNFi are used both to induce and then maintain a clinical response.1

Over the first six months of the study, flares (exacerbations of symptoms and signs) occurred in 14% of patients who stayed on the same TNFi dose, compared to a similar figure of 13% in those patients for whom the dose was reduced by one-third. A two-thirds dose reduction increased the odds of a flare occurring by four times compared with a one-third dose reduction, with flares occurring in 37% of patients. Post-dose reduction flares resolved when the original dose of TNFi was restarted. There were no significant differences in self-reported measures of disability (Health Assessment Questionnaire score) with either dose reduction strategy at six months.

The OPTTIRA study is a 12-month multicentre, randomised controlled trial designed to evaluate if reducing TNFi doses (of either etanercept or adalimumab) caused a loss of response in RA patients who were also receiving a synthetic DMARD. To be eligible, patients had to demonstrate stable low disease activity (DAS28 less than 3.2) for over three months. Patients with serious concomitant illness, or those taking high-dose steroids (more than 10mg prednisolone daily) were excluded.

Of the 47 patients who reduced, then stopped their TNFi after six months, 45% (21/47) succeeded without flaring, and their final mean DAS28 score after stopping treatment was 2.2, demonstrating low disease activity.

For further information on this study, or to request an interview with the study lead, please do not hesitate to contact the EULAR congress 

Press Office in Room 5B of Fiera Roma during EULAR 2015 or on: 

Email: eularpressoffice@cohnwolfe.com 

Onsite tel: +44 (0) 7738 890 799 / +44 (0) 20 7331 5442 

Twitter: @EULAR_Press 

Youtube: Eular Pressoffice

The European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) is an umbrella organisation which represents scientific societies, health professional associations and organisations for people with rheumatic diseases throughout Europe.

EULAR aims to promote, stimulate and support the research, prevention, and treatment of rheumatic diseases and the rehabilitation of those it affects.

With 45 scientific member societies, 35 People with Arthritis and Rheumatism in Europe (PARE) organisations, 19 health professionals associations and 21 corporate members, EULAR highlights the importance of combating rheumatic diseases through both medical means and patient care.

EULAR 2015 is set to be the biggest rheumatology event in Europe with around 14,000 scientists, physicians, allied health professionals and related audiences in attendance from more than 120 countries. Over the course of the congress there will be some 300 oral and just under 2,000 poster abstract presentations, more than 150 sessions, 400 lectures, 40 poster tours and 350 invited speakers.

To find out more about the activities of EULAR, visit: http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release notes that there was no significant difference in outcome between those who got the standard dose and those who got the dose that was reduced by a third. It gives the absolute percentage of patients experiencing flares in both groups.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Monitoring high-risk pregnancies with ultrasound tests may help prevent some fetal and newborn deaths, a new research review finds.

The review assessed a technology called Doppler ultrasound, which measures blood flow through the umbilical cord. Abnormal findings indicate that the fetus may be under stress.

Doppler ultrasound, done in the third trimester, is an established way to monitor high-risk pregnancies — those complicated by problems like poor fetal growth or health conditions in the mother, such as high blood pressure and heart and kidney diseases.

Still, the benefits of such monitoring had not been entirely clear. There have been concerns that abnormal findings on Doppler ultrasound may prompt doctors to sometimes unnecessarily intervene — by, for instance, performing a cesarean section.

But in the new review, researchers found that across 16 studies of more than 10,000 high-risk pregnancies, Doppler ultrasound testing was linked to a 29 percent reduction in fetal and newborn deaths.

Among women who did not receive ultrasound monitoring, 1.7 percent suffered a fetal or newborn death, versus 1.2 percent of women who underwent ultrasound.

The benefit seemed to stem from better decisions on C-sections and inductions of labor, according to the researchers, led by Dr. Zarko Alfirevic of the University of Liverpool in the UK.

He and his colleagues report their review findings in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, which is published by the Cochrane Collaboration, an international research organization that evaluates medical studies.

In an interview, Alfirevic said that the evidence supports using Doppler in high-risk pregnancies where the mother has high blood pressure or the fetus is abnormally small. In these cases, the fetus may not be getting enough nutrients and oxygen through the placenta.

“These women really should have a Doppler investigation of the umbilical artery,” Alfirevic said. Typically, high-risk women would receive other types prenatal testing as well, such as electronic fetal-heart monitoring.

“We’re just saying this (Doppler ultrasound) should be part of it,” Alfirevic said.

In practice, Doppler ultrasound may also be recommended for women who have diabetes or are having a prolonged pregnancy (beyond 42 weeks). But there is not yet strong evidence that these women benefit, Alfirevic said.

In general, he and his colleagues found, the trials included in the review, which were mainly done in the 1990s, had their shortcomings. Some had flaws in their design, while in other cases the researchers failed to provide details on key elements of the study design.

However, with Doppler an established technique for monitoring high-risk pregnancies, Alfirevic said it is very unlikely that any future studies will test Doppler against no Doppler — as most studies in this review did.

Research, according to Alfirevic, has moved on to other questions, including how to best manage abnormal findings from a Doppler scan.

In some cases, early delivery may be the best course, but it is unclear whether other options — such as bed rest or tighter blood pressure control in a woman with high blood pressure — are effective.

Another question, Alfirevic said, is whether ultrasounds of blood vessels other than the umbilical artery might improve pregnancy outcomes.

One thing that is clear, the researcher stressed, is that Doppler ultrasound is not necessary for women with average, healthy pregnancies.

“There is no evidence to suggest that it should be done in low-risk women,” Alfirevic said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story clearly states the reduction in fetal death rates the review authors calculated by combining the results of the studies ithey looked at. It reports the absolute risk calculation of fetal or newborn deaths (1.7 percent among women who did not receive ultrasound monitoring vs. 1.2 percent among those who did). This reporting of absolute (as opposed to relative) risk reduction is a strong point of the story since it conveys to readers that while the intervention did improve outcomes, the underlying risk is small. We only wish, however, that the story had cited the Number Needed to Test that was included in the study – 203 would need to be tested in order to find one case of fetal distress that would otherwise not have been seen using other routine exams.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Ransohoff and other screening experts say patients should continue to have the test, because it is still highly effective. But they also recommend that patients seek the best colonoscopists by, for example, asking pointed questions about how many polyps they find and remove. They also say patients should be scrupulous in the unpleasant bowel cleansing that precedes the test, and promptly report symptoms like bleeding even if they occur soon after a colonoscopy.

The American Cancer Society says that even if the test is less effective than many had believed, it has no plans to change its recommended intervals between screenings — the test still prevents most cancers, but the expense and risk of the test argue against doing it more often.

The cancer society and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also are focusing on developing measurements of quality so that doctors who do colonoscopies can assess themselves and improve.

But gastroenterologists say that, if nothing else, the study points up the paucity of evidence for the common suggestion that anyone who had a clean bill of health from a colonoscopy is almost totally protected for at least a decade.

“We have to not overpromise,” said Dr. Ransohoff, who wrote an editorial accompanying the colonoscopy paper. “We need to look at the evidence, and we shouldn’t go beyond it.”

The new study matched each of 10,292 people who died of colon cancer to five people who lived in the same area and were of the same age, sex and socioeconomic status. The researchers asked how many patients and control subjects had had colonoscopies and whether the doctors had removed polyps. Then the researchers compared the groups and asked how much the colon cancer death rate had declined in people who had had the screening test.

The results were “a shock,” said Dr. Nancy N. Baxter, the lead author of the paper and a colorectal surgeon at the University of Toronto. When she saw them, she said, “I asked my analyst to rerun the data.”

Now, researchers say, the challenge is to find out why the test missed so many cancers, in particular, those on the right side of the colon, and whether the problem can be fixed.

About 148,000 people will learn they have colon cancer this year, the American Cancer Society reports, and nearly 50,000 will die of it.

It might be that Canadian doctors were not sufficiently skilled. About a third of the colonoscopies were done by general internists and family practitioners who might not have had the experience to do the test well.

But, said Dr. Douglas K. Rex, director of endoscopy and professor of medicine at Indiana University, that cannot be the entire explanation because at least one study, as yet unpublished, involving California Medi-Cal patients also found the test missed many cancers on the right side of the colon.

That leaves several other possibilities.

Perhaps patients did not sufficiently cleanse their bowels of fecal material, a particular problem for the right side of the colon.

“After the prep has been completed, mucus and intestinal secretions start rolling out of the small intestine and colon,” Dr. Rex explained. The secretions, he added, pour from the base of the appendix into the right side of the colon and are “very sticky” and can obscure polyps.

One solution, supported by six studies, is to be sure there is just a short time between when patients finish taking the strong laxative that cleanses their bowel and the colonoscopy, Dr. Rex said. That usually means taking half of the laxative the night before the screening test and the rest in the morning, something that often is not done, he added, but that he and others recommend.

Cancer may also be different in the right colon, researchers said.

Flat and indented polyps tend to cluster in the right colon. And so do another kind, serrated lesions, which, some studies indicate, might turn into cancer much more quickly than typical polyps.

“It’s possible that we will never get as good a result” in the right colon, said Robert Smith, director of screening for the American Cancer Society.

Still, he said, that does not mean that patients should have more frequent colonoscopies. The tests are “hugely expensive,” he said, and insurers may not pay for more frequent colonoscopies. The test also carries a small risk of perforating the bowel. Even if colonoscopies miss some cancers, colon cancer remains a rare disease and, after a colonoscopy, “the likelihood that you have cancer is very, very low,” Dr. Smith said.

Dr. Harold C. Sox, editor of the Annals of Internal Medicine, is choosing another option. He is having a stool test, the fecal occult blood test, between colonoscopies. It looks for blood in the stool, which can arise from colon cancer.

Dr. Smith does not advocate that strategy, saying that the stool test can have false positives from things like red meat or broccoli that have nothing to do with colon cancer. He worries that frequent stool tests will lead to frequent false alarms and frequent colonoscopies without making much of a dent in the colon cancer death rate.

CT colonoscopies, so-called virtual colonoscopies, are not a solution, some screening experts said.

“The issues are prep quality, flat lesions, serrated lesions and people not being careful enough in the inspection process,” Dr. Rex said. There is no evidence, he added, that a virtual colonoscopy will help with the inspection process. And, he said, “it almost certainly is not as effective a technology as colonoscopy for flat and serrated lesions.”

Instead, patients should be compulsive about their bowel prep and be sure the test is done by one of the best colonoscopists in their area, gastroenterologists said. Doctors should find polyps in at least 25 percent of men and 15 percent of women. They should take at least eight minutes to withdraw an endoscope from the colon. And they should do a high volume of screening. Dr. Smith said a high volume was at least three or four colonoscopies a day.

After the test, patients can ask whether the doctor got to the right side of the colon and how that was documented.

Colon cancer experts said people should realize that even if colonoscopies prevent just 60 percent of colon cancer deaths, that still is a lot. Mammograms, for example, prevent 25 percent of breast cancer deaths, and the PSA test for men has not been shown to prevent prostate cancer deaths.

“If I was to provide one main message, it would be that colonoscopies are the way that colon cancer mortality gets reduced,” Dr. Ransohoff said. “Colonoscopy is a good test, but it isn’t completely effective. And you know what? We ought to be happy with that.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately quantifies the mortality benefit from colonoscopy screening. But we wish the story had quantified the benefit in absolute rather than relative terms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a first-of-its-kind study, researchers demonstrate a benefit in overall survival among epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients receiving generic heart medications known as beta-blockers. Survival was shown to be greatest among those prescribed first-generation nonselective beta-blockers. According to The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center investigators, the drugs block the effects of stress pathways involved in tumor growth and spread. With further research, they may also prove beneficial in conjunction with other treatment regimens and across other cancer types.

Published today in the journal CANCER, the findings are the result of a multi-institutional retrospective analysis of the medical records of 1,425 women with ovarian cancer treated between 2000 and 2010. Researchers compared overall survival among patients with documented beta-blocker use during chemotherapy and those without. Among the 269 patients who received beta-blockers, 193 (71.7 percent) received beta-1-adrenergic receptor selective agents (SBBs) and the remaining patients received nonselective beta antagonists (NSBBs). The research team found:
• For patients receiving any beta-blocker, the median overall survival was 47.8 months versus 42 months for nonusers.
• Median overall survival based on beta-blocker receptor selectivity was 94.9 months for those receiving NSBBs versus 38 months for those receiving SBBs.
• Even among patients with hypertension, a longer median overall survival was observed among users of NSBBs compared with nonusers (90 months versus 38.2 months).

This study builds on a large body of research by principal investigator Anil Sood, M.D., professor in Gynecologic Medical Oncology and Cancer Biology at MD Anderson. It showed that stress hormones fuel progression of ovarian and other cancers, and that beta-blockers - among the most proven drugs in cardiovascular medicine - might be a new way to stifle that effect.

"Beta-blockers treat a variety of conditions, such as heart disease, high-blood pressure, glaucoma and migraines. They target a receptor protein in heart muscle that causes the heart to beat harder and faster when activated by stress hormones," Sood said. "Our research has shown that the same stress mechanisms impact ovarian cancer progression, so these drugs could play a new role in cancer treatment."

According to Sood, the usefulness of beta-blockers was unclear until now. "The ability to show improved survival using nonselective agents - which inhibit a specific stress pathway - is the culmination of years of research into ovarian cancer biology and pathogenesis."

He added that beta-blocker users in the study presented at a higher stage of disease, had an increased average BMI and were more likely to be hypertensive. All these factors were associated with decreased survival, yet those who received beta-blockers had either equivalent or improved overall survival. Further examination revealed that NSBB users had improved overall survival regardless of the presence of such prognostic factors or comorbidities. This was not true for patients who took SBBs.

Although further study is needed, these results highlight the importance of adrenergic receptor-β2 (ADRB2), a signaling pathway important to ovarian carcinogenesis and targeted by NSBBs (versus the ADRB1 pathway targeted by SBBs).

Ovarian cancer is the 5th most deadly cancer among women, accounting for more deaths than any other female reproductive system cancer. An estimated 21,290 new cases are diagnosed, and some 14,180 women die from the disease each year in the U.S., according to the American Cancer Society.

Future trials will seek to identify patients who would benefit most from beta-blocker use and the best beta-blocker for a specific tumor type based on adrenergic receptor expression. Then they potentially could be used as an adjuvant therapy during surgical recovery and chemotherapy to decrease tumor growth, delays in wound healing and metastasis. Beta-blockers may also reduce cancer-related psychological distress in newly diagnosed patients, according to the study authors.

There are currently two clinical trials, one led by MD Anderson, evaluating the combination of chemotherapy and propranolol (a type of NSBB) on cancer biology and on stress modulators in patients with newly diagnosed EOC. According to Sood, the preliminary data from these feasibility trials will be used to design prospective, randomized clinical trials examining NSBBs on patient outcomes.

"The stratification of patients by beta-blocker use and selectivity in this study makes it unique among all other studies examining the impact of these drugs on cancer. It also builds on the mounting evidence that beta-blockers may become a key treatment component for many patients in the future," said Sood.

Portions of this study were supported by National Institutes of Health grants (CA140933, CA104825, CA109298, P50CA083639, U54CA151688, U54CA96300, U54CA96297, and CA016672), an Ovarian Cancer Research Fund program Project Development Grant, the Department of Defense (grants OC073399, W81XWJ-10-0158, and OC100237), the Betty Ann Asche Murray Distinguished Professorship, the RGK Foundation, the Gilder Foundation, the Blanton-Davis Ovarian Cancer Research Program, and a Gynecologic Cancer Foundation-St. Louis Ovarian Cancer Awareness grant. One of the researchers has acted as a paid consultant for Incyte Pharmaceuticals and received research funding from Egen Pharmaceuticals.

Other researchers contributing to this study include: Robert L. Coleman, M.D., Alpa M. Nick, M.D., Pedro T. Ramirez, M.D., Lois M. Ramondetta, M.D., Diana Urbauer, Jack L. Watkins, all from MD Anderson; Susan K. Lutgendorf, Ph.D. from University of Iowa; Sanjeev Kumar, M.B., B.S. from the Mayo Clinic; Koji Matsuo, M.D., from Mercy Medical Center; Kathryn Squires, M.D. and Premal H. Thaker, M.D., M.S. from Washington University School of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release provides an understandable summary of the benefits seen in this retrospective review.  “The release reports that EOC patients nonselective beta antagonists (NSBBs — a type of beta blocker) had a median overall survival of of 94.9 months. That’s compared to 42 months for EOC patients who did not take beta blockers, and 38 months for those receiving beta-1-adrenergic receptor selective agents (SBBs — another type of beta blocker).”  But we think a few words about a couple of important provisos which we comment on under Quality of evidence should have been included.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the past several decades, Alcoholics Anonymous and the 12 steps have dominated addiction treatment in America — boasting millions of adherents and turning into the standard option within most addiction treatment programs in the US.

A new study has found, however, that AA, the original 12-step program, and others like it don’t have to be the only answer for people seeking out mutual help groups to deal with alcohol addiction.

The study, in short, looked at how people’s self-reported outcomes with AA and 12-step programs compare with the three biggest alternative mutual help groups — Women for Sobriety, SMART Recovery, and LifeRing. It concluded that these other groups perform about as well as 12-step programs.

“This study suggests that these alternatives really are viable options for people who are looking for recovery support and don’t like AA for whatever reason,” Sarah Zemore, lead author of the study, told me.

The research is by no means the last word on this question — Zemore characterized the study as the beginning of a deeper evaluation into AA alternatives.

But this is important. There has been a good amount of research into AA and the 12 steps over the years, broadly finding that about a third of people maintain recovery from alcohol addiction due to 12-step treatment, another third get something out of the treatment but not enough for full recovery, and another third get nothing at all.

Researchers have long suspected, though, that the benefits found in 12-step treatment programs are not exclusive to the 12 steps. As Zemore told me, “The benefits of 12-step groups are not driven by the 12 steps’ specific philosophy or adherence to the 12 steps. It’s really more about general mechanisms like abstinence motivation and social support for abstinence. Presumably, you could get those by participating in alternatives to AA.”

In other words, these alternatives could help the one-third to two-thirds of people who don’t get anything or much out of AA. That would help deal with a big public health issue: Based on federal data, more than 20 million people in the US have a substance use disorder, and within that group, more than 15 million have an alcohol use disorder. Excessive drinking alone is linked to 88,000 deaths each year. So finding the right solutions for this problem is literally a matter of life or death.

The study, conducted by the Alcohol Research Group at the Public Health Institute in California and published last month in the Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, surveyed more than 600 people with alcohol use disorder (AUD), who were divided by which mutual help group they primarily participated in. Researchers followed up at six months then 12 months, measuring involvement in the groups and various substance use outcomes, including abstinence from drinking and alcohol-related problems.

After controlling for several factors, the researchers concluded that “[Women for Sobriety], LifeRing, and SMART are as effective as 12-step groups for those with AUDs.”

“Essentially, that’s the story,” Zemore said. “We were really interested in whether the effects of involvement on recovery outcomes depended on which group [participants] were in. And we found that they did not.”

There were some differences in the data. People who reported SMART as their primary group seemed to have worse substance use outcomes, and there were lower odds of total abstinence among LifeRing members.

That might have something to do with differences in recovery goals. For example, AA really emphasizes total abstinence from drinking as the solution to alcohol addiction. Groups like SMART and LifeRing, meanwhile, can be friendlier to the idea of members moderating their drinking but not quitting altogether. That could affect substance use outcomes — and especially abstinence outcomes.

The study’s survey data suggests this is in fact what was going on: When researchers controlled for people’s recovery goals — meaning, whether they wanted to commit to lifetime total abstinence or not — the differences between the 12-step groups, SMART, and LifeRing went away.

“That suggests that people with less commitment to lifetime total abstinence are more likely to participate in SMART and LifeRing than they are to participate in 12-step groups,” Zemore said. “That’s why you’re seeing these associations between SMART and LifeRing affiliation at baseline and worse recovery outcomes when you control for involvement.” She added, “But I want to emphasize that these go away when you control for recovery goals.”

Again, the study is not the final word. John Kelly, an addiction researcher at Harvard Medical School who was not involved in the study, told me that the study is “good news, in general,” but pointed out that it’s limited by its methodology: It’s based on an online survey, not the kind of randomized trial that’s typically the gold standard in research. That may have led to some potentially biased results — perhaps participants in specific groups were less likely to report bad outcomes, for instance.

And since it’s only one study, it’s possible that the results were biased in some other way. So it’s up to future research to verify the findings.

One tricky thing with this line of research is you can’t really force people to participate in certain groups — so studies that randomly assign participants to AA, SMART, LifeRing, or Women for Sobriety may not be easy to do. But there are ways that researchers could get around these problems, such as only using participants who are willing to try different groups and actively following up with them to make sure they are actually participating.

Another big research question: figuring out why, exactly, these groups might work to help people stay alcohol- or drug-free. There’s good research into how AA works, but it’d be good to figure out if SMART, LifeRing, and Women for Sobriety work in a similar way. That, Zemore said, will be one of her goals in future studies.

Why we need alternatives

In discussions about addiction treatment, AA and the 12 steps tend to prompt polarizing reactions — some people swear by the programs, others absolutely hate them.

There’s a good explanation for that: While the research shows that 12-step treatment can be as effective as professional treatment modalities like cognitive behavioral therapy, the research also shows that the 12 steps don’t work for everyone.

As one example, a prominent complaint about 12-step programs is the spiritual aspect. This is a big part of the 12 steps, with the final step even invoking “a spiritual awakening.” For people who aren’t religious or spiritual, this can be a big turn-off; that’s one reason SMART and LifeRing exist to begin with — they’re meant to be secular alternatives to the 12 steps.

The good news is that the research suggests the spiritual aspect doesn’t fully explain why the 12 steps are effective for some people. Instead, it seems other traits are just as, if not more, important — such as the social support that AA meetings provide and the lessons that participants can pick up at meetings.

That’s long led researchers to suspect that alternative mutual help groups could work. If so, that would let some people go to AA meetings if they prefer the 12 steps, while others could find SMART, LifeRing, Women for Sobriety, or something else that works for them. Basically, everyone could find a workable solution.

Providing these alternatives would essentially move addiction treatment closer to other kinds of medical problems. As Keith Humphreys, a drug policy expert at Stanford University, previously told me, “We don’t have anything that works for everybody. There’s very few places in medicine where you do.” So there need to be as many alternatives as possible.

The US is far from that at the moment. Most treatment facilities in America are, according to the survey data and research, at least partly based on the 12 steps — making it the only option for many people. While alternatives like SMART or LifeRing do exist, they’re not nearly as available as AA — and they certainly aren’t built into professional treatment programs in the same way as the 12 steps.

As Albert, a pseudonym for an AA member in Georgia, previously told me, “There’s just not a lot of widely advertised options available.” AA and 12-step treatment are “the most well-known and most recommended option, so that’s kind of where you tend to go.”

Zemore’s study begins to peel away at this problem. By showing that there really might be other effective options out there, the research provides hope that there may be a better — or at least more complete — solution out there for alcohol addiction.

For more on the research into AA and the 12 steps, read Vox’s explainer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story reports the researchers’ conclusion that “[Women for Sobriety], LifeRing, and SMART are as effective as 12-step groups for those with AUDs.”
The story also quantifies that level of effectiveness when it says that studies broadly find that “about a third of people maintain recovery from alcohol addiction due to 12-step treatment, another third get something out of the treatment but not enough for full recovery, and another third get nothing at all.”
The story acknowledges that there were some differences in the data — for example that those who reported SMART as their primary group “seemed to have worse substance use outcomes,” and that “there were lower odds of total abstinence among LifeRing members.” It explains that those differences might be explained by the differing goals of the programs, as LifeRing doesn’t emphasize complete abstinence as intensely as the 12-step programs. While it would be interesting to know just how much worse the outcomes were with these alternate groups, we don’t think the omission is enough to merit a not satisfactory grade.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Autism spectrum disorders , marked by impaired language, repetitive behaviors, and social difficulties, now affect up to one in 110 children, according to the CDC.

The research needs to be duplicated, Hertz-Picciotto tells WebMD. Still, she says, the finding points to a gene-environment interaction that may possibly help explain some cases of autism.

Taking prenatal vitamins was found even more protective for mothers and children who had a high-risk genetic makeup .

"It appears that women who reported taking prenatal vitamins starting three months prior to conception and through the first month after conception seem to have a reduced chance their child will develop autism ," says study researcher Irva Hertz-Picciotto, PhD, professor of epidemiology and environmental health at the MIND Institute and Department of Public Health, University of California, Davis.

June 1, 2011 -- Taking prenatal vitamins may reduce the risk of having a child with autism , new research shows.

The researchers looked at three groups of children, all aged 2 to 5. All were enrolled in the CHARGE study (CHildhood Autism Risks from Genetics and Environment) from 2003 to 2009. The groups included:

Mothers reported their use of prenatal vitamins or other supplements before, during, and after pregnancy.

The researchers collected blood from all family members to evaluate their genetic makeup.

They focused on genes known to play a role in folate metabolism. These genes include MTHFR and COMT as well as others. Folate and other B vitamins are crucial to brain development.

Overall, Hertz-Picciotto says, "For the women who didn't take prenatal vitamins, there was about a 60% higher risk of having a child with autism."

The risk rose if the mothers or the children had a high-risk gene form.

The mothers with the high-risk form of MTHFR had a 4.5 times higher chance of a child developing autism, she says, than mothers without this high-risk form who did take the prenatal vitamins.

Children who had the high-risk COMT gene form were seven times as likely to have autism as children without it whose mothers did take the vitamins.

"Overall, it does look like there are at least a couple of genes here, either the mother's genotype or the child's genotype, that show this interaction ... magnifying the size of the effect from not taking the vitamins," Hertz-Picciotto says.

Exactly why the prenatal vitamins may protect against autism is not clear, she says. It may be that the vitamins contribute to high levels of folate.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story communicates the results using relative terms, noting that women who didn’t take vitamins had “about a 60% higher risk of having a child with autism.” In women with a high-risk genetic profile who didn’t take vitamins, the risks were 4.5 to 7 times higher compared with women who didn’t have the high risk genes and took prenatal supplements, according to the story. While these relative numbers probably give readers an overinflated sense of the benefits of taking supplements (or the harm of not taking them), using absolute numbers, which we normally prefer, would be inappropriate and probably even more misleading in coverage of a case-control study such as this one — for the reasons discussed here. The use of relative numbers is acceptable in a case-control study if there is some indication of the underlying population-wide risk, which this story provides when it says that autism affects “up to one in 110 children” — or about 1%.  While admittedly complicated and imperfect, this mix of numbers should help readers draw appropriate conclusions about the significance of the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, March 1, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A procedure that delivers the anesthetic lidocaine (Xylocaine) directly to nerves in the back of the nasal cavity appears to offer significant relief to migraine sufferers, preliminary research indicates.

Early findings suggest that a single outpatient treatment can reduce migraine pain levels by about 35 percent for up to a month after the procedure, according to this small, ongoing study.

The technique is "a minimally invasive treatment option," said the study's lead author Dr. Kenneth Mandato, a vascular and interventional radiologist at Albany Medical Center in Albany, N.Y. He added that he views the new procedure as "a clear simple alternative" to standard migraine treatments.

"This nasal spray option is safe, convenient and innovative," said Mandato.

In the new study, his team focused on 112 patients averaging about 45 years of age. All had been diagnosed with either migraines or another type of intensely painful (and cyclically occurring) headache known as cluster headaches.

Before participating in the study, patients were asked to indicate their pain levels according to a standardized scale from 1 to 10. Pre-treatment pain scores averaged more than 8, Mandato said.

The participants all underwent a session of "image-guided therapy," in which a spaghetti-sized catheter was inserted through a nostril and into the nasal passage to deliver a dose of lidocaine to a nerve center known as the sphenopalatine ganglion. This was then repeated in the opposite nostril, according to the researchers.

Mandato stressed that no one in the study required sedation to undergo the procedure.

The target nerve bundle, explained Mandato, "resembles a complex highway crossing with many [nerve] signals and exits going in all directions." And, he said, the hope was that lidocaine would essentially short-circuit that bundle's headache-causing pathway.

The day after the procedure, average migraine pain levels had dropped from about 8 to just over 4. Pain scores rose only marginally a week after the procedure, and reached an average of just over 5 by the one month post-procedure mark, according to the study.

The procedure didn't help everyone, though. Seven of the patients (about 6 percent) failed to get any benefit from the treatment, the investigators found. However, 88 percent of those in the study reported needing less standard pain relief medication after the procedure.

The researchers acknowledged that this procedure is a temporary solution that would need to be repeated. Mandato said his team is continuing to monitor patients to see how well the nasal spray approach holds up six months out.

Dr. Richard Lipton, director of the Montefiore Headache Center in New York City, described the findings as "very dramatic."

"Unmet treatment needs in chronic migraine are huge, as is the overuse of medications," he noted. "When a body gets used to having a chronic headache suppressor, the patient can experience a rebound in the absence of that suppressor. So developing an effective treatment that can reduce the need for acute medicine would be very valuable," Lipton explained.

"These results sound very promising," Lipton added. "Of course, it remains to be seen if the demonstrated benefit already seen holds up over a longer period of time, and with a bigger group of patients."

Mandato and colleagues are scheduled to present their findings Sunday at the Society of Interventional Radiology annual meeting in Atlanta. Findings presented at meetings are generally viewed as preliminary until they've been published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The study received no funding from private industry.

There's more on migraine treatment at the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story was on point with the reduction of pain levels. It mentioned that a single outpatient treatment seemed to reduce migraine pain levels by “about 35 percent for up to a month after the procedure,” which was close to the 36 percent reduction rate researchers saw on day 30. The article also explained very well the range of “pain scores” that patients experienced during the study, such as pain levels recorded from a day to a week to a month after the procedure. We’d note that in headache research, investigators usually also record the frequency of headaches as well, since this is an important quality of life measure for patients. It’s not clear why that outcome wasn’t measured in this study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A government committee of health experts yesterday opened the door to selling Orlistat, a prescription weight-loss drug in a reduced dosage directly to consumers.

While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) still must approve the switch, the agency often follows the advice of its experts. If it does, Orlistat (xenical) -- currently sold only by prescription -- could be available over-the-counter (OTC) later this year. But it's important to know that the weight loss that's typical for users of the drug -- 5 to 10 percent of total weight -- will be less than many dieters expect. And many consumers may be put off by the drug's significant gastrointestinal side effects, including flatulence, diarrhea and anal leakage.

Nor is Orlistat a quick fix for unwanted pounds. To achieve any weight loss, users must also eat fewer calories and exercise more.

"It's not a miracle drug," notes Lawrence Cheskin, director of the Weight Management Center at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore, who conducted a study of Orlistat in adolescents. "None of these [weight loss] medications are."

Orlistat was approved as a weight loss and weight maintenance drug by the FDA in 1999 to treat obese and overweight people -- those with a body mass index of 30 or higher -- and overweight people (with BMI of 27 or higher) who already have weight-related health problems including diabetes, heart disease or high blood pressure.

More than 100 studies involving some 30,000 patients have been conducted with Orlistat, according to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) Consumer Healthcare, the maker of Orlistat, which has petitioned the FDA to permit OTC sales of the drug. The company says that 22 million people in 145 countries have taken the drug. "Orlistat is a very safe and effective drug with a long history of use around the world," says George Quesnelle, president of GSK Consumer Healthcare, North America.

In the longest study of Orlistat, participants who took the drug in addition to eating fewer calories and increasing exercise shed up to 12 percent of their body weight the first year. But by the fourth year of the study, they had regained some pounds. Overall, they lost about 7 percent of their body weight, compared to 4 percent for a control group that dieted and increased physical activity but didn't take the drug. The 7 percent figure works out to about 18 pounds for someone who weighs 250.

"That's little difference in weight, but significant in terms of medical benefits," notes Samuel Klein, director of the Center for Human Nutrition at the Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine. Those lost pounds translate to lower blood pressure, improved blood cholesterol levels and reduced risk of diabetes.

While Americans spend an estimated $1 billion on nonprescription weight loss products, few if any of those products have undergone the rigorous testing that is required by the FDA for prescription medications. Some weight loss experts say making Orlistat available directly to consumers broadens the proven options available to people trying to reach a healthier weight. "It's very exciting," Klein says.

But "the problem with Orlistat are the side effects," notes Johns Hopkins endocrinologist Aniket Sidhaye, co-author with Cheskin of a recent scientific review of Orlistat and other prescription weight loss drugs.

At the current recommended prescription dose -- 120 milligrams taken up to three times per day, for example up to 360 milligrams daily -- about 70 percent of users experience gastrointestinal complications, Klein says. They range from flatulence and increased bowel movements to diarrhea and anal leakage.

That's because Orlistat works by blocking fat absorption in the intestine. When fat that's eaten isn't absorbed, it must be eliminated. Thus, the gastrointestinal problems.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Provides at least a ball park estimate for people about the amount of weight that might be 
anticipated to be lost with the use of this medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Oct. 26, 2011 -- An experimental drug called briakinumab appears to be more effective than a standard medication for treating psoriasis, a new study shows.

The study is published in the New England Journal of Medicine. It included psoriasis patients who were assigned to get monthly injections of briakinumab or to take methotrexate pills weekly.

The result: The thick, red, flaking skin lesions that are characteristic of psoriasis cleared up in about three times as many patients who got briakinumab as those who got methotrexate.

"This drug has had, in this trial, the highest efficacy we have ever seen with any biologic in psoriasis before," says study researcher Kristian Reich, MD. Biologics are genetically engineered proteins derived from human genes.

Reich, a partner at Dermatologikum Hamburg and professor of dermatology, venerology, and allergology at Georg-August-University in Gottingen, Germany, says that after a year of therapy, roughly 60% of the 154 patients in the briakinumab group had near or complete clearance of their skin lesions. Those same results were achieved by about 10% to 20% of 163 patients in the methotrexate group.

"This is unheard of," Reich tells WebMD. "We in dermatology have never spoken about remission before. But with this drug, the word 'remission' is on the table."

But as successful as the drug appears to be for some patients, it may come with a significant risk. Patients taking briakinumab had more serious infections and more cancers than those taking methotrexate.

"We had amazing responses," Reich says. "Obviously, the price that this comes with is the increased rate of serious infections and cancers."

Abbott, the company that makes briakinumab, announced in January that it was withdrawing its bid to get the drug approved in the U.S. and Europe after regulators asked to see more robust proof that the medication was safe.

At that time, the company said it wanted to evaluate the "next steps" for briakinumab and might try for approval again at a later date.

"This is the single most effective drug we've had in psoriasis, ever," says Kenneth B. Gordon, MD, a dermatologist and clinical associate professor at the University of Chicago's Pritzker School of Medicine. "Many of us were disappointed it was withdrawn because there would be a subset of patients who wouldn't respond to anything else and it would have been nice to have for them."

Gordon was not involved in the current study, but he has been involved in research of the drug and has been a paid consultant and investigator for Abbott.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Adequate explanation of the potential benefits seen in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among older adults with an unstable ankle fracture, the use of a modified casting technique known as close contact casting (a molded below-knee cast with minimal padding) resulted in similar functional outcomes at 6 months compared with surgery, and with fewer wound complications and reduced intervention costs, according to a study appearing in the October 11 issue of JAMA.

The number of older adults sustaining ankle fractures is increasing. Treatment of unstable fractures is either surgical or nonsurgical (using externally applied casts). Neither method yields an entirely satisfactory outcome in older adults. Traditional casting techniques are associated with poor fracture alignment and healing, as well as plaster-related sores. Surgery is often complicated by poor implant fixation (bone healing), wound problems, and infection. A modified casting technique has been developed, close contact casting, which uses minimal padding compared with traditional casting and achieves fracture reduction by distributing contact pressure by close anatomic fit.

Keith Willett, M.B.B.S., F.R.C.S., of the University of Oxford, United Kingdom, and colleagues randomly assigned 620 adults older than 60 years with acute, unstable ankle fracture to surgery (n = 309) or casting (n = 311). Casts were applied in the operating room under general or spinal anesthesia by a trained surgeon.

Among the 620 adults (average age, 71 years; 74 percent women) who were randomized, 96 percent completed the study. Nearly all participants (93 percent) received assigned treatment; 52 of 275 (19 percent) who initially received casting later converted to surgery. At 6 months, casting resulted in measures of ankle function equivalent to that with surgery. Infection and wound breakdown were more common with surgery (10 percent vs 1 percent), as were additional operating room procedures (6 percent vs 1 percent).

Radiologic malunion (abnormal healing of a fracture) was more common in the casting group (15 percent vs 3 percent for surgery). Casting required less operating room time compared with surgery. There were no significant differences in other secondary outcomes: quality of life, pain, ankle motion, mobility, and patient satisfaction.

"Close contact casting was delivered successfully for most participants, substantially reducing the number of patients requiring invasive surgical procedures at the outset and additional operations during a 6-month period," the authors write.

The researchers add that close contact casting may be an appropriate treatment for older adults with unstable ankle fracture.

Editor's Note: Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

"The results reported by Willett et al demonstrate that most unstable ankle fractures in older patients can be treated with a cast without the need for surgery," writes David W. Sanders, M.D., M.Sc., F.R.C.S.C., of Western University, London, Ontario, Canada, in an accompanying editorial.

"However, many patients who were initially treated by casting subsequently required repeat casting or surgery. Further studies are needed to help identify which patients will not benefit from casting. Although close contact casting may be unfamiliar to some orthopedic surgeons, it can avoid surgery for older patients with ankle fractures, yet result in equivalent functional outcomes. This technique is worth considering when treating this challenging clinical problem."

Editor's Note: The author has completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.

To place an electronic embedded link to these articles in your story These links will be live at the embargo time: http://jama. http://jama.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release includes a list of benefits of the modified casting method, with some quantification, mostly in terms of reduced complications. It says, “At 6 months, casting resulted in measures of ankle function equivalent to that with surgery. Infection and wound breakdown were more common with surgery (10 percent vs 1 percent), as were additional operating room procedures (6 percent vs 1 percent).”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors and patients “traditionally see palliative care as something extended to a hospitalized patient in the last week of life,” said Dr. Jennifer S. Temel, an oncologist and author of the paper. “We thought it made sense to start them at the time of diagnosis. And we were thrilled to see such a huge impact. It shows that palliative care and cancer care aren’t mutually exclusive.”

Dr. Atul Gawande, a Harvard Medical School surgeon and writer who just published a long article in The New Yorker about hospitalized patients’ suffering before death, called the study “amazing.”

“The field was crying out for a randomized trial,” he added.

Although the study could not determine why the patients lived longer, the authors and other experts had several theories: depression is known to shorten life, and patients whose pain is treated often sleep better, eat better and talk more with relatives. Also, hospitals are dangerous places for very sick people; they may get fatal blood infections, pneumonia or bedsores, or simply be overwhelmed by the powerful drugs and radiation attacking their cancer.

Saying the study was “of critical importance,” Dr. R. Sean Morrison, president of the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, said it was the “first concrete evidence of what a lot of us have seen in our practices — when you control pain and other symptoms, people not only feel better, they live longer.”

There is sometimes tension between medical specialties, since surgeons and oncologists often view cancer as a battle, while palliative care specialists are seen as “giving up.”

Palliative care typically begins with a long conversation about what the patient with a terminal diagnosis wants out of his remaining life. It includes the options any oncologist addresses: surgery, chemotherapy and radiation and their side effects. But it also includes how much suffering a patient wishes to bear, effects on the family, and legal, insurance and religious issues. Teams focus on controlling pain, nausea, swelling, shortness of breath and other side effects; they also address patients’ worries and make sure they have help with making meals, dressing and bathing when not hospitalized.

Hospice care is intensive palliative care including home nursing, but insurers and Medicare usually cover it only if the patient abandons medical treatment and two doctors certify that death is less than six months away.

During the debate over President Obama’s 2009 health care bill, provisions to have Medicare and insurers pay for optional consultations with doctors on palliative and hospice care led to rumors, spread by talk-show hosts like Rush Limbaugh and Glenn Beck and by the former vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin, that the bill empowered “death panels” that would “euthanize” elderly Americans.

Legislators eventually removed the provisions. In practice, Medicare and private insurers do pay for some palliative care, said Dr. Gail Austin Cooney, a former president of the palliative medicine academy. “But it’s piecemeal,” she said. “The billing is complicated, and for many physicians that’s enough of a deterrent to not bother.”

Dr. Cooney herself had such care along with surgery and chemotherapy for ovarian cancer in 2008.

“I decided I wanted every drop of chemotherapy they could give me, and it was very painful, dumping the drugs directly into my belly,” she said. She needed powerful painkillers, and also chose alternative-medicine options like acupuncture and “energy work” for nausea and fatigue.

“I’m rigid — I had my last chemo treatment on Christmas Eve because I wanted it on the day I was due for it,” she said. “But I couldn’t have completed the program without the psychosocial support.”

Palliative care experts now want to study patients with other cancers, heart disease, stroke, dementia and emphysema. But the National Institutes of Health is under budget pressure, and the other major source of money for medical research, the pharmaceutical industry, has little incentive to study palliative care. This trial was paid for by the American Society of Clinical Oncology and private philanthropy.

“Philanthropists tend to focus on curing cancer,” Dr. Temel said. “But we can’t ignore people who need end-of-life care.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Like the competing coverage, this story featured prominent discussion of the survival benefit associated with palliative care. We were pleased to see that it also spent some time on the improvement in quality of life and depression scores as well as the reduction in aggressive chemotherapy usage toward the end of life in the palliative care group. We wish the story had been more precise in its quantification of some the benefits — it notes that the palliative care group reported "less depression" and "happier lives" but offers no way to judge the magnitude of the benefit. However, we don’t think these shortcomings were enough to throw the story out of balance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Acupuncture may help relieve chronic back, joint and shoulder pain, according to a new review of the evidence - but some of its benefit is likely due to the “placebo effect,” researchers concluded.

In an analysis of 29 studies, they found people who got acupuncture typically reported more pain relief than those who didn’t.

But patients treated with fake or “sham” acupuncture - using retracting needles that don’t stick in the skin, for example - estimated their pain at somewhere in between the other two groups, suggesting that they also got some benefit from the procedure.

“A doctor who has a patient in pain has a lot of options,” such as medications and physical or talk therapy, said lead author Andrew Vickers, from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.

“This provides evidence that they would be justified in considering… acupuncture,” he told Reuters Health.

Acupuncture has been controversial among doctors as a possible treatment for a range of conditions including chronic pain and fibromyalgia.

Some think it has potential as an add-on or alternative to standard treatment, while others argue any acupuncture-related benefits are likely the result of hopeful patients getting treatment they strongly believe will help them.

That either means many of the three million Americans that get acupuncture every year are “wasting their time” - or others who forgo it are missing out on potential benefits, Vickers said.

To try to help sort out which is the case, he and his colleagues analyzed 29 studies they deemed to be high-quality comparisons of acupuncture, fake acupuncture and no treatment. Those trials included close to 18,000 patients in the United States and Europe with back and neck pain, shoulder pain, chronic headaches or joint pain due to osteoarthritis.

The researchers found that on average, people treated with acupuncture reported a “modest” improvement in symptoms compared to those who had sham treatment, and a larger effect compared to untreated patients.

They estimated in their Archives of Internal Medicine report that about 50 percent of patients had their symptoms cut in half with acupuncture, compared to almost 43 percent of those treated with sham acupuncture and 30 percent with no acupuncture-like therapy.

A typical acupuncture session runs for about $100 and is often not covered by health insurance.

USUALLY NOT THE FIRST STEP

“I have a long list of chronic pain patients coming to seek acupuncture,” said Jongbae Park, head of Asian Medicine & Acupuncture Research at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine.

It’s usually “not their first approach to address the condition,” he said - rather people seek acupuncture when traditional care fails to stop their pain.

Park, who was not involved in the new study, said acupuncture focuses on healing the underlying tissue injury that is causing pain, rather than treating the pain itself as medications would.

“I am a biased clinician,” Park told Reuters Health. But, he added, “I would sincerely say more than 75 percent of my patients will see improvement.”

Vickers said people who are considering acupuncture should first make sure their acupuncturist is appropriately qualified and licensed. In those cases, he said, acupuncture is very safe - and the main downsides are costs and the inconvenience of getting to a clinic.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story puts the benefits in terms readers can understand and that accurately reflects the magnitude of the benefit: “…about 50 percent of patients had their symptoms cut in half with acupuncture, compared to almost 43 percent of those treated with sham acupuncture and 30 percent with no acupuncture-like therapy.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - German researchers who used a bone marrow transplant to treat a cancer patient with the AIDS virus, have declared him cured of the virus — a stunning claim in a field where the word “cure” is barely whispered.

The patient, who had both HIV infection and leukemia, received the bone marrow transplant in 2007 from a donor who had a genetic mutation known to give patients a natural immunity to the virus.

Nearly four years after the transplant, the patient is free of the virus and it does not appear to be hiding anywhere in his body, Thomas Schneider of Berlin Charite hospital and colleagues said.

“Our results strongly suggest that cure of HIV has been achieved in this patient,” they wrote in the journal Blood.

AIDS researchers have rejected the approach on any kind of scale for patients with HIV. A bone marrow transplant is a last-ditch treatment for cancers such as leukemia.

It requires destruction of a patient’s own bone marrow — itself a harrowing process — and then a transplant from a donor who has a near-exact blood and immune system type. Months of recovery are needed while the transplant grows and reconstitutes the patient’s immune system.

“It’s not practical and it can kill people,” said Dr. Robert Gallo of the Institute of Human Virology at the University of Maryland, who helped discover the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS.

“It is possibly a cure, that’s for sure, you won’t know for absolute sure until the person dies and undergoes extreme PCR (genetic) analysis of post-mortem tissue.”

The mutation affects a receptor, a cellular doorway, called CCR5, that the AIDS virus uses to get into the cells it infects.

Since the 1990s scientists have known that some people, mostly of Northern European descent, have the mutation and are rarely infected with HIV.

Some researchers are working on the idea of gene therapy to treat or try to cure HIV, but the technology is still in experimental stages.

“I don’t want to throw cold water on an interesting thing, but that’s what it is — an interesting thing,” Gallo said.

Schneider’s team has been following the patient, taking samples from his colon, liver, spinal fluid and brain as he developed various conditions that justified the tests. They tested all these samples for evidence of the virus, which can be difficult to detect unless it is actively infecting cells.

All these places are suspected “reservoirs” where HIV can hide out for years, to rebound in patients who stop taking drugs that suppress the infection.

This patient appears to have a fully functioning immune system, they found, which appears genetically identical to cells from the donor — not the patient’s own immune cells.

Schneider’s team found no evidence of HIV anywhere.

“From these results, it is reasonable to conclude that cure of HIV infection has been achieved in this patient,” they wrote.

The AIDS virus infects 33 million people globally and has killed more than 25 million since the pandemic began in the 1980s. Cocktails of strong drugs can suppress the virus, keeping patients healthy and reducing the chance they will infect others, but there is no vaccine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’re giving this one a pass here. The story makes quite clear that it is a report on the experience of only one patient and that while the researchers say there are now no signs of HIV infection in this individual, the tests don’t completely rule out the possibility that the virus is lurking somewhere. In particular, the comments of Dr. Gallo to place the apparent benefit in this single patient into context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — CHAPEL HILL, NC – UNC researchers say the results from the multi-site phase 2 and 3 trials of brexanolone injection are not only promising, but could change the way postpartum depression (PPD) is treated.

Brexanolone injection works differently than existing anti-depressant medications, and if approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) later this year, will be the first new class of anti-depressants in decades, and the first drug specifically indicated for PPD.

“With current anti-depressant SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) it could take four to six weeks to get a treatment response. In the brexanolone trials, we saw patients starting to feel better within days,” said the trial’s academic principal investigator, Samantha Meltzer-Brody, MD, MPH, director of Perinatal Psychiatry Program at the UNC School of Medicine.

David Rubinow, MD, chair of the Department of Psychiatry at the UNC School of Medicine and a coauthor of the paper, says time is especially crucial for new mothers experiencing postpartum depression because the weeks and months following birth are a critical period for mother-infant bonding. Common symptoms of PPD – a mood disorder in women that can be triggered by fluctuations in reproductive hormones – include low mood, feeling overwhelmed, anxious and ruminating thoughts, potential withdrawal from the baby and her family, and suicidal thoughts in the most severe cases. PPD is one of the most common complications of pregnancy, with between 10 and 20 percent of mothers worldwide experiencing it.

“Having a drug developed specifically for postpartum depression is a game-changer for women’s health,” said Meltzer-Brody. “With our latest results, we believe that brexanolone, if approved, could provide relief for women with a range of postpartum severity.”

The paper, published in The Lancet, includes a new integrated analysis of results from three double-blind, placebo-controlled trials that took place at 30 sites in the U.S., including UNC’s Perinatal Psychiatry Unit. Eligible women were aged 18-45 years old and were six months postpartum or less at screening. They also had to be experiencing moderate to severe postpartum depression, which was assessed by the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D).

The integrated analysis looked at results of the trials which randomized 209 women to receive a double-blinded 60-hour infusion of either brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr or placebo. A unique dose group of brexanolone 60 µg/kg/hr in one of the studies was not included in the integrated efficacy analysis, but was included in integrated analyses of safety. Brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr was administered to 102 women with moderate or severe PPD who also were evaluated throughout the infusion, after the infusion stopped and then periodically for up to 30 days. Another 107 women were administered a placebo and evaluated during the same timeframe. The first statistically significant reduction in depression severity with brexanolone injection relative to placebo was observed as early as 24 hours after dosing. At the end of the 60-hour infusion, the average reduction in patients’ Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D or depression severity score) was 17.0 points for women in the brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr group, versus 12.8 in the placebo group (p<0.0001). The reduction of symptoms in the patients receiving brexanolone injection was maintained throughout the last study visit at Day 30. The most common (≥10% of subjects) adverse events following during brexanolone injection administration were headache, dizziness and somnolence.

“This is a very different model for how we treat depression. Having a drug approved to treat PPD that works quickly and effectively, yet is also durable, would be a huge step forward for psychiatry in general,” Meltzer-Brody said.

Brexanolone injection is an allosteric modulator of both synaptic and extra-synaptic GABAᴀ receptors. In postpartum depression, the GABA pathway may play a key role in regulating hormones that researchers believe can lead to PPD.

Sage Therapeutics is the developer of brexanolone injection and sponsor of the trials. A New Drug Application is currently under review by the FDA and brexanolone injection has been granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation. The FDA has assigned a Prescription Drug User Fee Act target date of December 19, 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that  there was a reduction in depressive symptoms of 17 points for those on the drug, and 12.8 for those in the placebo group based on the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. The absolute reduction in the rating scale is given for each group. This information would have been much more helpful if the release also clarified the magnitude of the scale and whether a 4.2-point difference is clinically meaningful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Just an avocado a day can significantly lower your cholesterol and reduce the risk of heart disease, a new study shows.

Avocados are rich in so-called healthy fats and other nutrients and the study, published in the Journal of the American Heart Association, shows the creamy fruit can work within weeks to lower cholesterol.



Just like olive oil and nuts, avocados have plaque-busting monounsaturated fatty acids, and the effects seem similar to all the benefits from a Mediterranean diet, the researchers said.

And it’s one more piece of evidence in favor of adding good fats to the diet.

“In the past, we used to substitute carbohydrate for saturated fat, and that would result in a low-fat diet,” said Penny Kris-Etherton, chair of the American Heart Association’s Nutrition Committee and distinguished professor of nutrition at Pennsylvania State University.

“Now we're seeing that it's better for people to have good fats in their diet at the expense of saturated fat. And so the current message is to replace saturated fat with unsaturated fat, and in so doing, consume a moderate-fat diet, not too much, and also not too little,” Kris-Etherton told NBC News.

Kris-Etherton and colleagues did an intensive study with 45 typical Americans – all overweight or obese, but with healthy cholesterol and blood pressure levels.

It’s tough to test diets in real life, because people eat so many different things, but the team controlled what everyone ate, feeding them carefully calibrated diets. One was a lower-fat diet without avocado, another was a moderate-fat diet without avocado, and the third added one avocado per day to the moderate-fat diet.

The two moderate-fat diets looked a lot like the average American diet, with about a third of calories coming from fat. The lower fat diet provided 24 percent of calories from fat.

Everyone spent five weeks on each diet. No one lost weight, but their low-density lipoprotein (LDL or “bad” cholesterol) levels changed.

“All diets decreased LDL cholesterol, the main lipid risk factor for cardiovascular disease. But the diet with the avocado decreased LDL cholesterol the most,” Kris-Etherton said.

Americans are advised to keep total cholesterol below 200 and preferably below 180. LDL should be below 100.

While they were eating the avocado-a-day diet, the volunteers saw their LDL go down by more than 13 points compared to their usual levels, Kris-Etherton’s team reported in the Journal of the American Heart Association.

LDL was 8.3 points lower on the moderate-fat diet without the avocado and 7.4 points less on the lower-fat diet.

The volunteers all ate Hass avocados, which have bumpy green skin. The Hass Avocado Board helped pay for the research, which was also funded by the U.S. government.

In addition to monounsaturated fats, the avocados contain fiber, phytosterols and polyphenols – all of which can help lower cholesterol. Avocados also contain natural sugars that may help regulate blood sugar.

“We need to focus on getting people to eat a heart-healthy diet that includes avocados and other nutrient-rich food sources of better fats,” Kris-Etherton said.

“All the foods were exactly the same, except the avocado versus oils that were high in monounsaturated fat on the moderate-fat diet. So that was the only difference between the two diets, which then tells us that it's the avocado that has additional benefits which are beyond the unsaturated fat.”

The findings are similar to a batch of studies that showed people who were given olive oil and nuts and told to add them to their diets ended up healthier. They were less likely to have strokes or heart attacks, and they were less likely to die over a period of years than people who didn’t get the extra oils.

Saturated fat – the kind found in meat and butter – has a different chemical structure from the unsaturated fats found in plant products. Repeated studies have shown it raises the risk of heart disease.



“We studied avocados but maybe a lot of other fruits and vegetables have these bioactive components which have additional cholesterol-lowering effects,” Kris-Etherton said. “And certainly there's an emerging research base showing that some of these bioactive components may affect another lipoprotein particle favorably, like high-density lipoprotein. I think we need to stay tuned for that. “

Americans may not be used to eating avocado but Kris-Etherton says it’s easy to add.

“Consumers can include avocados in their diet in salads. They can include avocados on top of a sandwich, or in a sandwich. They can make guacamole and use vegetables rather than chips as the dip,” she said.

“I love guacamole and with my recipe, I'll use avocados, cilantro, lime juice and garlic... and then sometimes I'll put salsa in, or red pepper flakes.”

But like anything, too much of a good thing can be harmful. Avocados are definitely not low-calorie food.

“One avocado has around 200 to 250 calories. So I would strongly urge people not to just add an avocado a day to their diet but they have to substitute nutrient-poor calories, which are so popular in the U.S. diet.,” Kris-Etherton said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story accurately compares the reduction of LDL cholesterol in study participants who ate avocado to reductions in LDL among study participants who did not — the avocado group’s LDL levels dropped by just over 13 milligrams per deciliter of blood (13.5 according to the news release), compared to reductions of 8.3 and 7.4 for two other groups. The story also provides readers with a frame of reference for those numbers, noting that overall LDL levels should be below 100 (which makes a difference of 5 or 6 mg/dl fairly significant). The story also explicitly makes the connection between LDL cholesterol and human health, noting that it is a significant risk factor for heart disease.
We wish the story had explained how the changes observed in the study would affect someone’s risk of a heart attack or stroke. In addition, there’s a reference to the “plaque-busting” properties of monounsaturated fatty acids that is a bit of unnecessary hype. There is no medication or nutrient that “busts” plaque, but rather a healthy lifestyle, diet, and medications for some will help prevent its accumulation. Given the other strengths discussed above, we don’t think these problems are sufficient enough to warrant an unsatisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Blood test may identify gestational diabetes risk in first trimester

NIH analysis suggests early screening could allow for lifestyle changes before condition develops.

A blood test conducted as early as the 10th week of pregnancy may help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes, a pregnancy-related condition that poses potentially serious health risks for mothers and infants, according to researchers at the National Institutes of Health and other institutions. The study appears in Scientific Reports.

Gestational diabetes occurs only in pregnancy and results when the level of blood sugar, or glucose, rises too high. Gestational diabetes increases the mother’s chances for high blood pressure disorders of pregnancy and the need for cesarean delivery, and the risk for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes later in life. For infants, gestational diabetes increases the risk for large birth size. Unless they have a known risk factor, such as obesity, women typically are screened for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.

In the current study, researchers evaluated whether the HbA1c test (also called the A1C test), commonly used to diagnose type 2 diabetes, could identify signs of gestational diabetes in the first trimester of pregnancy. The test approximates the average blood glucose levels over the previous 2 or 3 months, based on the amount of glucose that has accumulated on the surface of red blood cells. According to the authors, comparatively few studies have examined whether the HbA1c test could help identify the risk for gestational diabetes, and these studies have been limited to women already at high risk for the condition. The test is not currently recommended to diagnose gestational diabetes at any point in pregnancy.

The researchers analyzed records from the NICHD Fetal Growth Study, a large observational study that recruited more than 2,000 low-risk pregnant women from 12 U.S. clinical sites between 2009 and 2013. The researchers compared HbA1c test results from 107 women who later developed gestational diabetes to test results from 214 women who did not develop the condition. Most of the women had tests at four intervals during pregnancy: early (weeks 8-13), middle (weeks 16-22 and 24-29) and late (weeks 34-37).

Women who went on to develop gestational diabetes had higher HbA1c levels (an average of 5.3 percent), compared to those without gestational diabetes (an average HbA1c level of 5.1 percent). Each .1 percent increase in HbA1c above 5.1 percent in early pregnancy was associated with a 22-percent higher risk for gestational diabetes.

In middle pregnancy, HbA1c levels declined for both groups. However, HbA1c levels increased in the final third of pregnancy, which is consistent with the decrease in sensitivity to insulin that often occurs during this time period.

“Our results suggest that the HbA1C test potentially could help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes early in pregnancy, when lifestyle changes may be more effective in reducing their risk,” said the study’s senior author, Cuilin Zhang, Ph.D., of the Epidemiology Branch at NIH’s Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

Exercise and a healthy diet may lower blood glucose levels during pregnancy. If these measures are not successful, physicians may prescribe insulin to bring blood glucose under control.

The authors noted that further studies are needed to confirm whether measuring HbA1c levels in early pregnancy could determine a woman’s later risk for gestational diabetes. Similarly, research is needed to determine whether lowering HbA1c with lifestyle changes, either in early pregnancy or before pregnancy, could reduce the risk for the condition.

About the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD): NICHD conducts and supports research in the United States and throughout the world on fetal, infant and child development; maternal, child and family health; reproductive biology and population issues; and medical rehabilitation. For more information, visit https://www.nichd.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release quantifies the results and potential benefits by noting that each 0.1 percent increase in HbA1c levels above 5.1 percent  in early pregnancy was associated with a 22 percent higher risk for gestational diabetes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Spinal manipulation and home exercise are more effective at relieving neck pain in the long term than medications, according to new research.

People undergoing spinal manipulation therapy for neck pain also reported greater satisfaction than people receiving medication or doing home exercises.

"We found that there are some viable treatment options for neck pain," said Gert Bronfort, vice president of research at the Wolfe-Harris Center for Clinical Studies at Northwestern Health Sciences University in Bloomington, Minn.

"What we don't really know yet is how to individualize these treatments for each particular patient. All are probably still viable treatment options, but what we don't know is what each particular patient will need," Bronfort said, adding that it's possible a combination of treatments might be helpful, too.

Results of the study are published in the Jan. 3 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine. Funding for the study was provided by the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.

Neck pain is an extremely common problem. About three-quarters of adults report having neck pain at some point in their lives, according to background information in the study. Neck pain is responsible for millions of health care visits each year, and it can have a negative impact on quality of life.

Spinal manipulation is one type of treatment that's offered for neck pain, and it can be administered by chiropractors, physical therapists, osteopaths and other health care providers, according to the study.

But, there isn't much evidence for treating neck pain with spinal manipulation. There also isn't a great deal of information on how effective medications or home exercise programs are for treating neck pain, the researchers noted.

Bronfort and colleagues thought that spinal manipulation might prove to be more effective than medications or home exercise therapy. To test their hypothesis, they recruited 272 people between the ages of 18 and 65 who had neck pain. Their neck pain had no known cause, such as a trauma or pinched nerve, and the patients been experiencing the pain for between two and 12 weeks when the study began.

The study volunteers were randomly selected for one of three treatment groups. One group received spinal manipulations over a 12-week period. Each individual was allowed to choose the number of spinal manipulations they felt they needed.

The second group received medications, both over the counter and prescription, depending on their needs. First-line medications included nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications or acetaminophen (Tylenol). If people didn't get relief from these drugs, narcotic pain medications and muscle relaxants were offered.

The third group was assigned two one-hour sessions of home exercise. The goal of the home-exercise program was to improve movement in the neck area. Participants were instructed to do the exercises six to eight times per day.

At the 12th week, 82 percent of people receiving spinal manipulation reported at least a 50 percent reduction in pain, compared with 69 percent of those on medication and 77 percent doing home exercises. Also at week 12, of people receiving spinal manipulation, 32 percent reported feeling a 100 percent reduction in pain, compared with 13 percent on medications and 30 percent doing home exercises.

At one year, 27 percent of those receiving spinal manipulation said they felt a 100 percent reduction in pain versus 17 percent of those on medications and 37 percent of those doing home exercises.

"For me, as an ER doctor, this study offers an interesting perspective," said Dr. Robert Glatter, an attending physician in emergency medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "It's a small study, but it found that home exercises and spinal manipulation were effective. So, should we be referring to physical therapists, osteopaths or chiropractors from the ER?"

"This study shows that basically neck pain will get better on its own," said Dr. Victor Khabie, chief of the departments of surgery and sports medicine at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y. "It would've been good if they had a no-treatment group, too," he added.

"Everyone heals differently. There are different pathways to healing, and whether you feel you're better off with chiropractic, home exercises or medications, this study shows that all three are basically just as effective. Whatever your pathway to healing, in about six to eight weeks, you should start to feel better," said Khabie.

He also noted that it's important for anyone receiving spinal manipulation to know that there are rare, but serious risks that can occur with neck manipulations.

All three experts said anyone experiencing neck pain needs to have it evaluated to make sure there isn't a serious or correctable cause of the pain. This is especially true if you've been in a car accident, or if you have any neurological symptoms, such as repeatedly dropping things, or if you have pain radiating down your arm.

Learn more about neck pain, its causes and treatment from the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story includes both some of the specific results reported by researchers as well as more conversational descriptions of the overall experiences of people in this trial. Readers get the message that people with neck pain tend to feel better as time passes no matter which treatment option they used and that none of the treatments is clearly superior or can deliver sure-fire pain relief.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
BOSTON (Reuters) - If you’re checking into the hospital for surgery, doctors may soon be swabbing your nose in an effort to prevent an infection from appearing after your operation.

Researchers in the Netherlands said on Wednesday they were able to cut the risk of a common bacterium by nearly 60 percent by first looking for signs of it in the nose and then treating it with an antibiotic nasal gel and full body wash.

The treatment combination also shaved two days off a typical 14-day stay in the hospital.

Hospital-acquired infections are a major problem in medicine, so doctors are always looking for the best way to reduce the risk.

About 27 million surgeries are done just in the United States each year, and in as many as half a million cases, infections occur at the site of surgery.

Up to 30 percent of those infections are caused by strains of the bacterium Staphylococcus aureus, which otherwise benignly resides in the nose and on the skin.

The new study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, used a rapid test to identify which patients, most of whom were scheduled to undergo surgery, had the bacteria in at least one nostril.

The 504 patients treated with the antibiotic nose gel mupirocin, also known as Bactroban, and washed with chlorhexidine, a common ingredient in mouthwash, developed an S. aureus infection 3.4 percent of the time. The rate for 413 volunteers given placebo treatment was 7.7 percent.

The research team, led by Dr. Lonneke Bode of Erasmus University Medical Center in Rotterdam, estimated that 250 patients would need to be screened to prevent one infection.

“Preventing one infection will pay for thousands of these screenings,” Dr. Henri Verbrugh of Erasmus, a coauthor of the study, said in a telephone interview.

Infections are also a problem when doctors put tubes into the body. Although his team did not evaluate enough patients to study the problem directly, “We feel this technology is capable of preventing those types of infections as well,” Verbrugh said.

A second infection study, also reported in the journal, found that a chlorhexidine-alcohol combination produced 41 percent fewer surgical-site infections as the commonly used mixture of povidone and iodine, which gives a yellow-orange tinge to the skin.

In a commentary, Dr. Richard Wenzel of the Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond said the chlorhexidine-alcohol mixture should replace the older disinfectant when scrubbing people for surgery, and the nasal disinfection technique should primarily be used for people undergoing cardiac surgery, receiving an implant, or whose immune system is likely to be affected.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The potential benefits are quantified. We were pleased to read absolute risk reduction data following the relative risk reduction data.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Blood drawn from expectant mothers could offer parents an earlier sneak peek at their baby’s sex than methods currently used in the U.S., researchers said Tuesday.

The test may be particularly valuable for families that harbor sex-linked genetic disorders like hemophilia, they add.

Because such disorders mostly strike boys, knowing that the baby is a girl could spare the mother diagnostic procedures, such as amniocentesis, that carry a small risk of miscarriage.

“It could reduce the number of invasive procedures that are being performed for specific genetic conditions,” said Dr. Diana Bianchi of Tufts University School of Medicine, who worked on the new study.

But other researchers voiced concerns, saying it could be misused to terminate a pregnancy if the baby isn’t of the desired sex.

“What you have to consider is the ethics of this,” said Dr. Mary Rosser, an obstetrician and gynecologist at the Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

“If parents are using it to determine gender and then terminate the pregnancy based on that, that could be a problem,” she told Reuters Health. “Remember, gender is not a disease.”

The test looks for small pieces of the male sex chromosome in the mother’s blood, which would mean she is carrying a baby boy. Some European hospitals already rely on the method, called cell-free fetal DNA, although it’s not available from doctors in the U.S.

“What they are finding in England is that many women are not going on to have the invasive tests,” Bianchi told Reuters Health.

In those procedures, doctors either extract a small amount of the fluid that surrounds the fetus (amniocentesis) or they take a sample of the placenta (chorionic villus sampling). Between one in 100 and one in 600 mothers miscarry as a result, according to Bianchi.

In a fresh look at the medical evidence for the blood test, she and her colleagues analyzed 57 earlier studies that included more than 6,500 pregnancies.

They found parents could trust the test 98.8 percent of the time when it said they’d have a boy, and 94.8 percent of the time when it indicated a girl.

That leaves some room for error, which could be important if parents are making medical decisions based on the results — such as whether or not to get an invasive procedure to look for genetic disorders.

However, the current non-invasive alternative — an ultrasound done at the end of the first trimester — isn’t always good at spotting a baby’s sex, Bianchi’s team reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

And the blood test is reliable as early as seven weeks into the pregnancy, whereas ultrasound is not.

Bianchi said one study had estimated the blood test costs about 255 pounds in the UK (about $413), all included. While it’s available over the Internet, she said her team had only looked at hospital-based test performance.

“I don’t know why it is not being incorporated in the US,” she said.

Rosser, however, chalked that up to the ethical issues it raises.

“It is a great test that can be part of our armamentarium of noninvasive testing that we use,” she said. “But it should only be used by families that are at risk for sex-linked diseases.”

Bianchi said she owns stock in Verinata Health, a company that is developing cell-free fetal DNA tests for Down syndrome, although that company had no role in the new study.

The American College of Medical Genetics did not respond to requests for comment on the DNA tests.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Reuters examines how parents may benefit from earlier results in pregnancy if their unborn child is at risk of a serious genetic defect that is sex-linked. However, the story also points out that there is some chance of mistakes with the early testing.
We’re just surprised that neither Reuters nor the NY Times pointed out in absolute terms that 5 out of every 100 tests of girls and 1 of every 100 boys will be wrong – 6 out of a hundred multiplied by millions of pregnancies a year is a lot of errors even if uptake is small.
It’s also worth noting that most research achieves better performance results than when the tests are used in the real world.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have found evidence that a natural fruit extract is capable of dissolving calcium oxalate crystals, the most common component of human kidney stones. This finding could lead to the first advance in the treatment of calcium oxalate stones in 30 years.

Jeffrey Rimer, associate professor of chemical engineering at the University of Houston, was lead author of the study, published Aug. 8 in the online edition of Nature. The work offers the first evidence that the compound hydroxycitrate (HCA) is an effective inhibitor of calcium oxalate crystal growth that, under certain conditions, is actually able to dissolve these crystals. Researchers also explain how it works.

The findings are the result of a combination of experimental studies, computational studies and human studies, Rimer said.

Kidney stones are small, hard mineral deposits that form inside the kidneys, affecting up to 12 percent of men and seven percent of women. High blood pressure, diabetes and obesity can increase the risk, and the reported incidence is on the rise.

Preventive treatment has not changed much over the last three decades. Doctors tell patients who are at risk of developing stones to drink lots of water and avoid foods rich in oxalate, such as rhubarb, okra, spinach and almonds. They often recommend taking citrate (CA), in the form of potassium citrate, a supplement that can slow crystal growth, but some people are unable to tolerate the side effects.

The project grew out of preliminary work done by collaborator John Asplin, a nephrologist at Litholink Corporation, who suggested HCA as a possible treatment. HCA is chemically similar to CA and is also available as a dietary supplement.

"HCA shows promise as a potential therapy to prevent kidney stones," the researchers wrote. "HCA may be preferred as a therapy over CA (potassium citrate)."

In addition to Rimer and Asplin, authors on the paper include Giannis Mpourmpakis and his graduate student, Michael G. Taylor, of the University of Pittsburgh; Ignacio Granja of Litholink Corporation, and Jihae Chung, a UH graduate student working in Rimer's lab.

The head-to-head studies of CA and HCA determined that while both compounds inhibit the growth of calcium oxalate crystals, HCA was more potent and displayed unique qualities that are advantageous for the development of new therapies.

The team of researchers then used atomic force microscopy, or AFM, to study interactions between the crystals, CA and HCA under realistic growth conditions. According to Rimer, the technique allowed them to record crystal growth in real time with near-molecular resolution.

Chung noted that the AFM images recorded the crystal actually shrinking when exposed to specific concentrations of HCA. Rimer suspected the initial finding was an abnormality, as it is rare to see a crystal actually dissolve in highly supersaturated growth solutions. The most effective inhibitors reported in the literature simply stop the crystal from growing.

It turned out that Chung's initial finding was correct. Once they confirmed it is possible to dissolve crystals in supersaturated solutions, researchers then looked at reasons to explain why that happened.

Mpourmpakis and Taylor applied density functional theory (DFT) - a highly accurate computational method used to study the structure and properties of materials - to address how HCA and CA bind to calcium and to calcium oxalate crystals. They discovered HCA formed a stronger bond with crystal surfaces, inducing a strain that is seemingly relieved by the release of calcium and oxalate, leading to crystal dissolution.

HCA was also tested in human subjects, as seven people took the supplement for three days, allowing researchers to determine that HCA is excreted through urine, a requirement for the supplement to work as a treatment.

While Rimer said the research established the groundwork to design an effective drug, questions remain. Long-term safety, dosage and additional human trials are needed, he said.

"But our initial findings are very promising," he said. "If it works in vivo, similar to our trials in the laboratory, HCA has the potential to reduce the incidence rate of people with chronic kidney stone disease."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release merely states that, in lab tests, hydroxycitrate appears to be capable of dissolving a common component of kidney stones and could be more effective than citrate, which is often recommended in addition to diet and lifestyle changes as a way to help prevent kidney stones. There is also a cautionary note at the end of the release (which could have been placed near the top) stating that long-term safety, dosage and additional human trials are needed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Surgery For Sinus Misery: Better, But Still No Cure

Surgeon Ralph Metson stares at a big video screen that shows, with amazing clarity, the inside of Nancy Butler's nasal passages.

A weird glow lights up her nose and cheek from within. It comes from the fiber-optic tip of Metson's endoscope, which also holds a high-res camera lens.

On the monitor, you can see the miniature instruments he's using to cut away inflamed tissue and snip away pieces of eggshell-thin bone that block Butler's sinuses and give her nonstop headaches. To avoid poking through to the brain or into the orbit of an eye, there's a device around the patient's head with a guidance system that tells Metson, in three dimensions, exactly where his sharp instruments are on a CT scan of Butler's head.

After an hour or so of this delicate work, Metson has opened up the 72-year-old woman's sinuses so they can drain. "The next time she gets a cold," he says, "her membranes are not going to swell and block the sinuses the way they have in the past. They're going to stay open."

This is modern sinus surgery. It's a lot less brutal than the old days -- back in the early 1980s. Then, surgeons cut through the face and mouth, scraped out the sinuses and left patients bruised and scarred. Often they were no better off, sometimes worse.

Advances since then have persuaded more doctors to do sinus surgery. So a lot more people are getting it -- around 300,000 a year, making it one of the most common operations.

But how good is it, in terms of giving patients relief from the pain, breathing difficulty and fatigue of chronic sinusitis?

"Surgery is usually not curative," Metson says. "But probably in over 90 percent of the cases, it does significantly improve a patient's quality of life. He or she will still have infections after surgery. But hopefully they'll be less frequent, less severe and shorter in duration. A brief course of antibiotics will work better after surgery."

Judy Foreman, another of Metson's patients, offers an example of both how surgery can help -- and why patients' expectations shouldn't be too high.

Foreman had sinus surgery two years ago, when she was 64, after trying everything else. (See sidebar.) She rinsed out her sinuses faithfully with saltwater. She tried decongestants, antihistamines and steroid nasal sprays. Over and over, Metson prescribed antibiotics.

For about 80 percent of patients, these nonsurgical alternatives manage the problem adequately, Metson says. But Foreman was in the other 20 percent.

Foreman writes a health column for The Boston Globe and other newspapers, so she's an unusually well-informed patient. "I read an article about people feeling less tired all the time after having had surgery, and I thought, boy, I would really like that," she says.

When she asked Metson about surgery, he said most people with her degree of sinus problems would have had it long before.

"I thought, 'OK, so I'm just being scared,' " Foreman says. She didn't like to think of someone sticking sharp instruments up her nose and cutting away delicate tissue. But when she overcame her squeamishness and finally had the operation, she found it wasn't nearly as bad as she thought it would be.

"It's uncomfortable," she reports. "Afterwards you have these cotton wads up your nose and, of course, you can't breathe with all this stuff in your nose." But she didn't hurt very much. "I was so glad to get it over with that I would say the pain was not bad at all."

And the outcome? Now she has three or four sinus infections a year instead of five or more. They're not as bad as before. Still, she's disappointed.

"I'm not like a person without this problem," she says. "I get a cold and I freak out because I know it's going to be there for three weeks. Other people get it and they're done in five days."

Foreman wrote a column about her surgery. Two years later, she's still getting e-mail from people asking whether they should have it.

"I say, 'Go for it!' Because I think it's made enough of a difference that I'm glad I did it," Foreman says. She'd consider a second operation, but Metson says usually that's advised only for patients with nasal polyps that regrow -- not a problem she has.

Metson says most of his patients do better than Foreman. But surgery rarely cures them. That's because surgery doesn't touch the root cause of chronic sinusitis.

Surgeons can cut away bone and membranes that block sinuses. But they can't stop the inflammation some people are prone to, and that inflammation can cause new obstructions.

To tackle that problem, researchers have discovered five genes involved in that inflammatory process. Metson hopes drugs will be developed to regulate those genes.

"And if we can use those as novel targets for, let's say, nasal sprays or medications, we may be able to treat people like Judy without surgery," Metson says. "Or we'll do surgery and follow it up after surgery with these sprays."

That, he says, will be the next big advance in sinus treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This story focuses almost exclusively on the experience of one patient, a practice we generally think should be avoided. In this case, however, the patient in question was a health columnist with the Boston Globe who brings a well-informed and appropriately skeptical perspective to the story. Whereas many stories seek out patients who embody the best possible outcome for a new technology or procedure, this patient describes an incremental benefit that was "disappointing" in size but in the end, still worth the trouble. Instead of getting 5 or more sinus infections per year, she now gets 3 or 4 infections that are not as bad as before. In addition, the story emphasizes that surgery is "rarely a cure" and should be viewed as a "last resort" for most patients with sinus problems.  We wish more stories were this measured in their assessment of medical benefits.
  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using data from a national study, Johns Hopkins researchers determined that using heart CT scans can help personalize treatment in patients whose blood pressure falls in the gray zone of just above normal or mild high blood pressure. Previously, the appropriate blood pressure treatment for these patients used risk calculations and some guesswork, potentially leaving many vulnerable to heart disease or taking drugs they don't need. Nearly one in three adults in the U.S. has prehypertension, blood pressure higher than normal but not considered high yet.

The scans detect levels of calcium in the heart's arteries, and the physicians suggest those people with the highest calcium levels would benefit most from aggressive blood pressure treatment, whereas those with little or no calcium may not need to be treated as intensively, depending on their other heart disease risk factors.

In the study, published on Jan. 10 in Circulation, the researchers say these calcium scores allow physicians to go beyond the traditionally calculated risk factors to determine which blood pressure treatment strategy may be most appropriate for a particular patient.

"If a health care provider wants to target blood pressure in a patient with traditional heart disease risk factors and above-normal blood pressure, he or she can look at coronary artery calcium to help with tiebreakerlike decisions," says J. William McEvoy, M.B.B.Ch., M.H.S., assistant professor of medicine and member of the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. "Our study, along with others, such as SPRINT and HOPE, positions cardiac risk and coronary artery calcium as helpful ways to determine if a given patient would either benefit from more intensive blood pressure control or do just fine with a more traditional blood pressure target."

In late 2015, the SPRINT trial showed improved outcomes for participants with increased risk for heart disease whose physicians targeted their systolic (the top number) blood pressures to 120 millimeters of mercury, rather than the traditional 140 millimeters of mercury. But not all people deemed "higher risk" by traditional methods may need to be aggressively treated, McEvoy says. Some people react poorly to higher doses of blood pressure medicines and experience side effects, such as sexual dysfunction, dizziness, falls, weakness and more. And the risk factor equations that determine whether certain people are at higher risk and should be treated more intensively with blood pressure medications may have inaccuracies on the individual level, says McEvoy. "We can predict that about 15 out of every 100 people with a particular risk score will die of a heart attack, but the equations don't tell us which of those people will be one of the actual 15; they don't give us personalized information," says McEvoy.

Conventionally, coronary artery calcium scores have informed physicians' decisions of whether to put a patient on statins, but the researchers say they haven't been evaluated before for their potential ability to determine blood pressure treatment. To determine if coronary artery calcium scores could inform blood pressure recommendations too, the researchers used data from 3,733 participants in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) who had systolic blood pressures between 120 and 179 millimeters of mercury. Participants were an average of 65 years old, and 48 percent were men. Thirty-five percent were white, 32 percent were African-American, 22 percent were Hispanic and 11 percent were Chinese-American. At the beginning of the study, investigators measured their blood pressure and performed a cardiac CT scan to determine coronary artery calcium scores. They also calculated each participant's heart disease risk with the Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Algorithm, which uses traditional risk factors, such as race, age, sex, cholesterol levels and family history of disease. About once a year for 10 years, an interviewer contacted each participant or a family member to determine heart disease diagnosis, hospitalizations or deaths. After about 10 years, the participants had 642 heart disease events, such as heart attack, heart failure, stroke and death.

The researchers divided the participants by their coronary artery calcium scores into one of three groups: those with a score of zero, those with a score of one to 100 and those with a score greater than 100. Then, they looked at the number of heart disease-related events in each calcium score category broken down by blood pressure range and calculated heart disease risk. Low heart disease risk was classified as a less than 15 percent chance of a heart disease event over the next 10 years, and high risk was 15 percent or greater risk of a heart disease event. To get the event rate, the investigators divided the number of events in each category by the amount of people in the study multiplied by the length of time they spent in the study, known as a person-year.

Participants with calcium scores of zero with a high calculated risk of heart disease had a relatively low actual event rate after the 10-year study. For example, according to the researchers, those with systolic blood pressures below 140 millimeters of mercury and no calcium had an event rate of 12.7 events per 1,000 person-years, and similar people with systolic blood pressures between 140 and 159 millimeters of mercury had an event rate of 13.6 events per 1,000 person-years.

In contrast, participants with systolic blood pressure under 140 millimeters of mercury -- below the current cutoff for treatment -- and rated with a low predicted risk of heart disease who had a calcium score over 100 had a high actual event rate of 19.7 events per 1,000 person-years. Thus, even though their calculated heart disease risk is relatively low and their blood pressure is below traditional cutoffs for treatment, the researchers say people in this category with calcium over 100 are high risk and may benefit from more aggressive blood pressure treatment.

Participants with high systolic blood pressure between 160 and 179 millimeters of mercury had high event rates ranging from 20 to 40 heart disease events per 1,000 person-years regardless of their calcium scores. The researchers say this demonstrates that calcium scores may only be useful in guiding more personalized blood pressure treatment for patients with mild high blood pressure -- the gray zone -- not those with high blood pressure.

"It may be that if patients are in that blood pressure treatment gray zone with a high risk score but their coronary artery calcium score is zero, then they don't need to be treated aggressively to 120 millimeters of mercury and can be treated to 140 instead," says McEvoy. "But if patients have a high calcium score and are in the gray zone, then it would make sense to go with 120 as a treatment goal."

The researchers caution that results are from an observational study, and a randomized trial would be needed to confirm the recommendations.

Coronary artery calcium scans aren't usually covered by insurance and can range in cost from $100 to $400. The scans use radiation, so there is a very small cancer risk for susceptible individuals.

About 70 million adults in the U.S. have high blood pressure -- a systolic blood pressure over 140 millimeters of mercury -- putting them at increased risk for heart attacks, stroke, heart failure and kidney disease, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Additional authors on the study included Seth Martin, Zeina Dardari, Wendy Post, Khurram Nasir and Michael Blaha of Johns Hopkins; Michael Miedema of the Minneapolis Heart Institute; Veit Sandfort of the National Institutes of Health; Joseph Yeboah of Wake Forest Baptist Health; Matthew Budoff of the University of California, Los Angeles; David Goff of the Colorado School of Public Health; and Bruce Psaty of the University of Washington.

The study was funded by the P.J. Schafer Cardiovascular Research Fund, the Johns Hopkins Magic That Matters Research Fund for Cardiovascular Research, grants from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (UL1-TR-000040 and UL1-TR-001079), and contracts from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (HHSN268201500003I, N01-HC-95159, N01-HC-95160, N01-HC-95161, N01-HC-95162, N01-HC-95163, N01-HC-95164, N01-HC-95165, N01-HC-95166, N01-HC-95167, N01-HC-95168 and N01-HC-95169).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job of explaining the findings with numbers. It says the study shows “heart CT scans can help personalize treatment in patients whose blood pressure falls in the gray zone of just above normal or mild high blood pressure.” It says the study suggests “people with the highest calcium levels would benefit most from aggressive blood pressure treatment, whereas those with little or no calcium may not need to be treated as intensively, depending on their other heart disease risk factors.”
It gives some detailed numbers to show the risk differential between people with no calcium buildup and those with a lot of calcium. To paraphrase the release, among participants with borderline blood pressure readings, those with calcium scores of zero and high predicted risk of heart disease had a low actual event rate, of 12.7 events per 1,000 person-years. Those with calcium scores over 100 but a low predicted risk of heart disease ended up with a higher rate of actual cardiac events, 19.7.
“Thus,” the release says, “even though their calculated heart disease risk is relatively low and their blood pressure is below traditional cutoffs for treatment, the researchers say people in this category with calcium over 100 are high risk and may benefit from more aggressive blood pressure treatment.
Given that the difference in cardiac event rates between people with low calcium scores and those with high calcium scores isn’t extreme, this might amount to a marginal benefit; we would have liked some discussion of how many patients might fall into this “gray zone” and thus benefit from this approach.
Basically, the benefits, including the number needed to treat (NNT), cost-effectiveness, as well as harms and costs of obtaining these calcium scores are unknown. All we know is the magnitude of the increased potential risk associated with higher calcium scores, not whether this risk can be reduced.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Becky Herry has tried nearly every drug available for melanoma.

A few years ago, that would have been a very short list. Until recently, people with advanced melanoma often died within a year of diagnosis, even with chemotherapy.

For the first time, however, patients such as Herry have options.

The Food and Drug Administration approved two new melanoma drugs in 2011 — the first new therapy for the disease in more than a decade — and approved two from GlaxoSmithKline on Wednesday. All improve survival by a few months.

The FDA also has put a Merck melanoma drug, lambrolizumab, on a fast track to approval by designating it a "breakthrough" therapy.

Several other drug companies are also working on melanoma therapies.

Melanoma research will take center stage at the four-day annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which begins Friday in Chicago. Doctors will present 288 melanoma studies, compared to only 62 a decade ago.

"The number of new melanoma therapies is sort of astonishing," says melanoma researcher Lynn Schuchter, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine. "The pace is unbelievable."

No one can claim to have cured melanoma, the most aggressive form of skin cancer, which is diagnosed in 77,000 Americans a year and kills more than 9,400.

But after decades of failure, the spate of new drugs is helping more patients than ever before, giving people like Herry more time and better quality of life, Schuchter says. Doctors now dare to hope that giving these new drugs in sequence, or in combination, will help people with melanoma live for years while feeling relatively good.

Unlike traditional chemo, which indiscriminately kills growing cells, the new generation of melanoma drugs work in a precise way, based on a better understanding of the specific genes and proteins that drive cancer growth, says Timothy Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.

"The reason we're seeing these breakthroughs is because we did the basic science research to help us understand how this cancer happens, how it escapes therapy and how it progresses," Turnham says.

Many of the new drugs aim to remove melanoma's "cloaking device," allowing it to be recognized and killed by the immune system, says Roy Herbst, chief of medical oncology at the Yale Cancer Center.

Other drugs — such as the two approved Wednesday, trametinib and dabrafenib — target growth signals within cancer cells.

Herry has tried two of the newer drugs from Bristol-Myers Squibb: ipilumumab, approved in 2011, and an experimental drug called nivolumab.

Although her tumors increased while taking ipilumumab, Herry says a CT scan earlier this year found they had shrunk by half after beginning nivolumab.

The most noticeable side effects from nivolumab have been moderate fatigue and vitiligo, a loss of pigment on some areas of her hands and arms, says Herry, 57, from Santa Cruz, Calif. She's been able to continue working as a registered nurse throughout these latest treatments.

Older melanoma therapies — including interferon, interleukin-2 and five chemo drugs — caused much more serious side effects, leaving her too sick to work, Herry says.

When the new immune therapies work, they often keep cancer at bay for a long time, says Schuchter, who has patients whose cancer has been controlled by ipilumumab for three years.

At the cancer meeting, featured presentations include a study by researcher Mario Sznol, of the Yale Cancer Center, who will discuss long-term results of nivolumab. Researcher Stephen Hodi, of Boston's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, will present the results of combining ipilumumab with an immune-stimulating drug. Doctors from New York's Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center will present research on uveal melanoma, which occurs in the eye, and affects about 1,200 Americans a year.

Other studies released in advance of the conference have shown positive results.

None of the new drugs works for everyone. And none are risk-free.

Ipilumumab can cause severe side effects, created when the immune system attacks the body itself, Schuchter says. Vemurafenib, approved in 2011, can cause non-lethal skin cancers.

"Doctors will say, 'There are side effects, but they are manageable,'" Turnham says. "Well, 'manageable' can mean something different to patients."

Turnham knew a 19-year-old woman with melanoma who "woke up bleeding every morning" because of rashes caused by one of the new drugs, which targets mutations in a gene called MEK. The woman died a year later.

Drugs such as ipilumumab can seem like breakthroughs to doctors because they help 15% of patients. Patients with a limited time to live may not be so positive, Turnham says.

"If you are a patient and someone says, 'There is an 85% chance of you spending $120,000 on a drug, and spending four months of your life being sick, with no benefit,' you're not going to be so excited."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: With so many different drugs discussed in one overview story, it’s difficult to give complete data on all. And, while we had some reservations, we give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
In general terms the story states, “No one can claim to have cured melanoma.” Also in general terms, it stated, “When the new immune therapies work, they often keep cancer at bay for a long time.”
It gave specific details on two studies released in advance of the upcoming ASCO meeting – what percentage of patients had what percentage of tumor shrinkage. But we would have liked to have seen additional comments on why this level of tumor shrinkage is important to the patient. Tumor shrinkage may be a surrogate outcome that doesn’t translate into a meaningful improvement in a person’s life. Was there an improvement in survival or quality of life?  How long were the subjects followed in the studies?
It also included this quote from the executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation: “Drugs such as ipilumumab can seem like breakthroughs to doctors because they help 15% of patients. Patients with a limited time to live may not be so positive.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Britain’s 650,000 people with bipolar disorder should take lithium to help control their condition, despite its reputation for dulling the senses, a significant new study has found.

Researchers claim that although the drug does carry some health risks, its overall effectiveness, especially its ability to reduce self-harm and suicide, mean it should be much more widely used.

The findings are contained in the first study comparing the side-effects of the four main mood-stabilising drugs the NHS prescribes. They have prompted calls for a rethink about attitudes towards lithium, given that only an estimated 10% of those with bipolar disorder use it, mainly because patients fear it will cause loss of personality, weight gain and other problems.

The lead author behind the research told the Guardian that widespread “lithium stigma” among patients is leading to them receiving the wrong treatment and ending up admitted to hospital unnecessarily because their condition is not as well controlled as it could be.

“Lithium is a drug with a bad reputation. It is seen by patients, and some psychiatrists, as a dangerous drug. People rightly have suspicions about it. Patients say that the downsides include emotional numbing – feeling that you aren’t connected with your feelings – as well as tremors,” said Dr Joseph Hayes, a psychiatrist at University College London.

But lithium’s reputation is largely misplaced and based on the experiences of patients from the 1960s to the 1980s who were given too large a dose of the drug, he added. The new research, published in the medical journal PLOS Medicine, found that the side-effects of the mood-stabilising alternatives used by most patients are either the same as or worse than lithium, Hayes said.

The paper, co-written by Hayes and four colleagues from UCL and Oxford University, concluded that: “Lithium remains an important treatment for individuals with bipolar disorder.” It accepts that “there is clear evidence that its use is associated with a number of adverse events.”

However, it adds: “These risks need to be offset with the potentially superior effectiveness and anti-suicidal benefits of the drug compared to other treatment options.”

The researchers studied a nationally representative sample of 6,671 patients across the UK who were treated for bipolar disorder between 1995 and 2013. Of those, 2,148 had taken lithium, 1,670 had used valproate, 1,477 had been on olanzapine and 1,376 had taken quetiapine. They experienced side-effects including chronic kidney disease, thyroid disease, weight gain and high blood pressure.

The researchers’ analysis bore out one of the two main criticisms of lithium, but found the other to be baseless. They found that patients on lithium had a higher risk of suffering kidney function problems and developing hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism and also hypercalcemia. However, none of the drugs caused more severe kidney problems.

Meanwhile, lithium patients were less likely to put on weight than patients on the other drugs. While 15%-20% of those on the three other drugs were more likely to gain more than 15% of their body weight, just 10% of those on lithium put on the same amount of extra pounds. Those on olanzapine added the most weight and experienced high blood pressure as a result.

Separate research has shown that patients on the other three medications are 40% more likely to harm themselves than those on lithium. Bipolar disorder carries one of the highest rates of suicide of any mental illness, alongside schizophrenia and alcohol and drug addiction.

The very limited use of lithium is despite the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) advising in 2014 that it should be the standard treatment for bipolar disorder, which is also known as manic depression and is characterised by manic highs and bouts of depression. That superseded its previous view, outlined in 2006, that any of the four drugs were useful first lines of treatment for the condition, which affects about one in 100 people.

“Lithium stigma, which includes some people in the psychiatric community, leads to people using drugs that are less effective [than lithium]. To me as a doctor that’s a big worry because my main aim is to help people to be well and if you aren’t doing that with the best available evidence then you are failing patients,” said Hayes.

“I think that many patients are missing out quite commonly on the best available treatment. That means that people end up in hospital more often than they need to and end up achieving less in their lives than they could do if they were on lithium. The high suicide rate with bipolar disorder should encourage greater use of lithium. There should be more sensible use of it.”

Stephen Buckley, head of information at the charity Mind, said: “We welcome research which adds to our understanding of treatments and medications for people experiencing mental health problems, including bipolar disorder. But as with all areas of mental health there is still more research to be done.

“Different people will find that different treatments help with managing their mental health problems. This may be medication, talking therapies, or a mixture of both.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The research examined the side effect profiles of  lithium, valproate, olanzapine, and quetiapine and provided hazard ratios for the most commonly recognized side effects.
The Guardian story reflects those findings in a qualitative way with some quantitative details, such as: “Meanwhile, lithium patients were less likely to put on weight than patients on the other drugs. While 15%-20% of those on the three other drugs were more likely to gain more than 15% of their body weight, just 10% of those on lithium put on the same amount of extra pounds.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago (CNN) -- For the first time, patients with the deadliest form of skin cancer have two new treatment options that prolong survival, according to new research presented at a cancer conference in Chicago on Sunday.

One drug specifically targets a mutated gene that tells a cancer cell to grow, the other boosts a patient's immune system in the fight against the disease. Both drugs cause tumors to shrink and prolong survival for patients with melanoma that has spread to other parts of the body, but neither is a cure.

"This is an unprecedented time of clinical options -- it is truly practice-changing," said Dr. Lynn Schuchter, who heads the Melanoma Center at the University of Pennsylvania and is not involved with the research.

MayoClinic: Find out more about melanoma

One study presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's (ASCO) conference on Sunday focused on the experimental drug vemurafenib. About half of all melanoma patients have a mutated BRAF gene. This mutation tells the cell to continue to grow.

"It's like the on-switch is stuck," said Dr. Paul Chapman, from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Center in New York and lead author of the study. Vemurafenib blocks the mutated gene, which kills the cancer cell and shrinks tumors.

Researchers compared this new drug, which comes in pill form, to the only FDA-approved chemotherapy drug for melanoma, dacarbazine: It has been used to treat melanoma patients since 1975, but is only effective in about 10% of patients.

Nearly 90% benefited from this new targeted drug, Schuchter said.

In a large, phase 3 study involving 675 people worldwide, patients on vemurafenib did much better than those on chemotherapy. Forty-eight percent of patients on vemurafenib had substantial tumor shrinkage that lasted for more than a month, compared to 5.5% of patients in the chemotherapy group.

Those taking vemurafenib had a 63% reduced risk of death compared to those on chemo. Patients on vemurafenib saw the drug work within 72 hours and 84% of the patients were still alive after six months, compared with 64% of patients getting dacarbazine.

"These are truly striking results" ASCO president Dr. George Sledge said.

Patient advocates like Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation, are thrilled because "the incidence of melanoma is going up all over the world and the treatment landscape has been terrible."

Drugs that treat breast cancer found to prevent it, too

Sledge and other cancer experts are confident that based on these study results, vemurafenib will almost certainly will get FDA approval this year.

A second study showed that the recently approved drug Ipilimumab, sold under the name Yervoy, also extends survival for melanoma patients with advanced disease.

It doesn't target a specific part of the cell. Instead, it stimulates the patient's immune system to allow it to better fight the cancer. Patients with and without the BRAF mutation were eligible to participate.

Among 502 patients enrolled in this clinical trial, half were given Yervoy plus dacarbazine and the other half were given a placebo and chemotherapy.

"Twenty-one percent of (the Yervoy) population was alive after three years," lead study author Dr. Jedd Wolchok said, compared to 12% who got the placebo and chemo. Wolchok, also an oncologist from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said patients taking Yervoy saw the drug work for them for 19 months, compared to only eight months in patients in the chemo group.

Schuchter says melanoma patients are celebrating this moment because there are now two good treatment options for patients, when there really were none before.

"I've been doing this for 25 years, and we've not had drugs that extended survival. That is what is so remarkable here," Schuchter said.

While patients taking vemurafenib do very well, Schuchter said the drug stops working after about nine or 10 months. But in many cases that are nine or 10 months they otherwise would not have had.

Yervoy takes a while to work, and some patients may not have that time, study author Chapman said. He also points out that both drugs do have side effects so patients have to be monitored.

Doctors and researchers will now explore how to best use these drugs -- give one before the other, or simultaneously.

Wolchok says manufacturers of both drugs (Genentech's vemurafenib and Bristol-Myers Squibb's Yervoy), which also funded these studies, have agreed to work with researchers to study how these drugs are tolerated by patients when taken together, giving doctors even more possible treatment options. This is very unusual in the world of drug development, he said.

According to the American Cancer Society, melanoma is one of the most common cancers in young adults today. More than 68,000 people were diagnosed with melanoma last year and about 8,700 died.

Not all melanomas can be prevented, but limiting exposure to strong sunlight and other sources of UV light like tanning beds can significantly reduce the risk of getting this very deadly cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Adequate explanation of the benefits reported in both studies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Overweight people who used a new motivational intervention called Functional Imagery Training (FIT) lost an average of five times more weight than those using talking therapy alone, shows new research published today by the University of Plymouth and Queensland University.

In addition, users of FIT lost 4.3cm more around their waist circumference in six months - and continued to lose weight after the intervention had finished.

Led by Dr Linda Solbrig from the School of Psychology, the research involved 141 participants, who were allocated either to FIT or Motivational Interviewing (MI) - a technique that sees a counsellor support someone to develop, highlight and verbalise their need or motivation for change, and their reasons for wanting to change.

FIT goes one step further than MI, as it makes use of multisensory imagery to explore these changes by teaching clients how to elicit and practice motivational imagery themselves. Everyday behaviours and optional app support are used to cue imagery practice until it becomes a cognitive habit.

Maximum contact time was four hours of individual consultation, and neither group received any additional dietary advice or information.

Dr Solbrig, who completed the work as part of a PhD funded by The National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRC) South West Peninsula, said: "It's fantastic that people lost significantly more weight on this intervention, as, unlike most studies, it provided no diet/physical activity advice or education. People were completely free in their choices and supported in what they wanted to do, not what a regimen prescribed."

The study showed how after six months people who used the FIT intervention lost an average of 4.11kg, compared with an average of 0.74kg among the MI group.

After 12 months - six months after the intervention had finished - the FIT group continued to lose weight, with an average of 6.44kg lost compared with 0.67kg in the MI group.

Dr Solbrig continued: "Most people agree that in order to lose weight, you need to eat less and exercise more, but in many cases, people simply aren't motivated enough to heed this advice - however much they might agree with it. So FIT comes in with the key aim of encouraging someone to come up with their own imagery of what change might look and feel like to them, how it might be achieved and kept up, even when challenges arise.

"We started with taking people through an exercise about a lemon. We asked them to imagine seeing it, touching it, juicing it, drinking the juice and juice accidently squirting in their eye, to emphasise how emotional and tight to our physical sensations imagery is. From there we are able to encourage them to fully imagine and embrace their own goals. Not just 'imagine how good it would be to lose weight' but, for example, 'what would losing weight enable you to do that you can't do now? What would that look / sound / smell like?', and encourage them to use all of their senses.

"As well as being delighted by the success of the study in the short term, there are very few studies that document weight loss past the end of treatment, so to see that people continued to lose weight despite not having any support shows the sustainability and effectiveness of this intervention."

Trisha Bradbury was one of the participants allocated to the FIT study, and she explains: "I lost my mum at 60, and being 59 myself with a variety of health problems, my motivation was to be there for my daughter. I kept thinking about wearing the dress I'd bought for my daughter's graduation, and on days I really didn't feel like exercising, kept picturing how I'd feel.

"I've gone from 14 stone to 12 stone 2 and have managed to lower the dosage I need for my blood pressure tablets. I'd still like to lose a touch more, but I'm so delighted with the mind-set shift."

Professor Jackie Andrade, Professor in Psychology at the University of Plymouth, is one of the co-creators of FIT, and she explains: "FIT is based on two decades of research showing that mental imagery is more strongly emotionally charged than other types of thought. It uses imagery to strengthen people's motivation and confidence to achieve their goals, and teaches people how to do this for themselves, so they can stay motivated even when faced with challenges. We were very excited to see that our intervention achieved exactly what we had hoped for and that it helped our participants achieve their goals and most importantly to maintain them."

The full study, entitled Functional Imagery Training versus Motivational Interviewing for Weight Loss: A randomised controlled trial of brief individual interventions for overweight and obesity is available to view in the International Journal of Obesity (doi: 10.1038/s41366-018-0122-1).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release describes benefits in terms of kilograms lost at six months and twelve months after the FIT/MI intervention. Benefits are also described in terms of centimeters lost from their waist circumference. This information would have been more meaningful if it had provided information about the starting weight and waist circumference for the groups, since that would have shed light on whether one group would find it more difficult to shed kilograms or centimeters.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a big step towards developing a test that can tell people if they have cancer long before the first symptoms show up.

The blood test detected the majority of cancers in people with four of the biggest cancer killers: breast, colon, lung and ovarian cancer, the team at Johns Hopkins University said.

The test is a long way from being used to screen for cancer, but the study shows a way to get there, the team reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

“There is a lot of excitement about liquid biopsies, but most of that has been in late-stage cancer or in individuals where you already know what to look for,” said Dr. Victor Velculescu, professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins University Kimmel Cancer Center.

“The surprising result is that we can find a high fraction of early-stage patients having alterations in their blood,” said Velculescu, who led the study team.

It was not a slam dunk, but the test found cancer in the blood of more than half the patients who had been diagnosed with stage 1 cancer. It was even more accurate in finding late-stage cancers, but the goal would be to catch cancer in its earliest, easiest-to-treat stage.

There were no false positives in 44 people who did not have cancer, they said. That's important, said Dr. Wyndham Wilson of the National Cancer Institute, because there is no point detecting cancer in people if the cancer is not going to actually cause trouble.

"You don’t want to go screening people for hallmark (cancer) mutations unless you absolutely know that when you find it, that there is a tumor there and that it is a tumor that needs to be treated," said Wyndham, who was not involved in the study.

Sometimes, early-stage tumors or precancerous growths just go away -- attacked by the immune system or because they don't thrive for other reasons.

Several different liquid biopsies are already on the market, used to help track whether cancer treatments are working. But there’s nothing yet that can detect cancer in someone who has not yet been diagnosed.

It’s easy to find tumor mutations if you know what to look for. “The challenge was to develop a blood test that could predict the probable presence of cancer without knowing the genetic mutations present in a person’s tumor,” Velculescu said.

“We have used this approach to examine 58 cancer-related genes,” the team wrote in their report. The method involved deep sequencing – sequencing DNA 30,000 times over to look for mutations in DNA from tumor cells that floats in the blood.

Cancer patients had more of this DNA in their blood, the team found.

They identified 62 percent of the patients with stage I cancer – four out of eight colon cancer patients, and 90 percent of colon cancer patients with stage II, III or IV disease.

They got a positive in 45 percent of the lung cancer patients with stage I disease, 67 percent of ovarian cancer patients with stage I disease and 67 percent of breast cancer patients with stage I disease.

While that's good, it's not a great result. The test still missed a large percentage of cancers and will need much improvement, Velculescu said.

It will also have to be tried in larger groups of patients, and patients with different cancers. The first goal would be to try it in people at high risk of cancer but no symptoms yet – such as smokers, or people with cancer-causing gene mutations like BRCA mutations, Velculescu said.

Wyndham said it will be important to study such tests in large groups of people who have not had cancer diagnosed, to see if it can truly be used to screen asymptomatic people for cancer. And then it will have to be shown that using the test allows doctors to intervene sooner and help people.

Catching cancer in its earliest stages could save many lives. Cancer is the No. 2 killer overall in the United States.

”The survival difference between late stage and early stage disease in these cancers would account for more than a million lives each year worldwide,” Velculescu said.

The genetic sequencing is also expensive right now – on the order of several thousand dollars for the 30,000 repeats the team did. But costs are coming down steadily, he said.

Velculescu said Johns Hopkins had patented this test, and Velculescu is himself the founder of a company that does liquid biopsies for advanced cancer patients called Personal Genome Diagnostics.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has been very skeptical of blood tests that claim to diagnose disease before people have symptoms.

The agency has chastised a company called Pathway Genomics over its "liquid biopsy" test , saying the company had not shown the $699 test worked as advertised.

It’s also warned other gene testing companies but finally gave 23andMe the go-ahead to market its home DNA test – which does not include any cancer screening – in April.

Cancer screening is still often a tricky issue.

Currently, colon cancer can be detected very early with colonoscopies, and even stopped before pre-cancerous growths get out of control. But colonoscopies are uncomfortable and carry a small risk of injury.

Mammograms can detect early breast cancer, Pap smears can detect cervical cancer or pre-cancerous changes and a type of specialized chest x-ray called a spiral CT can detect lung cancer. There’s a debate over the usefulness of screening for prostate cancer but blood tests and physical exams can indicate some men at high risk.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story says, “They identified 62 percent of the patients with stage I cancer – four out of eight colon cancer patients, and 90 percent of colon cancer patients with stage II, III or IV disease. They got a positive in 45 percent of the lung cancer patients with stage I disease, 67 percent of ovarian cancer patients with stage I disease and 67 percent of breast cancer patients with stage I disease.”
This is a good start and we’ll rate it Satisfactory, but one very important thing to make clear with this type of research: It used samples where cancer was already confirmed to exist–which is different from testing only on samples where it’s not known if there is any cancer present. That could affect the accuracy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- When a manufacturer recalls an implanted heart defibrillator because of a potential flaw, patients and doctors must decide whether to leave the device in the body or replace it.

A new Canadian study provides the first estimate of the risk of major complications from replacement surgery, important information for patients facing the choice.

"That risk is much higher than we initially thought," said study co-author Dr. Andrew Krahn of the London Health Sciences Center in Ontario. Some patients "might want to hang out and wait and see what happens," Krahn said.

Six percent of the 533 patients who decided to have their recalled defibrillators replaced over a 12-month period suffered major complications, including two deaths, according to a study published in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association.

In contrast, the risk of failure among recently recalled defibrillators has been estimated by the manufacturers at just 0.009 percent to 2.6 percent. And not every failure is deadly.

Implantable defibrillators can be as small as a half dollar and are placed surgically under the skin of the upper chest. Vice President Dick Cheney is among the thousands of Americans who have one.

When the device senses a dangerous and potentially deadly irregular heartbeat, it sends electrical impulses to jolt the heart back to normal. It can correct a heart that beats too fast, as in ventricular tachycardia, or quivers chaotically, a condition known as ventricular fibrillation.

A total of 270,000 defibrillators have been recalled since January 2005, though it is unclear how many were inside patients and how many were on the shelf, according to the Food and Drug Administration. About 80,000 patients received the implantable devices in 2004.

Krahn said the rate of complications from surgical removal will surprise doctors, because replacing a defibrillator is considered a minor procedure.

"It's typically performed with a local anesthetic and sedation. It takes an hour or less," he said. "Most patients return home the same day."

The researchers studied 2,915 patients who were tracked by 17 Canadian hospitals in 2004-05. All the patients had devices that were recalled by manufacturers, Canada's national health system or the FDA.

Only 18 percent decided to undergo replacement surgery. Infection, bruising or bleeding required a follow-up operation in 31 of those patients. Two patients died.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article includes the numbers of patients who had serious complications after replacement surgery, as well as how many had minor problems. Data are also included that would help readers assess how the risks of replacing a device compare with the device manufacturers’ estimates of how often something could go wrong if it was left in place. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Dec. 7, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Hot flashes, a common curse in menopause, can be especially bothersome after breast cancer. But a new study suggests an existing medication may help.

The drug is oxybutynin (Ditropan XL), long used to treat urinary incontinence.

The study found that women taking the medicine had an average of five fewer hot flashes a week, compared with three fewer among women taking a placebo.

"Oxybutynin is an option that can control these symptoms and improve quality of life," said lead researcher Dr. Roberto Leon-Ferre, an assistant professor of oncology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

There are a couple of reasons for severe hot flashes after breast cancer. Chemotherapy may induce early menopause, and drugs that reduce estrogen levels may make hot flashes worse, the research team noted.

Hormone replacement therapy, which is often recommended for menopausal symptoms, is generally not advised for breast cancer survivors. That's left women who can't take hormones at a disadvantage.

Oxybutynin blocks a substance in the brain, and one of its side effects is decreased sweating, Leon-Ferre noted.

"Because of this, we can take advantage of the 'side effect' and decrease involuntary sweating associated with hot flashes, and decrease the hot flashes as well," he explained.

The drug could be game-changing for certain women, said Dr. Alice Police, regional director of breast surgery at Northwell Health Cancer Institute in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y.

"This is a really important advance in survivorship and compassionate cancer care," added Police, who wasn't involved in the study.

Because oxybutynin is already available for other conditions, Leon-Ferre said doctors could prescribe it off-label.

However, he cautioned that its long-term effects aren't known. Drugs in this class -- called anticholinergics -- have been linked with mental decline, he said.

For example, the drugs may raise the risk for problems with short-term memory, reasoning and confusion, and may also hike the risk for dementia among older patients, studies indicate.

For the new study, Leon-Ferre and his colleagues randomly assigned 150 women who experienced at least 28 hot flashes a week to oxybutynin or a placebo.

Almost two-thirds were also taking drugs to prevent a return of breast cancer, either tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor.

The women were randomly assigned to one of three groups: low-dose oxybutynin twice a day for six weeks; low-dose oxybutynin for one week followed by an increased dose; or a placebo.

Both doses appeared to reduce hot flashes better than the placebo.

And oxybutynin doesn't interfere with the metabolism of tamoxifen, Leon-Ferre said, calling that an important consideration for breast cancer survivors.

Most insurance covers oxybutynin, and a month's supply can range from $21 to $42. With insurance, copays would be less, he added.

Side effects included constipation, mild diarrhea, dry mouth, dry eyes, episodes of confusion and difficulty urinating, the researchers found.

Women taking oxybutynin also reported improvement in work, social activities, leisure activities, sleep and overall quality of life.

These are vital issues, Police said. "I will never forget the first time a patient said, 'Thank you for curing my breast cancer, but you ruined my life,' " she said.

The patient said endocrine therapy had caused hot flashes so severe that she could not sleep. As a result, she was having trouble at work and in all other aspects of her life, Police recalled.

"Her intimate relationship was also suffering, as nighttime had become a battleground between her and her internal temperature control," Police said.

The patient said she was willing to stop her hormone therapy and risk the return of breast cancer rather than live with her current symptoms, she said.

"This study makes me hopeful that these patients may have a way out of their dilemma," Police said. "Instead of just telling them they should be happy to be alive, we may be able to offer a reliable treatment for some of the debilitating side effects of our treatments for breast cancer."

The research was scheduled to be presented Friday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas. Studies presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until peer-reviewed for publication in a medical journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about hot flashes and cancer survivors.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article reports that the study found the women on oxybutynin had an average of five fewer hot flashes per week, while those on the placebo had three fewer. It’s not clear if the benefit was the same for both doses. The story explains that this was from a group 150 women who experienced at least 28 hot flashes a week. This is enough information to glean the magnitude of benefit.
But, the story could have used more context: The drug resulted in five fewer hot flashes a week. That’s not even one less hot flash per day. And those on the placebo, which costs nothing and has no side effects, has three fewer hot flashes a week. That’s a difference of two hot flashes a week–which seems like a really low bar.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- By probing deeper into the biological mechanisms that go awry in melanoma, scientists have come up with an experimental drug that has had an effect in a surprising number of patients with advanced melanoma.

The drug, PLX4032, just completed a phase 1 clinical trial in which 81 percent of participants with a particular gene mutation had a partial response, meaning at least some shrinkage of the tumor.

The current standard treatments for metastatic melanoma -- chemotherapy and interleukin-2 (IL2) -- only have response rates in about 15 percent of these patients, said Dr. Paul Chapman, senior author of a study in which the findings are described.

The average survival time for someone diagnosed with melanoma is nine to 11 months, added Chapman, who is an attending physician in the Melanoma Sarcoma Service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.

One expert cautioned that it's too early to say whether the drug will actually prolong patient's lives, or if it might be helpful to patients in earlier stages of the disease.

"I don't want to say this is going to change survival rates but they're working with the most ill people, so you can't really generalize [to other patient populations]," said Dr. Alice Pentland, chair of dermatology at the University of Rochester Medical Center. "I think the most important part of this breakthrough is the bigger percentage of people who responded."

The study, which is published in the Aug. 26 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, was funded by drug makers Plexxikon and Roche Pharmaceuticals.

About nine years ago, scientists discovered that the tumors of about half of patients with melanoma have a mutation in a gene called BRAF.

The gene appears to help drive the runaway cell division that is a hallmark of cancer. "It's always on. It's always signaling to the nucleus [of the tumor cells] that it's time to divide," Chapman explained.

That finding opened the door to potential targeted, molecular therapies for melanoma, which has been sorely lacking in effective treatments.

PLX4032 is the first potent inhibitor of BRAF that has made it to the clinical trial stage, Chapman said.

In the trial, 55 patients received escalating doses of the drug. Ten of 16 patients who had the BRAF gene mutation had a partial response to the drug, meaning the tumor shrank by at least 30 percent, while one had a complete response, with the tumor disappearing altogether.

Among 32 patients with BRAF-mutated melanoma in the second phase of the study, 24 had a partial response and two had a complete response.

"It worked: 81 percent had a partial response -- which has never been seen. I don't know of any solid tumors that have a response rate that high," said Chapman. "What's different here is that we've discovered a molecule that is responsible for driving the melanoma cell. It turns out that the melanoma really cares if we block the gene BRAF. It matters. It's addicted to this pathway."

There are some important caveats, however. It's not known at this time if the drug can improve overall survival, and a sizable proportion of participants developed resistance to the drug, the researchers say.

The findings join other recent reports of potential treatments for melanoma in what appears to be an exciting time for the field. Progress in this field has essentially been stalled for decades, experts say.

Recently, scientists reported that another experimental drug, ipilimumab, prolonged median survival in patients with metastatic melanoma from 6.4 months to 10 months.

"[Existing therapy] is not good for melanoma, so this is really a new opportunity that I think may have some importance to people," Pentland said.

However, she stressed that the best defense against melanoma is to get your skin examined regularly by a professional who knows what to look for.

"Our most successful treatment is to get [the lesion] early, get it before it's thick, get it before it spreads," she said.

There's more on metastatic melanoma at the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of quantifying the benefits. It explained that 81% of patients had a partial response, meaning some shrinkage of the tumor, and gives the absolute number of people this represents. It also explains that the drug is effective in only the 50% of advanced melanoma patients with a specific genetic mutation. Although it cautions that a "sizable proportion" of patients developed resistance to the drug, we wish it had been a bit more precise in its characterization of this problem.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Douglas P. Zipes, a professor at the Indiana University School of Medicine in Indianapolis, said the new device could someday displace existing models used in many patients Every month, about 10,000 patients in this country get a defibrillator, either for the first time or as replacements for devices whose batteries have worn out.

In recent years, the safety of defibrillator wires has come in particular focus because a model made by Medtronic has been prone to fracturing. Hundreds of patients who received the model have had to undergo new operations to replace it. Also, scar tissue often builds up around intravenous wires, a process that can make removing and replacing them difficult or dangerous.

Dr. Bardy said in a telephone interview that the deaths of several patients many years ago because of wire-related injuries were a factor in his interest in developing the new device.

“You are looking at a therapy that can avert, we hope, complications and be as effective,” he said.

In the study published Wednesday, Dr. Bardy and others reported that the new device had undergone several successful initial trials, including one in which it was used for a year in about 60 patients.

The device is being developed by Cameron Health, a small company in San Clemente, Calif., that was co-founded by Dr. Bardy. Since the cardiologist began work on the project about a decade ago, the defibrillator he helped design has gone through several iterations.

The device will not be suitable for a significant number of heart patients, particularly those who require units that also include a pacemaker, which regulates a heart that is beating too fast or too slowly.

But Dr. Bardy estimated that the device could work in about 25 percent of patients who now get a defibrillator. These are largely patients at risk, because of genetic factors or certain types of heart diseases, for a type of erratic cardiac rhythm that can cause sudden death. Dr. Bardy said the cost of the new device is about the same as a standard defibrillator. However, he said it could help reduce health care costs, because implanting it is much simpler.

Before the device can be sold here, Cameron Health will have to submit more extensive human trial data to the F.D.A.. Dr. Bardy said a larger study of the device has just begun in this country and overseas and that it will most likely take a year or more to assemble data from it for the agency’s review.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
This story outlines the problems with the electrical lead wires of existing devices that have harmed patients and required re-operations and recalls. It explains that by using wires placed under the skin, instead of through blood vessels into the heart, the new device might reduce the risks associated with implantable defibrillators for certain patients. The story cautions that only about a quarter of patients who currently are given implantable defibrillators might be candidates for the new type of device.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 29, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's approval of a temporary, implanted balloon device for weight loss may have many wondering how -- and how well -- it works.

Called the ReShape Integrated Dual Balloon System, the device consists of two connected balloons filled with saline. The balloons take up space in the stomach, which presumably makes people feel fuller faster, the FDA said in its announcement Tuesday.

But the device can only be used for six months at a time, and it is not likely to be an alternative for people who require lap-band surgery, stomach stapling or other forms of bariatric surgery, said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of obesity surgery for Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"It's going to be effective for short-term weight-loss," Roslin said, "but there is still an overwhelming question whether these devices provide any long-term benefit for obesity."

"I don't think it's going to be part of the medical algorithm for treating obesity," he added. "I think it's going to be for people who want to lose weight fairly rapidly."

In a clinical trial, the ReShape system helped people more than double their weight loss compared to those trying to lose weight through diet and exercise, an FDA news release said. That clinical trial was funded by the company that makes the ReShape system, according to a presentation from the Obesity Society annual meeting in Boston.

The device is available to obese people who often don't qualify for surgical weight-loss procedures, according to the FDA. Obese people who have a body-mass index (a rough estimate of body fat based on your height and weight) between 30 and 40 and at least one obesity-related health condition are eligible for the new procedure, the agency said. Obesity-related health conditions include high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol.

It's also intended for those who have been unsuccessful in trying to lose weight through diet and exercise alone, the agency said.

Doctors insert the balloons through a scope snaked down the throat and into the stomach, and then fill them with saline containing a blue dye. It takes about eight minutes to place the balloons, and about 14 minutes to remove them, according to Dr. Jaime Ponce, medical director of the bariatric surgery program at Hamilton Medical Center in Dalton, Ga. Ponce was the principal investigator of the clinical trial on the ReShape system.

The device doesn't change the stomach's natural anatomy, according to the FDA. Patients are told to follow a medically supervised diet and exercise plan, to help them lose weight while they have the device in their stomach and to maintain weight loss after the device is removed.

A pair of connected balloons are used because earlier single-balloon versions tended to dislodge and migrate down the digestive tract, blocking the bowels, Roslin explained.

With ReShape, if one of the balloons ruptures then the other balloon will keep it in the stomach. The blue dye that filled the balloon will turn a patient's urine blue, letting the person know that one of the balloons has ruptured. Doctors can then go back in and retrieve the entire device.

Nausea is a common side effect of the device. In the clinical trial, about 15 percent of patients had to have the balloons removed prematurely due to intolerable nausea, according to Ponce.

"The first few days are associated with a fair amount of nausea, and you will need some coaching to get through that," Roslin said.

Another troubling side effect is gastric ulcers caused by the balloons rubbing against the stomach wall. About 35 percent of patients in the clinical trial suffered ulcers, but researchers said most of the ulcers were small and superficial.

Roslin also believes that, for now, patients will have to pay cash for the ReShape. "It is not going to be reimbursed by insurance, at least for the first generation and certainly for the foreseeable future," he said.

The balloons have been available in Europe since 2011, where their average price is about $6,200, according to the manufacturer, ReShape Medical Inc. in California.

The people who initially will use the ReShape are people who can afford to pay for it out-of-pocket and need to drop some pounds quickly, Roslin said.

In the clinical trial, the 187 participants who used the device lost an average of more than 14 pounds, or about 7 percent of their total body weight. Patients who did not receive the device lost about half that amount of weight -- just over 3 percent of their total body weight, the FDA said.

For more information on how being overweight or obese affects your health, visit the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story states “the ReShape system helped people more than double their weight loss compared to those trying to lose weight through diet and exercise.” We also also note that because previous studies on weight loss suggest that the average individual is hoping for a loss of 20% or more of presenting weight, “double” as a descriptor, when discussing very small losses, may be a bit loaded.
In the final paragraph, the story includes absolute values of weight loss:
“In the clinical trial, the 187 participants who used the device lost an average of more than 14 pounds, or about 7 percent of their total body weight. Patients who did not receive the device lost about half that amount of weight — just over 3 percent of their total body weight, the FDA said.”
Kudos to the writer for including the comments from the researcher who said the results may be temporary.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Neil M. Bressler of Johns Hopkins University, the chairman of the group that conducted the trial, said a two-line improvement in vision would allow some people to read normal-size print or to drive again.

Lucentis is not approved as a treatment for macular edema. But it is approved for another eye disease, age-related macular degeneration.

So doctors can — and some already do — use the drug off-label for the diabetic condition. With this successful Phase 3 trial, insurers will now be more likely to pay for such off-label use.

Some doctors criticized the organizers of the trial for testing Lucentis rather than another Genentech drug, Avastin, which works in the same way as Lucentis.

Although it is a cancer drug, Avastin is often used off-label for eye diseases because it is far cheaper than Lucentis, costing only $20 to $100 a dose, compared with $2,000 for Lucentis.

Avastin is undercutting sales of Lucentis, which totaled $1.1 billion in the United States last year.

Organizers of the trial conceded that a major reason Lucentis was chosen was that Genentech, which is now owned by Roche, agreed to provide the drug free of charge and to contribute $9 million in additional financing — but only if Lucentis were used.

“Obviously you can’t underplay $9 million,” said Dr. Ferris of the eye institute, which is part of the part of the National Institutes of Health. But he said there were other factors as well, like a belief that Lucentis might have been the better drug.

Dr. Philip J. Rosenfeld, a professor of ophthalmology at the University of Miami, said the decision was “clearly a case of pay to play” since Genentech’s money dictated the choice of drugs.

Retinopathy results from damage to the blood vessels in the eye. In macular edema, fluid from those damaged vessels leaks into the macula, the part of the retina that is responsible for the straight-ahead vision important for driving, recognizing faces and reading.

Lucentis, also known as ranibizumab, works by drying up leaky blood vessels and preventing the growth of new ones.

John Bevan, who has diabetic macular edema, said that every two months or so he used to have an incident in which blood leaked into his eye, blurring his vision.

“It’s like a paintball hits a plate-glass window — there’s a big splat and it drips downward and takes three days to a week to dissipate,” said Mr. Bevan, the school superintendent in north central Indiana. He said treatment with Lucentis in the clinical trial virtually eliminated those incidents.

The trial involved 691 patients, some of whom had both eyes treated, resulting in 854 total eyes. There were four treatment groups: One group got Lucentis injections into the eye as often as every four weeks, plus laser therapy. Another got Lucentis, with laser therapy used only after six months and only if needed. The third group got laser therapy plus injections into the eye of triamcinolone, a steroid sold by Allergan under the name Trivaris. The fourth group got laser therapy plus a sham injection.

After the first year, only 3 to 4 percent of the eyes treated with Lucentis suffered a visual loss of two or more lines compared to 13 percent that got only laser therapy.

Researchers said the results seem to be holding up for the second year of the three-year trial.

About 1 percent of those getting Lucentis injections suffered an inflammation of the eye from an infection.

The steroid treatment did not improve eyesight more than laser therapy alone and caused side effects.

Results of the trial were published online on Tuesday by the journal Ophthalmology.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION:  The story provided quantitative information about the possible impact on vision. But we wish there information about any measurement of  the patients’ perspective on whether they are functioning better after receiving this treatment versus standard treatment
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Small doses of aspirin can lower the risk of heart attack in people who never had heart disease, a new look at the medical evidence shows.

But the blood-thinning drug doesn’t appear to cut the chances of dying from the disease, at least not enough that researchers can say for certain. And experts warn people to consult their doctor before taking the medication, which increases the risk of bleeding ulcers.

“I like to say you have to make the recommendation about aspirin one patient at a time,” Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, who was not linked to the study, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre worked on the 2009 aspirin recommendations from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), a federally supported expert panel.

The task force advises that men age 45 to 79 take aspirin to stave off heart attacks, as long as the benefit outweighs the risk of bleeding. For women age 55 to 79, aspirin is recommended to prevent strokes, with the same caveat.

The new work, by Alfred Bartolucci of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and colleagues, was supported by aspirin-maker Bayer AG.

The research team pooled the results of the nine trials that have tested the drug in the prevention of heart disease so far, including three that weren’t part of the 2009 USPSTF review.

About 100,000 men and women age 45 and up took part in the studies. Some were healthy and some had diabetes, but none had chest pain or other symptoms of an ailing heart.

The researchers found a 19-percent reduction in non-fatal heart attacks among participants who took aspirin compared to those who did not.

They don’t mention how many people actually suffered such a heart attack, but an earlier analysis of six of the trials showed that out of every 1,000 people, 18 individuals taking aspirin had heart attacks every year, compared to 23 individuals taking placebo pills.

On the other hand, that analysis also found aspirin increased the rate of bleeding from 0.7 to 1 per 1,000 people per year, making the authors conclude the drug was of “uncertain net value.”

Heart disease is the leading killer worldwide and accounts for more than a third of deaths in the U.S., according to the American Heart Association. Every year, heart attacks alone kill some 400,000 Americans.

In the current study, published in the American Journal of Cardiology, the researchers also report small decreases in stroke and death risks with aspirin, although those changes might have been due to chance.

“It refines our knowledge of how beneficial aspirin is,” Dr. Graham Nichol, an expert in emergency care at the University of Washington in Seattle, said about the study. “I don’t think this paper is inconsistent with previous work.”

Nichols, who was not involved in the study, said aspirin is clearly beneficial for people who’ve already had heart disease, and that it also seems to help those at high risk.

“There is not universal agreement on what is high risk,” he told Reuters Health. “In my mind, if you have diabetes or multiple risk factors for heart disease — such as smoking or obesity — it is reasonable to take aspirin.”

In addition, working to eliminate those risk factors by other means will not only slash the risk of heart disease, but also a host of other health problems.

LeFevre added that while the new study did add extra evidence compared with earlier work, it failed to analyze the effects on men and women separately.

That muddies the picture because men may see a benefit in the form of fewer heart attacks, whereas aspirin appears to lower the risk of stroke in women.

“We can’t tell from the existing study if that is going to hold up or not,” he said.

One recent study has suggested that despite the increase in bleeding ulcers from aspirin, the reduction in heart attacks might make the cheap drug cost-effective for men over 45.

The question then becomes finding out what your risk of heart attack is in the first place, which your doctor can help with.

“The number of events that you prevent depends on your baseline risk,” LeFevre concluded. “A blanket recommendation that everybody should take an aspirin is not a good idea.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Appropriate context.  With a meta-analysis it is not statistically appropriate to pool absolute risk reductions, so the way the story treated the evidence is as good as can be done (showing the relative risk reduction and an “anchor” in terms of absolute risk. Excerpt:
“The researchers found a 19-percent reduction in non-fatal heart attacks among participants who took aspirin compared to those who did not.
They don’t mention how many people actually suffered such a heart attack, but an earlier analysis of six of the trials showed that out of every 1,000 people, 18 individuals taking aspirin had heart attacks every year, compared to 23 individuals taking placebo pills.
On the other hand, that analysis also found aspirin increased the rate of bleeding from 0.7 to 1 per 1,000 people per year, making the authors conclude the drug was of “uncertain net value.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gut Check is a periodic look at health claims made by studies and by newsmakers. We ask: Should you believe this?

The Claim: If you drink coffee you’ll live forever! Well, almost: nurses and other health professionals who drink coffee (regular or decaf) had a lower risk of premature death than coffee abstainers.

The Backstory: . . . is enough to make STAT cross-eyed. Decades of studies have examined links between coffee drinking and health outcomes. Overall, the conclusions have been pro-coffee. Lots of research has linked coffee drinking to a lower risk of dying early, including this, this, and this. Other studies have found associations with lower risk of specific conditions, like this on cardiovascular disease (by many of the same authors as the new study), this on stroke, this on heart failure, and this on diabetes. Most research has found the greatest benefits with daily consumption of around three or four cups — usually 6 to 8 ounces, and without distinguishing regular from decaf. Fewer studies link coffee to a higher likelihood of dying prematurely, but this classic found a link between 6-plus cups a day and dying of cardiovascular disease, while this 2013 paper, on 43,727 people followed for a median of 17 years, concluded that adults under 55 who averaged more than 4 cups a week had a 56 percent (men) or 130 percent (women) higher risk of dying over the study period than non-coffee drinkers.

First Take: The new research, published in Circulation on Monday and funded by the National Institutes of Health, mined three large, ongoing epidemiological studies (74,890 women in the Nurses’ Health Study, 93,054 women in the Nurses’ Health Study 2, and 40,557 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study), following them for at least 20 years. Overall, the heaviest coffee-drinkers (more than five cups a day, regular or decaf) had a tiny 2 percent additional risk of dying compared with coffee abstainers. Those drinking 1.1 to 3 cups, and 3.1 to 5 cups, had slightly (9 percent and 7 percent) lower risks of dying.

Then the researchers, led by Dr. Frank Hu of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, did something clever: they ran the analysis on nonsmokers only. That eliminated the stereotypical coffee-swilling, cigarette-sucking types. Result: people drinking 1.1 to 3 cups a day had an 8 percent lower mortality risk, while the 3.1-5-cup crowd had a 15 percent lower mortality risk, mostly due to lower risk of deaths from cardiovascular disease, neurological diseases, type 2 diabetes, and suicide. Even the 5-plus’s had 12 percent lower mortality.

A co-author of the 2013 study linking heavy coffee drinking to higher mortality called the new one “very good,” especially since it controlled for the deadly effects of smoking, which the earlier one did not. It “supports the safety and efficacy of even high doses of coffee in non-smokers,” said Dr. Carl Lavie, a cardiologist at Ochsner Health System. But given the 2013 research suggesting “toxicity of high coffee doses” in some people, he said, “to me the most reasonable approach would be to keep coffee intake to two to three cups most days.”

Second Take: STAT knows better than to get between coffee lovers and their cup o’ joe, so if you want to take this study as permission to keep beating a path to your Keurig, we’re not going to slow you down.

This is another observational study, where researchers look for associations between people’s freely-chosen diet and other lifestyle decisions and subsequent health outcomes. Correlations do not establish causation: a link between Behavior A and Health Outcome B might or might not mean that A caused B. It might mean instead that a third factor — another behavior, socioeconomic status, even personality or genetics — might go hand in hand with Behavior A and be the true cause of Outcome B. Maybe people who drink coffee have some genetic, psychological, or behavioral trait (drinking fewer sugary beverages? eating less junk food?) that causes the observed benefit.

But surely the population in this study is so huge and socioeconomically similar (all health professionals) that correlation is more likely to reflect causation?

More likely, yes, but don’t count on it. This same Nurses Health Study, for instance, infamously found a correlation between post-menopausal hormone therapy and lower risk of cardiovascular disease and death, here and here. That turned out to be wrong. The definitive, randomized Women’s Health Initiative study showed that hormone therapy raised the risk of cardiovascular disease, contradicting the NHS and shocking nearly everyone.

Takeaway: Observational studies that associate coffee drinking with health benefits are strongly suggestive but not definitive. If you do want to infer causation from this latest study, know that drinking coffee reduced the absolute mortality risk from 6.8 deaths a year per 1,000 people to, at best, 5.8. That is, each year, coffee would be keeping 1 person in 1,000 from dying.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: STAT’s story, like the coverage in CNN, gets the details, strengths and weaknesses of the data right, but STAT’s piece more precisely quantifies the findings and goes to exceptional lengths to clearly describe what an observational study can and cannot do, and did and did not do in this current piece of analysis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Watch Chief Medical Correspondent Dr. Sanjay Gupta's CNN Special Report "Weed 4: Pot vs. Pills" on Sunday, April 29, at 8 p.m. ET.

(CNN) Experts have proposed using medical marijuana to help Americans struggling with opioid addiction. Now, two studies suggest that there is merit to that strategy.

The studies, published Monday in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine , compared opioid prescription patterns in states that have enacted medical cannabis laws with those that have not. One of the studies looked at opioid prescriptions covered by Medicare Part D between 2010 and 2015, while the other looked at opioid prescriptions covered by Medicaid between 2011 and 2016.

The researchers found that states that allow the use of cannabis for medical purposes had 2.21 million fewer daily doses of opioids prescribed per year under Medicare Part D, compared with those states without medical cannabis laws. Opioid prescriptions under Medicaid also dropped by 5.88% in states with medical cannabis laws compared with states without such laws, according to the studies.

"This study adds one more brick in the wall in the argument that cannabis clearly has medical applications," said David Bradford , professor of public administration and policy at the University of Georgia and a lead author of the Medicare study.

"And for pain patients in particular, our work adds to the argument that cannabis can be effective."

"Medicare and Medicaid publishes this data, and we're free to use it, and anyone who's interested can download the data," Bradford said. "But that means that we don't know what's going on with the privately insured and the uninsured population, and for that, I'm afraid the data sets are proprietary and expensive."

'This crisis is very real'

"We have had overuse of certain prescription opioids over the years, and it's certainly contributed to the opioid crisis that we're feeling," he added. "I don't think that's the only reason, but certainly, it was too easy at many points to get prescriptions for opioids."

"All drugs of abuse operate using some shared pathways. For example, cannabinoid receptors and opioid receptors coincidentally happen to be located very close by in many places in the brain," Hill said. "So it stands to reason that a medication that affects one system might affect the other."

But unlike opioids, marijuana has little addiction potential, and virtually no deaths from marijuana overdose have been reported in the United States, according to Bradford.

"No one has ever died of cannabis, so it has many safety advantages over opiates," Bradford said. "And to the extent that we're trying to manage the opiate crisis, cannabis is a potential tool."

Comparing states with and without medical marijuana laws

In order to evaluate whether medical marijuana could function as an effective and safe alternative to opioids, the two teams of researchers looked at whether opioid prescriptions were lower in states that had active medical cannabis laws and whether those states that enacted these laws during the study period saw reductions in opioid prescriptions.

"We saw a 9% or 10% reduction (in opioid prescriptions) in Colorado and Oregon," Wen said. "And in Alaska and Washington, the magnitude was a little bit smaller but still significant."

The first state in the United States to legalize marijuana for medicinal use was California, in 1996. Since then, 29 states and the District of Columbia have approved some form of legalized cannabis. All of these states include chronic pain -- either directly or indirectly -- in the list of approved medical conditions for marijuana use, according to Bradford.

The details of the medical cannabis laws were found to have a significant impact on opioid prescription patterns, the researchers found. States that permitted recreational use, for example, saw an additional 6.38% reduction in opioid prescriptions under Medicaid compared with those states that permitted marijuana only for medical use, according to Wen.

The method of procurement also had a significant impact on opioid prescription patterns. States that permitted medical dispensaries -- regulated shops that people can visit to purchase cannabis products -- had 3.742 million fewer opioid prescriptions filled per year under Medicare Part D, while those that allowed only home cultivation had 1.792 million fewer opioid prescriptions per year.

"We found that there was about a 14.5% reduction in any opiate use when dispensaries were turned on -- and that was statistically significant -- and about a 7% reduction in any opiate use when home cultivation only was turned on," Bradford said. "So dispensaries are much more powerful in terms of shifting people away from the use of opiates."

The impact of these laws also differed based on the class of opioid prescribed. Specifically, states with medical cannabis laws saw 20.7% fewer morphine prescriptions and 17.4% fewer hydrocodone prescriptions compared with states that did not have these laws, according to Bradford.

"I know that many people, including the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, are skeptical of cannabis," Bradford said. "But, you know, the attorney general needs to be terrified of fentanyl."

"As we have all of these states implementing these policies, it's imperative that we do more research," Hill said. "We need to study the effects of these policies, and we really haven't done it to the degree that we should."

The two recent studies looked only at patients enrolled in Medicaid and Medicare Part D, meaning the results may not be generalizable to the entire US population.

But both Hill and Moore agree that as more states debate the merits of legalizing marijuana in the coming months and years, more research will be needed to create consistency between cannabis science and cannabis policy.

"There is a great deal of movement in the Northeast, with New Hampshire and New Jersey being well-positioned to legalize adult use," Moore said. "I believe there are also ballot measures to legalize marijuana in Arizona, Florida, Missouri, Nebraska and South Dakota as well that voters will decide on in Fall 2018."

Hill called the new research "a call to action" and added, "we should be studying these policies. But unfortunately, the policies have far outpaced the science at this point."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article quantified the findings this way:
The researchers found that states that allow the use of cannabis for medical purposes had 2.21 million fewer daily doses of opioids prescribed per year under Medicare Part D, compared with those states without medical cannabis laws. Opioid prescriptions under Medicaid also dropped by 5.88% in states with medical cannabis laws compared with states without such laws, according to the studies.
It could have also mentioned that the study that looked at Medicaid data did not see reductions in opioid prescriptions in all states with medical marijuana laws.
Below, in evidence quality, we address a related concern: Does the story do enough to clarify that these findings aren’t proof that marijuana legalization reduces opioid use?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The antidepressant Prozac may alleviate repetitive behavior and obsessive-compulsive symptoms in adults with autism, reducing these defining symptoms of the disorder, according to new research.

The research, which included 37 high-functioning autistic adults, mainly diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome, followed participants for 12 weeks. Taking Prozac (fluoxetine) doubled the chances that a patient would show overall improvement, measured by their clinicians. Half of the participants taking Prozac had significant reductions in obsessive-compulsive symptoms, compared with 8% taking placebo. Side effects were mild to moderate and participants taking Prozac did not show increases in suicidal thoughts or ideas.

“Repetitive behavior is a core symptom of the illness,” says lead author Dr. Eric Hollander, medical director of the Autism and Obsessive-Compulsive Spectrum Program at Montefiore Medical Center in New York, explaining that “from a very early age, these children have rituals and routines. For example, they like to line up their toys and they get very bent out of shape if there is any deviation.”

MORE: What Does a 400% Increase in Antidepressant Use Really Mean?

A previous, larger study of a similar medication, Celexa (citalopram), in autistic children did not find a reduction in repetitive behaviors, but the drug did reduce irritability and was superior to placebo among children who had the highest levels of irritability. Irritability can sometimes lead to repetitive behaviors because autistic people often engage in these activities to soothe themselves.

Both Prozac and Celexa belong to a class of antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. Prior research on SSRIs in autistic people has also looked at Luvox (fluvoxamine) and found a reduction in repetitive behavior in adults but not children. It is not known if the differences between these studies are due to differences between the medications or other factors.

Obsessive behaviors may also arise in autistic people in response to the stress or discomfort of unpredictable situations. “Many of these individuals have expectations for what’s going to happen, and if there is an unexpected deviation, they experience a lot of discomfort and then they do all these kinds of behaviors,” says Hollander. That’s why people with autism may obsessively avoid locations where they previously experienced discomfort, for example, or they may engage in a repetitive habit like washing, checking, counting, touching or tapping.

When taking Prozac, Hollander says, “Patients acknowledge experiencing less discomfort. They’re more able to go outside their comfort zone and to better resist their habits and rituals.” One participant in Hollander’s study was previously too anxious to take the subway or eat in a restaurant, but, when taking Prozac, was able to tolerate these unpredictable environments.

“It takes the edge off,” Hollander explains, noting that the findings were statistically significant and clinically meaningful. “The clinicians could tell that people were doing better not only in terms of OCD symptoms but overall distress and ability to function.”

MORE: Why Are So Many Foster Care Children Taking Antipsychotics?

The only drugs approved to treat irritability and repetitive behaviors in autistic children are the atypical antipsychotics Risperdal (risperidone) and Abilify (aripiprazole), which tend to have more severe side effects than Prozac does. Those drugs carry significant risk for weight gain, diabetes and movement disorders.

Responding to the research, Yale Child Study Center director Fred Volkmar told WebMD: “The question remains, ‘Is fluoxetine better than risperidone for this symptom?’ It would be interesting to see studies comparing these two drugs head to head.”

Hollander has previously received funding from pharmaceutical companies, but the current study was paid for by a grant from the Food and Drug Administration’s “orphan” drug program. That program funds research on rare conditions with new drugs or those no longer patented that are not likely to be pursued by industry. When the research was originally funded, Hollander says, autism was considered to be a rare condition.

The study was published in the American Journal of Psychiatry.

Maia Szalavitz is a health writer at TIME.com. Find her on Twitter at @maiasz. You can also continue the discussion on TIME Healthland’s Facebook page and on Twitter at @TIMEHealthland.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: After explaining that the story was quite small and covered only a few months time, the story provides a quick summation of the benefits found in the study saying, “half of the participants taking Prozac had significant reductions in obsessive-compulsive symptoms, compared with 8% taking placebo.”  But given the very small sample size, natural frequencies would have been more informative and less likely to be misinterpreted. Also, a bit more detail on what a “significant reduction” means in an autistic disorder would have been welcome.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SAN DIEGO, July 14, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- GenomeDx Biosciences today announced that a study featured on the cover of Urology demonstrates that Decipher® Prostate Cancer Classifier significantly influenced treatment recommendations following prostate surgery, reducing disagreement between urologists and radiation oncologists, and has the potential to enhance personalization of patient care. Decipher is a Medicare-covered genomic test capable of predicting tumor aggressiveness in men following prostate surgery. The study, titled "Impact of a Genomic Classifier of Metastatic Risk on Postprostatectomy Treatment Recommendations by Radiation Oncologists and Urologists," was published in this month's issue of Urology.

"Conflicting treatment recommendations by different specialists looking at the same disease can be highly confusing for patients and is a problem for the health care system in general," said Paul Nguyen, M.D., of Dana-Farber/Brigham and Women's Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School. "The Decipher test's tendency to make the two specialties more concordant in their treatment recommendations provides significant value toward standardizing care for patients."

The study was designed to evaluate how the Decipher Prostate Cancer Classifier, which predicts the risk of metastasis after prostatectomy, would impact adjuvant treatment recommendations made by urologists and radiation oncologists. These two specialties often disagree on which patients should receive radiation therapy following surgery and when.

Using clinical information alone, observation rather than adjuvant radiation therapy was recommended in 42% of decisions made by urologists and 23% of decisions by radiation oncologists (P < .0001). The Decipher test results altered 45% and 35% of treatment recommendations made by urologists and radiation oncologists, respectively. Decipher results indicating genomic high risk resulted in intensification of treatment, whereas genomic low risk resulted in less aggressive recommendations. The Decipher results increased agreement in treatment recommendations between urologists and radiation oncologists, as the odds of a recommendation for adjuvant treatment by urologists vs radiation oncologists increased from 0.27 (95% CI, 0.17-0.44) to 0.46 (95% CI, 0.29-0.75) after results of the Decipher test were made available.

"It is notable that while the Decipher test significantly influenced treatment decisions, it did not increase the total number of people receiving adjuvant therapy, suggesting that it helped ensure that the ones selected for adjuvant therapy are the ones most likely to benefit from it," said Doug Dolginow, M.D., chief executive officer of GenomeDx. "As genomic tests like Decipher become used more routinely in urologic cancer patient care, they will have a greater impact on treatment recommendations in clinical practice and allow for better personalization of therapy."

The Decipher test used in this study has been previously described in multiple blinded independent validation studies in men at high risk of recurrence at the time of prostatectomy. Researchers found that 60% of the clinically high-risk men would be reclassified as low risk based on the Decipher test and have only a 2.4% risk of metastasis at 5 years after surgery. In addition, the 19% of the patients with the highest risk based on Decipher had a nearly 10-fold higher risk of distant metastases by 5 years. The test provided a more accurate and precise estimate of a patient's risk of recurrence. Use of this test therefore has the potential to assist clinicians to better direct utilization of secondary therapy after surgery.

The Decipher® Prostate Cancer Classifier is a highly validated and commercially available genomic test for men with intermediate and high risk prostate cancer. Decipher predicts cancer aggressiveness by looking for a unique genomic signature comprised of a validated series of biomarkers associated with metastatic disease. Adding truly unique information to the treatment decision-making process, Decipher generates a risk result that is completely independent and distinct from PSA, Gleason score and other clinical risk factors. Clinical studies from leading cancer centers published in over a dozen medical journals demonstrate that Decipher can accurately predict metastatic disease, which men may benefit from radiation therapy following prostate surgery, and can lead to significant cost-savings for healthcare systems. Decipher was developed in partnership with the Mayo Clinic.

Decipher is covered by Medicare and multiple private insurance plans in the US.

Learn more at: www.DecipherTest.com and follow Decipher on Twitter @DecipherTest and on Facebook.

GenomeDx Biosciences is focused on transforming cancer patient care by putting usable genomic information in the hands of patients and their physicians. GenomeDx is developing and commercializing Decipher®, a highly validated genomic test for predicting metastatic disease in men with prostate cancer. In partnership with leading medical centers, the company has assembled the largest genomic catalogue of prostate cancer tumors in the world, representing billions of data points and more than 20 years of prostate cancer research expertise. Using advanced cloud-based bioinformatics, GenomeDx mines the genomic data to develop proprietary tests that address key clinical questions in cancer patient management. GenomeDx has partnered to share genomic data with leading clinician-scientists worldwide to collaboratively enrich the knowledge and understanding of urologic cancers for the goal of improving global cancer patient care. GenomeDx is based in San Diego, California and Vancouver, British Columbia.

Learn more at www.genomedx.com and follow us on Twitter at Twitter @GenomeDx, Facebook, LinkedIn and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release states that, according to the latest study, Decipher has the ability to change the minds of both urologists (45%) and radiation oncologists (35%), and get more of them to agree what or what not to do with a patient after removal of his cancerous prostate gland.
We’ll give the release credit here for quantifying the main findings of the study. But we’d note that there was potential to go deeper. We’re never told how many patients have issues with recurrent cancer or metastasis. (The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services suggests about 40,000 men each year face a high risk.) We also aren’t told how effective radiation or other therapies are after a prostatectomy, nor how effective Decipher might be in saving lives. Most of the clinical trials cited in the article mention only reductions in biochemical progression–a surrogate endpoint.
Most of what’s found in the release are rather general statements from doctors who have financial relationships with GenomeDx Biosciences, e.g. “it helped ensure that the ones selected for adjuvant therapy are the ones most likely to benefit from it.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many heart doctor will tell you that one of the best ways to keep your heart healthy is to include more healthy oils, such as omega-3 fatty acids found in fish, in your diet. Studies have shown that people in parts of the world who eat more fish have lower rates of heart disease, and fewer heart attacks (though the same can’t necessarily be true of those who take supplements—see this piece “Fish Oil Is Hugely Popular—But Should You Take It? for more on that).

One thing that has been less clear is what role fish oil plays in people who have already had a heart attack. Can omega-3 fat provide similar benefit? Researchers led by Dr. Raymond Kwong at Brigham and Women’s Hospital wanted to find out, so they took advantage of more sophisticated imaging techniques that can provide detailed pictures of the heart and how it’s changing in the days and weeks after a heart attack.

For the study, published in the journal , they studied nearly 360 people who recently had a heart attack, who were randomly assigned to take 4g of omega-3 fatty acids or a placebo pill for six months. (That’s a high dose; a 3 oz. portion of salmon contains anywhere from half a gram to 1g of omega-3.) Every two months, the volunteers came in for an MRI of their heart to track how much the muscle was changing.

Normally after a heart attack, part of the heart is starved of oxygen, and that portion never recovers. The remaining healthy tissue starts to compensate for the compromised tissue, but has to work harder to maintain the heart’s normal pumping function. Over time, this overworking can lead to scar tissue and start to restrict even the healthy tissue’s ability to do its job.

Kwong and his team found that people taking the high dose of omega-3 fats showed 6% less of this decline in heart function than those taking placebo. What’s more, the people who showed the highest blood levels of the omega-3 fats (people absorb it at different rates) showed the greatest reduction in scarring — 13% — compared to those with the lowest levels. The effects remained strong even after the researchers accounted for the fact that all of the people were taking standard heart disease treatment drugs, including cholesterol-lowering statins and blood pressure medications.

“The omega-3 fatty acids seem to be preventing scarring of the otherwise healthy muscle that now has to overwork because of the heart attack,” says Kwong.

Based on analysis of their blood samples, the people taking omega-3 supplements also showed lower levels of inflammatory markers, which suggests that the fish oil may be working by reducing inflammation following a heart attack.

It’s the first encouraging strategy for protecting the heart a heart attack; the more remaining healthy tissue that can be saved, the stronger the heart will be.

Kwong says that the findings are only the first step toward considering whether omega-3 fatty acid supplements should be part of every emergency heart attack response. The 4g is a high dose; previous studies in which people were given 1g of fish oil were more inconsistent. Most of the people also started taking the supplements two to four weeks after their heart attack. Might they have benefit more if they had started taking the supplements sooner? How much omega-3 is needed to start remodeling the heart in a beneficial way?

These are questions Kwong and others hope to answer with more studies. Kwong collected blood samples from the volunteers and will be studying them for hints about how omega-3 fatty acids are working in the body after a heart attack. “To say every [heart attack] patient should be taking omega-3 fatty acids right away is a bit premature,” he says. “But I do think it’s logical that our results hold promise, and may reduce bad outcomes in patients after a heart attack.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story includes the most salient quantitative evidence of the study:
This is sufficient for a Satisfactory rating. However, more context would have made the story stronger: That researchers don’t know what “6% less scarring” means in terms of actually reducing a repeat heart attack, death or another cardiac event.
And from the original study, we learn that compared to standard post-heart attack medical therapies, the benefits of fish oil were not significant:
“after adjusting for standard post-MI (heart attack) medical therapies, there was only a nonstatistically significant trend for the treatment effect of O-3FA (omega-3 fatty acids) on noninfarct myocardial fibrosis (abnormal scarring of the heart muscle).”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic condition that affects 422 million people worldwide. For decades, doctors have treated it with medications designed to keep blood sugar levels down.

But in a paper published in the , researchers in the UK describe a landmark study in which people with diabetes went into remission—just by losing weight.

Nearly half of people in the study who were given a six-month diet plan and lost an average of 30 pounds went into remission and no longer had diabetes. None took any medications during that time to control their disease and relied on weight loss alone.

Type 2 diabetes is caused by the body’s in ability to break down sugars from the diet. Normally, cells in the pancreas work to release insulin, a hormone that can process sugar and either send it to cells that need it for energy or store it as fat for future energy needs. Cells in the liver are responsible for clearing insulin from the circulation. But excess fat in the pancreas and liver can start to shut down these insulin-producing cells, leading to spikes in blood sugar levels. Diabetes medications can bring sugar levels down but do not address the compromised insulin machinery.

In the study, Dr. Roy Taylor, professor of medicine and metabolism at Newcastle University, and his colleagues randomly assigned nearly 300 people to either a weight management program or their usual treatments, including diabetes medications. All of the people had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes in the six years preceding the study. The people assigned to the diet group stopped any diabetes drugs they were taking on the same day they began the diet.

The diet, which was designed to help people lose up to 30 pounds, involved three to five months of a strict low-calorie liquid formula diet averaging no more than 850 calories a day, followed by two to eight weeks of reintroducing food, along with nutritional education and cognitive behavioral therapy to help people stick with the new eating plan.

Taylor and his team tracked outcomes including weight loss, diabetes remission and level of fat in the pancreas and liver. After a year, most of the people in the diet group lost about 22 pounds, compared to two pounds in the control group. Nearly a quarter of the people who managed their weight were able to lose 33 pounds or more, while none in the control group were able to lose that much. Most importantly, 46% of the people in the diet group went into remission with their diabetes, compared to just 4% in the control group.

MORE: Antibiotics Are Linked To Type-2 Diabetes

“People newly diagnosed with diabetes for the first time can look at this and know it isn’t necessarily for life,” says Taylor. “It isn’t an irreversible, inexorable condition that you can never escape from — at the moment, people are told that.”

Previous studies have suggested that lifestyle changes, including diet and exercise, can be powerful ways to lose weight and combat diabetes. The Diabetes Prevention Program in the U.S. revealed in 2002 that diet and exercise alone can prevent people from progressing from pre-diabetes to diabetes, in some cases better than medications designed to control blood sugar. Gastric bypass surgery, which can result in dramatic weight loss, can also help to reverse diabetes, but the procedure is costly and carries a high risk of complications.

The current study takes that work a step further and shows that it’s possible to actually reverse the disease in people who have been diagnosed. Taylor stresses that the study only addressed people diagnosed relatively recently — within the past six years — and that the effect may not apply to more long-term patients. That’s because as the disease continues, he says, insulin-producing cells start to die off. Initially, the cells slowly shut down, entering a so-called resting state. Those are the cells that weight loss can re-activate.

But left in this state too long, the cells eventually die and cannot be revived. Studies suggest that people living with diabetes for more than 10 years, for example, may not be able to rely on weight loss alone to push them into remission.

That points to an important lesson that Taylor hopes doctors and patients will learn from the results. He says that it’s critical to discuss from the start — when people are diagnosed with diabetes — the possibility of using diet and weight loss to treat their disease. If more people can benefit from losing weight alone, then that would mean less cost to the health care system, as fewer people will suffer the serious complications of advanced disease, which can include heart problems, neuropathy, vision issues and even amputations.

Taylor says he intends to follow up on the people in the study for another four years to see if they are able to maintain their weight, and, if they are, whether they continue to remain in remission. “From the very clear data we produced in this trial, yes, this is a watershed moment for diabetes,” he says. “We can offer people hope from the start.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantifies how much weight people lost and how many people went into remission, both in the group on the liquid diet and the control group (in which subject received the usual care for diabetes). That’s good, and worthy of a satisfactory.
However, the story does not explain what remission is or how it was measured. The study used hemoglobin A1c levels, which indicate blood sugar levels over the previous three months, and is often used to diagnose type 2 diabetes. Remission was defined as having a hemoglobin A1c level below the threshold for diagnosis without taking any diabetes medications. (This good outcome might still be characterized as pre-diabetes.)
In addition, readers aren’t told how high blood sugars readings were before the diet, so it’s impossible to tell how big the change was with weight loss.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET) TUESDAY, AUGUST 16, 2016

Media Advisory: To contact Paul D. Miller, M.D., call 303-925-4514 or email millerccbr@aol.com. To contact editorial co-author Anne R. Cappola, M.D., Sc.M., email Abbey Anderson at Abbey.Anderson@uphs.upenn.edu.

To place an electronic embedded link to this study and editorial in your story These links will be live at the embargo time: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.11136 http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.11032

Among postmenopausal women with osteoporosis at risk of fracture, daily injection of the drug abaloparatide for 18 months significantly reduced the risk of new vertebral and nonvertebral fractures compared with placebo, according to a study appearing in the August 16 issue of JAMA.

Osteoporosis is associated with substantial social, economic, and public health burdens. Based on 2010 U.S. Census data, a study estimated the prevalence of osteoporosis among women 50 to 69 years of age at 3.4 million. It has been estimated that the lifetime risk of osteoporotic fracture for a 60-year-old woman is 44 percent. Additional therapies are needed for prevention of osteoporotic fractures. As a result of its mechanism of action, it has been hypothesized that the drug abaloparatide, a synthetic peptide, would have a more pronounced anabolic (i.e., bone growing) action on bone compared with the osteoporosis drug teriparatide.

Paul D. Miller, M.D., of the Colorado Center for Bone Research, Lakewood, Colo., and colleagues randomly assigned postmenopausal women with osteoporosis to receive daily injections for 18 months of placebo (n = 821); abaloparatide (n = 824); or teriparatide (n = 818). The trial was conducted at 28 sites in 10 countries.

Among 2,463 women (average age, 69 years), 1,901 completed the study. New vertebral fractures occurred less frequently in the active treatment groups vs placebo: in 0.58 percent (n = 4) of participants in the abaloparatide group; in 0.84 percent (n = 6) of participants in the teriparatide group; and in 4.22 percent (n = 30) of those in the placebo group. The estimated event rate for nonvertebral fracture was lower with abaloparatide vs placebo: 2.7 percent in the abaloparatide group; 3.3 percent in the teriparatide group; and 4.7 percent in the placebo group.

Bone mineral density (BMD) increases were greater with abaloparatide than placebo. Incidence of hypercalcemia (the presence of abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood) was lower with abaloparatide (3.4 percent) vs teriparatide (6.4 percent). Overall, there were no differences in serious adverse events between the treatment groups.

“Further research is needed to understand the clinical importance of risk difference, the risks and benefits of abaloparatide treatment, and the efficacy of abaloparatide vs other osteoporosis treatments,” the authors write.

: This study was funded by Radius Health. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, etc.

Editorial: Osteoporosis Therapy in Postmenopausal Women With High Risk of Fracture

“Ultimately, which therapy is selected for osteoporosis treatment may be less important than identifying and initiating an approved treatment,” write Anne R. Cappola, M.D., Sc.M., of the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, and Associate Editor, JAMA, and Dolores M. Shoback, M.D., of the University of California, San Francisco, in an accompanying editorial.

“The bar is high for any preventive treatment—in the efforts to prevent a fracture that may or may not ever occur, prescribers do not want to prescribe a therapy that causes a new problem. The way forward for fracture prevention involves not only the development of better therapies to prevent fracture and easier delivery systems but also improved adoption of existing osteoporosis therapies for patients with prior fractures and minimization of adverse effects, particularly those associated with long-term use.”

: Both authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: High in the release, the benefits of the drugs being studied and the placebo being compared are quantified clearly in both relative and absolute terms. Readers can see clearly that we are talking about quite a small group of people who saw benefits from either drug compared to the rather large group of women who were studied.
Most of the data presented was absolute risk which was excellent. This shows the benefit as well as the fact that most patients didn’t have a fracture regardless of which treatment was given.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Stem cell research can run the gamut from Nobel Prize-winning scientists to hucksters in lab coats making a buck off desperate, seriously ill people. The results of one new study may be less than hoped for, but the science is sound: The study concluded that injecting stem cells into the spinal cords of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is safe in most, though not all, cases. Unfortunately, the procedure provided no benefit to patients, though it caused substantial pain to two of the study participants.

Dr. Jonathan D. Glass, a professor of neurology and pathology at the Emory University School of Medicine and the director of the Emory ALS Center, specifically focused on human spinal cord-derived neural stem cells.

"We put them into the spinal cord, and they came from a human spinal cord. The idea was that they would find a familiar and supportive environment," explained Glass.

In previous studies , Glass and his colleagues had transplanted such stem cells into the spinal cords of rodents with ALS and discovered that the treatment delayed the disease and improved survival.

Next, in a study of 12 patients , Glass tested the safety of injecting the stem cells into the spinal cords of humans. What he discovered during that experiment was that none of the patients suffered long-term effects (from either the surgical procedure or the implantation of stem cells), and no unusual acceleration of disease occurred. Importantly, one patient showed some improvement, though he and his colleagues noted that this outcome "must be interpreted with caution" since the study wasn't designed to measure effectiveness of the treatment.

For the new study, funded by the National Institutes of Health, Glass and his colleagues tested increasing amounts of stem cells injected into 15 patients who were not enrolled in his previous study.

What ALS does to the body

When someone gets ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, their motor network rapidly disintegrates. Nerve cells that communicate and control the voluntary muscles of the body (such as those in the arms, legs and face) degenerate or die. When communication between the brain and muscles ceases, the result is a gradual weakening and wasting away of muscles.

"My father was actually 69 when he was diagnosed. Someone can go for two years without being diagnosed properly, and that was the case with my father," Pharr said.

Neither his primary care physician nor his neurologist could identify the cause of his deterioration. In fact, they first believed he had suffered a stroke. After all, ALS is rare, and in up to 90% of all cases, there is no family history and no known risk factors, as was the case with Pharr's father.

ALS affects men more often than women, usually between the ages of 40 and 70. Though more common between the ages of 60 and 69, this neurodegenerative disease can develop at any age, progressing rapidly. Most people with ALS die within three to five years after their symptoms begin, though about 10% survive for 10 years or longer. In Pharr's father's case, the progress of disease was rapid.

"He did not want to go on the ventilator," she said, adding that many people prefer a "natural death." ALS often ends with respiratory failure since muscles in the diaphragm and chest walls eventually stop functioning. "There's no cure, and we don't even have a treatment," she said.

According to Goldstein, this isn't entirely a negative. "One of the things ALS has going for it is, since it has no effective treatment or cure, you throw anything you can at it," he said. While for many other diseases, the researchers are focused on just one modality, ongoing ALS research uses each of the four key modes of medical treatment: small molecules, proteins and biologics, gene therapy and stem cells.

Was this research necessary -- and ethical?

The ethics of human experimentation were thoroughly examined before the study began.

"Ethical review happens at several levels: at the NIH, at the Food and Drug Administration and most importantly at University Institutional Review Boards at each institution where a faculty member is participating in a trial," Glass explained.

In Pharr's opinion, this and other stem cell studies are certainly fair from a participant's perspective, since beforehand, "patients are presented with all the risk factors involved so they can make an informed decision." Besides, she added, "you automatically assume anyone with ALS can participate, but not everyone meets the criteria for a particular study."

The results of the study: Most participants fared well. However, severe complications occurred in two of the patients as a result of the surgery involved. One developed partial paralysis, and another experienced "incapacitating pain."

"People who do these studies should be considered medical heroes," Goldstein said, adding, "The selflessness of these people when they're told they're gonna die."

Sadly, disappointment is part of it, according to Pharr, who typically hears the frustration of people who go through a study that worked for another person but not for them. "It may have had a different effect on someone else," she said. "But that's why we don't have a treatment yet: because it doesn't work for everyone."

These early stages may be painful for some of the "medical heroes" involved, but the goal is clear: providing an effective and safe treatment for future patients who suffer from a devastating condition.

"Importantly, people should understand that, at least for neurological diseases like ALS, we are just now getting started with testing our hypotheses about using stem cells as therapeutics," Glass said. "We do not know if these treatments will work, and it will take time to test these therapies in a systematic and safe way."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Since this was primarily a safety study, there are no measurable benefits to quantify, and the story lets us know with this statement: “Unfortunately, the procedure provided no benefit to patients.”
We’ll count this as sufficient for a Satisfactory rating.
However, we encourage journalists to think twice about giving air time to early-phase trials, especially for stem cells. In many cases, there isn’t a lot to report yet, since benefits haven’t been established in any meaningful way. Better to wait until bigger trials are conducted, which was even implied with this ending quote in the story:
“We are just now getting started with testing our hypotheses about using stem cells as therapeutics,” Glass said. “We do not know if these treatments will work, and it will take time to test these therapies in a systematic and safe way.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ViewRay, Inc. (Nasdaq: VRAY), maker of the world's first and only clinical MRI-guided radiation therapy system, announced today outcomes data presented during the recent 2017 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO). This data highlighted compelling early results using the company's MRIdian system for the treatment of inoperable, locally advanced pancreatic cancer.

Unlike any other system on the market today, MRIdian allows clinicians to see the tumor and nearby soft-tissue anatomy throughout radiation treatments using real-time diagnostic MR-visualization. As a result, MRIdian's on-table adaptive radiation therapy allows doctors to respond to subtle anatomical changes observed on a day-to-day basis and reshape the dose to better match the current contours of the tumor. By more accurately targeting the tumor, and reducing treatment radiation dose to surrounding organs such as the duodenum, small bowel, stomach and liver, a higher and potentially more effective radiation dose may be delivered without increasing the risks of side effects and complications for the patient.

As featured in the ASTRO Scientific Session poster titled "High Dose Adaptive MRI Guided Radiation Therapy Improves Overall Survival of Inoperable Pancreatic Cancer," key data points and findings from the presentation include the following:
• The study detailed a retrospective review of 42 locally-advanced pancreatic cancer patients treated with MRIdian at four institutions (University of California Los Angeles, University of Wisconsin, VU University Medical Center, Washington University).
• The authors examined survival and toxicity rates for two unique cohorts of patients. One sample received a higher biologically effective dose (maxBED10 >90), primarily enabled by MRIdian MR-guided on-table adaptive radiotherapy. The other sample received a lower, more conventional biologically effective dose (maxBED10 <90), using non-adaptive therapy.
• The cohort receiving a higher dose demonstrated a near doubling of median overall survival (Kaplan-Meier estimated median overall survival of 27.8 months compared to 14.8 months).
• Patients treated with higher radiation doses reported no grade 3 or higher toxicities (0 percent). In comparison, those patients receiving lower doses via non-adaptive treatments experienced 15.8 percent grade 3 or higher toxicities.

"High-definition MR now enables oncologists to detect the slightest anatomical changes that occur from one day to the next and in real-time while the patient is being treated. Coupled with new adaptive radiation therapy software tools, we create new customized plans in minutes, all while the patient is on the treatment table," said Percy Lee, M.D., senior author and Associate Professor and Vice Chair of Education for the Department of Radiation Oncology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. "The data presented at the 2017 ASTRO Annual Meeting suggests that higher radiation doses with adaptive MR guided radiation therapy may improve survival in pancreatic cancer while maintaining a very favorable toxicity profile. These outcomes warrant further investigations."

The early results highlighted above, along with other data obtained using MRIdian will be tested in a multi-center, prospective, single-arm clinical trial for inoperable, locally advanced or borderline resectable pancreatic cancer. The trial will be conducted by ViewRay's Clinical Cooperative Think Tank (C2T2), a group of MRIdian medical institutions focused on evidence gathering to support MR-guided radiation therapy.

For more information regarding this clinical trial, please visit http://go. .

Presentations discussing the multi-institutional poster in ViewRay's ASTRO booth are available on the company's website at http://www. .

ViewRay®, Inc. (Nasdaq: VRAY), designs, manufactures and markets the MRIdian® radiation therapy system. MRIdian is built upon a proprietary high-definition MR imaging system designed from the ground up to address the unique challenges and clinical workflow for advanced radiation oncology. Unlike MR systems used in diagnostic radiology, MRIdian's high-definition MR was purposely built to deliver high-precision radiation without unnecessary beam distortion, and consequently, help to mitigate skin toxicity and other safety concerns that may otherwise arise when high magnetic fields interact with radiation beams. ViewRay and MRIdian are registered trademarks of ViewRay, Inc.

This press release contains forward-looking statements. Statements in this press release that are not purely historical are forward-looking statements. Such statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause future results to differ materially from those referenced. Forward looking statements with respect to predicted improved survival described in the poster presentation and video, are based on current expectations from the presented retroactive study and involve inherent risks and uncertainties about the potential health and medical benefits of MR-guided Radiation Therapy for the treatment of patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Further studies, including the planned prospective multi-institutional study referenced in this press release, as well as patient data covering longer periods of time post-treatment, could lead to different or contrary results from those expressed during ASTRO or in the poster presentation. Given these uncertainties, the reader is advised not to place any undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Additional risk factors include, among others, the ability to raise the additional funding needed to continue to pursue ViewRay's business and product development plans, the inherent uncertainties associated with developing new products or technologies, competition in the industry in which ViewRay operates and overall market conditions. These forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this press release, and ViewRay assumes no obligation to update the forward-looking statements, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Investors should consult all of the information set forth herein and should also refer to the risk factor disclosure set forth in the reports and other documents ViewRay files with the SEC available at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release provides exact information about increased survival rates in the cohorts of individuals treated with the adaptive versus the convention radiotherapy techniques.
“The cohort receiving a higher dose demonstrated a near doubling of median overall survival (Kaplan-Meier estimated median overall survival of 27.8 months compared to 14.8 months).”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The first germs to colonize a newborn delivered vaginally come almost exclusively from its mother. But the first to reach an infant born by cesarean section come mostly from the environment — particularly bacteria from inaccessible or less-scrubbed areas like lamps and walls, and skin cells from everyone else in the delivery room.

That difference, some experts believe, could influence a child’s lifelong health. Now, in the first study of its kind, researchers on Monday confirmed that a mother’s beneficial microbes can be transferred, at least partially, from her vagina to her baby after a C-section.

The small proof-of-principle study suggests a new way to inoculate babies, said Dr. Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello, an associate professor of medicine at New York University and lead author of the report, published on Monday in Nature Medicine.

“The study is extremely important,” said Dr. Jack Gilbert, a microbial ecologist at Argonne National Laboratory who did not take part in the work. “Just understanding that it’s possible is exciting.”

But it will take further studies following C-section babies for many years to know to what degree, if any, the method protects them from immune and metabolic problems, he said.

Some epidemiological studies have suggested that C-section babies may have an elevated risk for developing immune and metabolic disorders, including Type 1 diabetes, allergies, asthma and obesity.

Scientists have theorized that these children may be missing key bacteria known to play a large role in shaping the immune system from the moment of birth onward. To replace these microbes, some parents have turned to a novel procedure called vaginal microbial transfer.

A mother’s vaginal fluids — loaded with one such essential bacterium, lactobacillus, that helps digest human milk — are collected before surgery and swabbed all over the infant a minute or two after birth.

An infant’s first exposure to microbes may educate the early immune system to recognize friend from foe, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

Friendly bacteria, like lactobacilli, are tolerated as being like oneself. Those from hospital ventilation vents or the like may be perceived as enemies and be attacked.

These early microbial interactions may help set up an immune system that recognizes “self” from “non-self” for the rest of a person’s life, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

In the United States, about one in three babies are delivered by C-section, a rate that has risen dramatically in recent decades. Some hospitals perform the surgery on nearly seven in ten women delivering babies.

An ideal C-section rate for low-risk births should be no more than 15 percent, according to the World Health Organization.

Dr. Dominguez-Bello’s study involved 18 babies born at the University of Puerto Rico hospital in San Juan, where she recently worked. Seven were born vaginally and 11 by elective C-section. Of the latter, four were swabbed with the mother’s vaginal microbes and seven were not.

Microbes were collected on a folded sterile piece of gauze that was dipped in a saline solution and inserted into each mother’s vagina for one hour before surgery. As the operations began, the gauze was pulled out and placed in a sterile collector.

One to two minutes after the babies were delivered and put under a neonatal lamp, researchers swabbed each infant’s lips, face, chest, arms, legs, back, genitals and anal region with the damp gauze. The procedure took 15 seconds.

Dr. Dominguez-Bello and her colleagues then tracked the composition of microbes by taking more than 1,500 oral, skin and anal samples from the newborns, as well as vaginal samples from the mothers, over the first month after birth.

For the first few days, ambient skin bacteria from the delivery room predominated in the mouths and on the skin of C-section babies who were not swabbed, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

But in terms of their bacterial colonies, the infants swabbed with the microbes closely resembled vaginally delivered babies, she found, especially in the first week of life. They were all covered with lactobacilli.

Gut bacteria in both C-section groups, however, were less abundant than that found in the vaginally delivered babies.

Anal samples from the swabbed group, oddly, contained the highest abundance of bacteria usually found in the mouth.

The results show the complexity of labor, said Dr. Alexander Khoruts, a microbial expert and associate professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota. “It cannot be simplified to a neat, effortless passage of the infant through the birth canal,” he said.

As the month progressed, the oral and skin microbes of all infants began to resemble normal adult patterns, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. But fecal bacteria did not, probably because of breast or formula feeding and the absence of solid foods.

The transfer fell short of full vaginal birth-like colonization for two reasons, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. Compared to infants who spent time squeezed inside the birth canal, those who were swabbed got less exposure to their mother’s microbes.

And all infants delivered by C-section were exposed to antibiotics, which also may have reduced the number and variety of bacteria colonizing them.

A larger study of vaginal microbial transfer is underway at N.Y.U., Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. Eighty-four mothers have participated so far.

Infants delivered both by C-section and vaginally will be followed for one year to look for differences in the treated and untreated groups and to look for complications. Thus far the swabbing has proved entirely safe.

The procedure is not yet recommended by professional medical societies, said Dr. Sara Brubaker, a specialist in maternal and fetal medicine at N.Y.U. Until more is known, physicians are hesitant to participate.

“But it has hit the lay press,” she said. “Patients come in and ask for it. They are doing it themselves.”

Dr. Brubaker is one of them. When her daughter was born three and a half months ago, she arranged to have her baby swabbed.
• Let Me Tell You About My Big Baby

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article does a nice job of detailing the potential benefits of the microbial transfer and the results seen in the study, while giving the caveat that longer follow up studies are needed to understand the implications of various microbiome make-ups. But to be fair, the results are from a total of 4 newborns, hardly a number on which to base any strong conclusions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An app called Natural Cycles has become the first to be classified as a medical device for use as contraception.



Natural Cycles uses a woman's body temperature and menstrual cycle data to tell her when she is fertile. On fertile days, users must abstain from sex or use other protection such as condoms to prevent pregnancy. The app was approved as a class IIb medical device by Tüv Süd, a notified body in Sweden where it is based.

But sexual health organisations are warning that being classed as a medical device does not guarantee that the app will effectively prevent pregnancy. Sexual health charity the FPA, Fertility UK, and the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Health of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists are jointly calling for more large-scale independent trials to ensure that evidence for such apps is on a par with other rigorously tested methods of contraception.

Natural Cycles is one of numerous apps that help women practise a method of contraception called natural family planning, also known as the fertility awareness method.



Natural family planning involves monitoring your body for signs of ovulation, like an increase in your temperature, or a change in cervical mucus.

"The thing about the female egg is that it only lives for about 24 hours. So if you could reliably know when you've ovulated as a woman, and then you give that egg two or three days to die, any time after that in the cycle you will not get pregnant because there's no egg to fertilise," Dr Susan Walker, a senior lecturer in sexual health at Anglia Ruskin University, told BuzzFeed News.



Taking your temperature is what sets Natural Cycles and other apps like it apart from standard period-tracking apps. Without temperature information an app can can guess at your ovulation day based on your average cycle length, but can't be sure when you actually have ovulated, and so you can't use it as a reliable form of birth control.

You don't actually need an app to practise natural family planning – although it does cut down on paperwork. Even so, the FPA advises that natural family planning is most effective if you’re taught how to do it by a specialist teacher, and you monitor all three fertility indicators – temperature, menstrual cycle length, and cervical secretions.

But natural family planning is not for everyone. For starters, it can only protect against pregnancy, not STIs.

And if you're considering ditching the Pill because remembering to take it each day is too much effort, you probably won't like having to remember to take your temperature every morning.

"You really have to commit to it, whether you're doing it the traditional way or you're using an app. You have to take your temperature every morning and record that, because without all that data it's not really any use to you," Bekki Burbidge, head of communications at the FPA, told BuzzFeed News. "It's not a method that's going to suit everybody."

But for women like Natural Cycles co-founder Dr Elina Berglund, who want an alternative to hormonal contraception, it's an option worth pursuing. Along with her husband and co-founder Dr Raoul Scherwitzl, Berglund created the algorithm used in the app for personal use, before deciding it was something she should share with the rest of the world.

"When it comes to contraception it's all about choice. It's not like one solution will fit all women," said Berglund.

"Our typical user is in a stable relationship a few years before wanting to have kids. At first she starts to use the app to prevent pregnancy, and when she's ready [to get pregnant] she switches to plan, and usually she gets pregnant quite quickly, because the app already knows her body and cycle."



To use the app, you need a monthly or yearly subscription, and a thermometer that you have to use to take your temperature each morning before you get out of bed.



The app then tells you if you're likely to be fertile or not that day. And if the app gives you a "red day" – meaning you could be fertile – you have to abstain from sex, or use another method of protection such as condoms.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story cites a study that the app, when used precisely as directed–or so-called perfect use–has a failure rate such that 0.5 in 100 women will get pregnant over a year of use. People aren’t perfect, so with so-called typical use, 7 people will get pregnant out of 100 users over a year. The pill by comparison, results in 0.3 out of 100 people with perfect use, and 9 out of 100 with typical use.
In addition, the writer makes clear that the method requires abstaining from sex or using other protection for as many as 10 day per cycle, although that interval may decrease with longer use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• Study addresses key U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requirement, keeping SHP465 on track for potential 2017 U.S. launch
• Key secondary endpoint also met, showing higher proportion of patients were rated improved (p<0.001)
• Data add to overall robust clinical development program for SHP465

Shire plc (LSE: SHP,NASDAQ: SHPG) today announces positive topline results from a four-week Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, multi-center, placebo-controlled, dose-optimization, safety and efficacy study, SHP465-305, in children and adolescents aged 6-17 years with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). SHP465 (triple-bead mixed amphetamine salts - MAS) is an investigational oral stimulant medication being evaluated in the U.S. as a potential treatment for ADHD, a therapeutic area with significant need for additional treatment options.

The primary efficacy analysis of study 305 demonstrated that SHP465, administered as a daily morning dose, was superior to placebo on the change from baseline in ADHD-RS-IV (ADHD rating scale) total score, with a Least Squares (LS) mean difference from placebo at Week 4 of -9.9 (95% CI: -13.0 to -6.8, p<0.001), suggesting a significant improvement in ADHD symptoms. SHP465 was also superior to placebo in the key secondary efficacy analysis on the clinical global impression improvement scale (CGI-I), with an LS mean difference from placebo at Week 4 of -0.8 (95% CI: -1.1 to -0.5, p<0.001), indicating a significantly higher proportion of patients were rated improved on the CGI-I rating scale. The CGI-I is a standardized assessment tool that allows clinicians to rate the severity of ADHD illness, change over time and efficacy of medication.

Treatment-emergent adverse events ≥ 5% for SHP 465-305 were decreased appetite, headache, insomnia, irritability, nausea, weight decrease and dizziness. Adverse events were generally mild to moderate in severity and similar to those observed in previous SHP465 studies and with other amphetamine compounds.

The completion of SHP465-305 addresses an FDA requirement to evaluate the safety and efficacy of SHP465 in children and adolescents prior to filing a Class 2 resubmission of the medicine for FDA approval.

"We are pleased with the positive results of the SHP465-305 study," said Philip J. Vickers, Ph.D., Head of Research & Development, Shire. "These results represent an important step toward a new treatment option for patients with ADHD. Shire looks forward to including these data as part of the FDA resubmission and is eager to continue advancing this clinical program."

Dr. Matthew Brams, M.D., Clinical Assistant Professor at Baylor College of Medicine and principal investigator for study 305, added: "The study of SHP465 in children and adolescents is an essential next step to progressing the clinical program. I'm excited about these positive data from SHP465-305 because of the benefit that this potential new treatment option may provide for patients with ADHD."

Including study 305 and previous studies, Shire now has a robust database of 15 clinical studies evaluating SHP465 in more than 1,100 subjects. Once the pharmacokinetic study and an additional safety and efficacy Phase 3 trial in adults currently under way are complete later this year, Shire plans to add these study results to its existing SHP465 data set to submit a Class 2 resubmission for FDA approval of the medicine for treatment of ADHD. SHP465 remains on track for potential U.S. launch in the second half of 2017.

In previous adolescent and adult clinical studies, SHP465 demonstrated a statistically significant difference versus placebo at 16 hours post dosing, with onset of action starting 4 hours post dosing, as measured by the Permanent Product Measure of Performance (PERMP). PERMP was not measured in the SHP465-305 study.

There are patents supporting Shire's overall ADHD franchise in the U.S. that extend to 2029. With a launch planned for the second half of 2017, Shire expects that SHP465, following potential FDA approval, will have three years of Hatch-Waxman exclusivity and at least three patents listed in the FDA Orange Book expiring as late as May 2029.

Shire enables people with life-altering conditions to lead better lives.

Our strategy is to focus on developing and marketing innovative specialty medicines to meet significant unmet patient needs.

We focus on providing treatments in Rare Diseases, Neuroscience, Gastrointestinal and Internal Medicine and we are developing treatments for symptomatic conditions treated by specialist physicians in other targeted therapeutic areas, such as Ophthalmics.

Statements included herein that are not historical facts, including without limitation statements concerning our announced business combination with Baxalta and the timing and financial and strategic benefits thereof, our 20x20 ambition that targets $20 billion in combined product sales by 2020, as well as other targets for future financial results, capital structure, performance and sustainability of the combined company, the combined company's future strategy, plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, the anticipated timing of clinical trials and approvals for, and the commercial potential of, inline or pipeline products are forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties and are subject to change at any time. In the event such risks or uncertainties materialize, Shire's results could be materially adversely affected. The risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the following:
• the proposed combination with Baxalta may not be completed due to a failure to satisfy certain closing conditions, including any shareholder or regulatory approvals or the receipt of applicable tax opinions;
• disruption from the proposed transaction with Baxalta may make it more difficult to conduct business as usual or maintain relationships with patients, physicians, employees or suppliers;
• the combined company may not achieve some or all of the anticipated benefits of Baxalta's spin-off from Baxter International, Inc. ("Baxter") and the proposed transaction may have an adverse impact on Baxalta's existing arrangements with Baxter, including those related to transition, manufacturing and supply services and tax matters;
• the failure to achieve the strategic objectives with respect to the proposed combination with Baxalta may adversely affect the combined company's financial condition and results of operations;
• products and product candidates may not achieve commercial success;
• product sales from ADDERALL XR and INTUNIV are subject to generic competition;
• the failure to obtain and maintain reimbursement, or an adequate level of reimbursement, by third-party payers in a timely manner for the combined company's products may affect future revenues, financial condition and results of operations, particularly if there is pressure on pricing of products to treat rare diseases;
• supply chain or manufacturing disruptions may result in declines in revenue for affected products and commercial traction from competitors; regulatory actions associated with product approvals or changes to manufacturing sites, ingredients or manufacturing processes could lead to significant delays, an increase in operating costs, lost product sales, an interruption of research activities or the delay of new product launches;
• the successful development of products in various stages of research and development is highly uncertain and requires significant expenditures and time, and there is no guarantee that these products will receive regulatory approval;
• the actions of certain customers could affect the combined company's ability to sell or market products profitably, and fluctuations in buying or distribution patterns by such customers can adversely affect the combined company's revenues, financial condition or results of operations;
• investigations or enforcement action by regulatory authorities or law enforcement agencies relating to the combined company's activities in the highly regulated markets in which it operates may result in significant legal costs and the payment of substantial compensation or fines;
• adverse outcomes in legal matters and other disputes, including the combined company's ability to enforce and defend patents and other intellectual property rights required for its business, could have a material adverse effect on the combined company's revenues, financial condition or results of operations;
• Shire is undergoing a corporate reorganization and was the subject of an unsuccessful acquisition proposal and the consequent uncertainty could adversely affect the combined company's ability to attract and/or retain the highly skilled personnel needed to meet its strategic objectives;
• failure to achieve the strategic objectives with respect to Shire's acquisition of NPS Pharmaceuticals Inc. or Dyax Corp. ("Dyax") may adversely affect the combined company's financial condition and results of operations;
• the combined company will be dependent on information technology and its systems and infrastructure face certain risks, including from service disruptions, the loss of sensitive or confidential information, cyber-attacks and other security breaches or data leakages that could have a material adverse effect on the combined company's revenues, financial condition or results of operations;
• the combined company may be unable to retain and hire key personnel and/or maintain its relationships with customers, suppliers and other business partners;
• difficulties in integrating Dyax or Baxalta into Shire may lead to the combined company not being able to realize the expected operating efficiencies, cost savings, revenue enhancements, synergies or other benefits at the time anticipated or at all; and other risks and uncertainties detailed from time to time in Shire's, Dyax's or Baxalta's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), including those risks outlined in "ITEM 1A: Risk Factors" in Shire's and Baxalta's Annual Reports on Form 10-K for the year ended .

All forward-looking statements attributable to us or any person acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements that speak only as of the date hereof. Except to the extent otherwise required by applicable law, we do not undertake any obligation to republish revised forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.

For further information please contact:
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job of explaining the benefits of the drug to children and adolescents with ADHD in relationship to a placebo and to a standardized measurement of improvement, but does not compare this new drug with existing treatments. It’s difficult to estimate how many people would want a stimulant that lasts 16 hours. Even if they do, it would be much cheaper to take a dose of an existing, shorter acting drug in the early afternoon.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Once, "relaxation beverages" consisted of alcohol, chamomile tea and warm milk. Now, the field includes a slew of new drinks promising a better night's sleep using such ingredients as melatonin, valerian root and - think turkey - tryptophan.

They have apt names such as Unwind, iChill and Dream Water, and offer such flavors as Berry-Berry Tired, Snoozeberry and Lullaby Lemon. They're the inverse of energy drinks. Consumers can wake up with Red Bull and then wind down with Slow Cow.

But can consumers trust these fruity concoctions to give them their z's?

According to Steven M. Scharf, director of the Sleep Disorders Center at the University of Maryland in Baltimore, the answer is a resounding maybe.

"The issue is this: Some of them probably have some biologic effect, but they haven't been as well studied as you'd like," Scharf says. "Nobody's ever compared valerian root to [the prescription sleep aid] Ambien."

The chief ingredient in many of these beverages is melatonin, a hormone that induces sleepiness and helps coordinate the body's biological clock. It's typically released by the pineal gland around 10 p.m.; secretion stops around 4 or 5 a.m., helping to trigger the body to wake up, Scharf says.

The body produces about three-fourths of a milligram of melatonin a day. The manufacturer of the sleep aid Snooz'n says its 2.5-ounce "shots" contain five milligrams of melatonin; Unwind, a "relaxation blend," has three milligrams per 12-ounce can.

Oral doses of melatonin haven't worked much better at inducing sleep than a placebo in most studies, Scharf says, and a single, concentrated shot of the stuff doesn't exactly mimic the body's time-release system. However, a study published in January in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society found that a pre-bedtime cocktail of magnesium, zinc and a five-milligram dose of melatonin significantly improved sleep among a group of 43 elderly Italian insomniacs.

Jason Healy, the head of InterMark Brands, which markets Snooz'n, says he drinks his product on nights when he is stressed-out or when he is traveling internationally. The back of the Snooz'n bottle says the beverage will "combat stress, energy drinks and sleeplessness" and takes about 30 minutes to take effect. When it launches nationally in March, Snooz'n will be available in grocery and convenience stores and pharmacies, like most of these drinks.

"We attack [insomnia] from two angles," Healy says. "You've got to turn off all the stimulants and also get into a natural sleep cycle."

Melatonin is used for the latter, while ingredients such as valerian root and chamomile take care of the former, Healy says. Both of those herbs are associated with soporific effects, according to the Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Valerian root has properties that resemble the benzodiazepine class of medications (such as Valium and Xanax), but Scharf says he has no idea how they compare with standard sleeping pills because of the lack of comparative studies.

Containers of relaxation drinks look similar to those of energy drinks. Many mimic the diminutive shape of the 5-Hour Energy shot or the bright graphics and tall, narrow can of Rockstar or Monster. Flavors range from a pleasant, fruit-flavored soda to just shy of cough syrup.

Many relaxation beverages contain safety labels that warn consumers that they should neither drive or operate machinery after drinking them, nor mix them with alcohol. Some say they aren't intended for people younger than 18 or for pregnant or nursing women - a warning that the Food and Drug Administration has also made about melatonin.

In January 2010, the FDA sent a warning letter to the Innovative Beverage Group, which makes the relaxation beverage Drank, saying the melatonin it uses is an "unapproved food additive" and not "generally recognized as safe."

Drank is still being sold with melatonin in it. In a statement, Drank inventor Peter Bianchi says "the safety of Drank's consumers remains a top priority" and the company is working to modify the product's packaging and marketing "to reflect its classification as a dietary supplement."

The FDA regulates conventional beverages' ingredients and labeling claims more strictly than those of dietary supplements. Drank is still classified as a beverage.

The relaxation drink market is tiny compared with the energy drink market, says Garima Goel Lal, a senior analyst at the consumer research firm Mintel.

A Mintel survey found that 48 percent of all "functional beverage" users said they were looking for beverages to release stress.

A functional beverage - the term is used for sport, energy and relaxation drinks - is a nonalcoholic drink that claims to have health benefits. The number of nonalcoholic beverages making relaxation claims continues to rise; 40 new ones came on the market in 2010, according to Mintel. The field is too young to identify the leaders and the losers, Goel Lal says.

"They're trying to find a niche," she says.

Katherine Zeratsky, a registered dietitian at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., has blogged about relaxation drinks. She says that people with certain health conditions, such as high blood pressure, should consult their physician before downing a can of Unwind or any of the other sleep beverages.

"A person can just go to the convenience store and purchase this," Zeratsky says. "There's this perception that it's safe and, depending on the person, it might not be a good choice."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does not report in detail on any one study, but comments from a sleep expert  tell readers what they need to know here. He remarks that melatonin (a constituent of many of the drinks) doesn’t seem to work much better than a placebo, and that we have no idea how well valerian root  (another supplement found in some drinks) works compared with prescription sleep medicines because they haven’t been compared.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking high doses of selenium may help slightly lower cholesterol levels — but it’s still not recommended in the United States, where most people get plenty of the mineral, according to the authors of a new study.

Still, the finding is “reassuring” because previous research had linked high selenium with higher cholesterol levels, said study author Dr. Eliseo Guallar, from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore.

The picture of selenium’s health benefits — or possible health risks — has been anything but clear. Last week, a review of prior studies suggested that selenium probably doesn’t help prevent cancer, but might be linked to an increased diabetes risk at high doses (see Reuters Health story of May 11, 2011.)

“We don’t really know where we are,” Guallar told Reuters Health. “In a sense it’s a necessary micronutrient and we need it, but we might be (in) a situation where we have enough — we might even have too much.”

Selenium is found in meat, bread, and some nuts. It’s also available in supplement form, and costs about $2 for a month’s supply.

The Institute of Medicine recommends U.S. adults consume 55 micrograms of selenium per day.

Guallar and his colleagues wanted to look specifically at the link between selenium and cholesterol. They recruited about 500 older adults in the UK to take one of three different doses of selenium daily — 100, 200, or 300 micrograms — or a placebo pill with no selenium.

Researchers measured participants’ cholesterol levels at the beginning of the study and after six months on the selenium supplements or placebo. Their results are published in Annals of Internal Medicine.

Participants had an average starting cholesterol of about 230 milligrams per deciliter of blood. A healthy cholesterol level is less than 200 mg/dL, according to the American Heart Association, while 200 to 239 mg/dL is considered “borderline high.”

In the groups taking 100 and 200 micrograms of selenium daily, total cholesterol dropped an average of 8.5 mg/dL and 9.7 mg/dL, respectively, compared to the group taking a placebo pill.

Taking the highest dose of selenium was not linked to decreases in total cholesterol — but it was the only dose associated with an increase in HDL (“good”) cholesterol.

The authors reported no serious side effects associated with selenium during the study.

While Guallar said the results are “good news” in showing that high selenium intake is probably not a risk for high cholesterol, he wanted to add a note of caution.

The finding “is not generalizable to other patients,” he said. “In a population like the U.S. where selenium levels are adequate, there’s no reason to take extra selenium in supplements.”

The question of the link between selenium and health outcomes, Guallar said, “is a very interesting story that’s still developing.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MILAN, ITALY, Sept. 12, 2017 - An antibody treatment reduces the rate of flare-ups by nearly 20 percent in patients with a subgroup of treatment-resistant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), according to the results of two large international trials presented today at the European Respiratory Society International Congress in Milan, Italy, and simultaneously published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

"The goal of precision medicine is to give the right treatment to the right patient," said lead author Frank Sciurba, M.D., director of the Center for COPD and Emphysema and UPMC Pulmonary Function Exercise Physiology Laboratory, and visiting professor in the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. "These findings are the first example of a precision therapy that is uniquely effective in a subgroup of patients with treatment-resistant COPD."

"There is significant variation between patients in the cells and other proteins responsible for lung inflammation, so there are actually many different subtypes of COPD," said Sciurba.

One subgroup called eosinophilic predominant COPD is present in as many as 40 percent of patients and is characterized by elevated levels of a type of white blood cell known as eosinophils, he said.

The new study reports the results from two Phase III clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of mepolizumab, an antibody treatment that reduces the number of eosinophils in the blood, in moderate to severe treatment-resistant eosinophilic COPD by blocking the pro-inflammatory effects of interleukin-5.

Patients included in the trials were still having flare-ups despite a year of a standard treatment known as "triple inhaled therapy" that includes bronchodilators and glucocorticoids.

"These patients already have been given every treatment we have to offer them and are still having flare-ups that significantly interfere with their quality of life and can lead to deterioration in lung function and higher mortality," said Sciurba. "We hoped to be able to offer them an option."

Mepolizumab is already approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to reduce symptom flare-ups and improve quality of life in eosinophilic asthma.

The first trial, termed METREX, was conducted at 117 sites in 15 countries from 2014 to 2017. A total of 837 COPD patients were stratified by blood eosinophil counts and randomized to receive either 100 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, delivered under the skin every four weeks for one year.

The patients with high eosinophil counts who received mepolizumab had a statistically significant 18 percent lower rate of moderate/severe exacerbations (1.4 per year compared to 1.7 per year) than those in the placebo group. The exacerbation rate in the low eosinophil group treated with the biologic did not differ from placebo. The time to the first exacerbation also was higher with mepolizumab than placebo, but only in the high eosinophil group.

In a second, simultaneous trial, termed METREO, the team assessed the effect of a higher dose of mepolizumab in 675 patients with elevated eosinophil levels. Patients were randomized to receive 100 or 300 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, with the same delivery method and schedule as METREX.

Similar to METREX, the exacerbation rate was reduced by 20 percent in the high eosinophil group after 100 milligrams of mepolizumab. The METREO results narrowly missed statistical significance. The 300-milligram dose did not provide an advantage over the lower dose.

An analysis of data from both trials found that as baseline blood eosinophil counts increased, so did mepolizumab's reduction in the annual exacerbation rate. This finding indicates that patients with higher initial eosinophil counts benefited more from mepolizumab than those with lower eosinophil counts, Sciurba said. The safety profile of mepolizumab did not differ from placebo in either trial.

"In addition to providing a new treatment option for patients with treatment-resistant, moderate to severe COPD, the new results also are important because they identify a potential biomarker for the disease and demonstrate that eosinophilic inflammation plays a role in flare-ups in COPD," Sciurba said.

Pitt's Division of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine has a legacy of pioneering treatments for lung disease. UPMC also is home to a leading lung transplant program.

"The findings in these trials exemplify what we hope to achieve not only in COPD but across all lung diseases with regards to a precision approach to treatment," said division chief, Rama Mallampalli, M.D.

Funding for both trials was provided by GlaxoSmithKline, which plans to seek approval from the FDA for the use of mepolizumab in eosinophilic COPD.

Additional authors on the study are Ian Pavord, F.Med.Sci. D.M., University of Oxford, UK; Pascal Chanez, M.D., Ph.D., CIC Nord Aix-Marseille University, France; Gerard Criner, M.D., Temple University; Huib Kerstjens, M.D., Ph.D., University of Groningen, the Netherlands; Stephanie Korn, M.D., Ph.D., Mainz University Hospital, Germany; Njira Lugogo, M.D., Duke University; Jean-Benoit Martinot, M.D., CHU UCL Namur, Belgium; Hironori Sagara, M.D., Ph.D., Showa University, Japan; and Frank Albers, M.D., Ph.D., Eric Bradford, M.D., Stephanie Schweiker Harris, B.Sc., Bhabita Mayer, M.Sc., David Rubin, M.D., and Steven Yancey, M.Sc., all of GlaxoSmithKline.

Patients wishing to learn more about the research being performed at the Center for COPD and Emphysema can call 866-948-2673 or email ecrc@upmc.edu.

About the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine

As one of the nation's leading academic centers for biomedical research, the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine integrates advanced technology with basic science across a broad range of disciplines in a continuous quest to harness the power of new knowledge and improve the human condition. Driven mainly by the School of Medicine and its affiliates, Pitt has ranked among the top 10 recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health since 1998. In rankings recently released by the National Science Foundation, Pitt ranked fifth among all American universities in total federal science and engineering research and development support.

Likewise, the School of Medicine is equally committed to advancing the quality and strength of its medical and graduate education programs, for which it is recognized as an innovative leader, and to training highly skilled, compassionate clinicians and creative scientists well-equipped to engage in world-class research. The School of Medicine is the academic partner of UPMC, which has collaborated with the University to raise the standard of medical excellence in Pittsburgh and to position health care as a driving force behind the region's economy. For more information about the School of Medicine, see http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The primary endpoint of the studies was to reduce the number of flare-ups that sent COPD patients either to the hospital or to the emergency room.
The release reports on the findings of two studies looking at the usefulness of the drug in a subset of COPD patients. For the METREX trial, which enrolled 837 volunteers for one year, it says, “The patients with high eosinophil counts who received mepolizumab had a statistically significant 18 percent lower rate of moderate/severe exacerbations (1.4 per year compared to 1.7 per year) than those in the placebo group.”
It’s not clear what a difference in exacerbation rate of 0.3 per year really means. Does this mean that each person will get one less exacerbation about every 3 years? That doesn’t sound like much of a difference.
For the METREO trial, the release said, “the exacerbation rate was reduced by 20 percent in the high eosinophil group after 100 milligrams of mepolizumab. The METREO results narrowly missed statistical significance.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Despite the availability of effective therapies, glaucoma remains a leading cause of blindness. Nearly 3 million people in the United States have the condition. It is often marked by elevated internal eye pressure, called intraocular pressure. Medicated eye drops taken daily or twice daily can lower internal eye pressure to help prevent damage to the optic nerve. But studies show that many patients do not take glaucoma eye drops as directed due to factors such as forgetfulness or physical limitations like arthritis. 1 Some studies show that half of patients stop taking their prescription glaucoma eye drops after a year, leaving them vulnerable to vision loss. 2

Researchers are tackling this challenge of medication adherence with new drug delivery methods. One technology involves a thin silicone ring suffused with medication that slowly releases over time. An ophthalmologist fits the patient with the ring. No surgery is required. The ring is designed to be replaced by an ophthalmologist every six months. This eliminates the need for glaucoma patients to regularly put in medicated eye drops themselves.

Ophthalmologists at 10 sites nationwide tested the ring in a phase 2 clinical trial on patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension. In the study, 64 patients received the topical ocular insert containing the glaucoma drug bimatoprost. They were also supplied artificial tears. The control group of 66 patients wore an insert treated with no drug but twice a day used 0.5 percent timolol drops, the regulatory benchmark for glaucoma drugs. Eye pressure in the bimatoprost group fell 3.2 to 6.4 mmHg over six months, in comparison to 4.2 to 6.4 mmHG for the timolol group. Overall, eye pressure decreased in the group wearing the bimatoprost ring by about 20 percent from the initial measurements over six months.

Authors said the device was well-tolerated and safe, with a high retention rate of 89 percent for both groups at six months. The ring became dislodged in 15 patients but was replaced each time, allowing therapy to continue. Some patients experienced itchiness and eye redness, which is not unusual for patients taking glaucoma medication.

"In making effective treatments easier for patients, the hope is that we can reduce vision loss from glaucoma, and possibly other diseases," said study author James D. Brandt, M.D., director of the UC Davis Medical Center Glaucoma Service. "What is exciting is that this is just one of several sustained-release drug delivery methods designed to help patients who have trouble taking daily eye drops."

A phase 3 study of a larger group of patients is expected to begin later in 2016. The authors noted the device could also be used for non-glaucoma medications, with potential applications for dry eye, allergies and inflammation. In addition, the non-invasive nature of the device and its relatively large surface area make this technology a potential candidate for delivering multiple ocular drugs at once, further reducing the burden of self-administration on patients.

"Six-month IOP Reduction with a Topical Bimatoprost Ocular Insert: Results of a Phase 2 Randomized Controlled Study," Brandt, et al. Ophthalmology, article in press, May 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2016.04.026. The results are also being presented today at the Ophthalmology Innovation Summit in New Orleans. The authors receive financial support from ForSight VISION5, manufacturer of the bimatoprost ring.

For more information on glaucoma, visit the American Academy of Ophthalmology's EyeSmart® public information website, www.aao.org/eye-health.

About the American Academy of Ophthalmology

The American Academy of Ophthalmology is the world's largest membership association of eye physicians and surgeons. A global community of 32,000 ophthalmologists, we are passionate about protecting sight and fighting preventable blindness. For more than 120 years, we have been educators, innovators and advocates for the public and our profession to ensure the highest-quality medical and surgical eye care. Our EyeSmart® program is a preeminent source of eye health information for the public and empowers people to preserve their vision. For more information, visit www.aao.org.

About Ophthalmology 

Ophthalmology, the official journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology, publishes original, peer-reviewed, clinically-applicable research. Topics include the results of clinical trials, new diagnostic and surgical techniques, treatment methods, technology assessments, translational science reviews and editorials. For more information, visit www.aaojournal.org.

1 Patterns of Glaucoma Medication Adherence over Four Years of Follow-Up, Newman-Casey, et al. Ophthalmology, 2015. 

2 Adherence and persistence with glaucoma therapy, Schwartz, et al, Survey of Ophthalmology, Nov. 2008
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the ring containing the drug bimatoprose reduced eye pressure in glaucoma patients by about 20 percent over six months, and eye pressure fell 3.2 to 6.4 mmHg, compared with 4.2 to 6.4 mmHG for the group taking standard eye drops. The news release could have given more context to these numbers to help readers understand what they mean in terms of patient outcomes.
It’s worth mentioning that reducing intraocular pressure is an intermediate outcome. The real goal is to slow vision loss. While this trial is too short for that, it could have been mentioned when discussing future trials that the real goal is yet to be studied. We won’t dock points for that omission here since we address it below under the “Evidence” criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 14, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Preliminary research suggests that a single injection of a man-made protein might lower levels of "bad" cholesterol.

Given in the abdomen, AMG145 reduced low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels among a group of healthy volunteers. The shot turned off a newly identified cholesterol regulator, PCSK9, which interferes with the liver's ability to clear bad cholesterol from the bloodstream.

The findings were presented Monday at the American Heart Association (AHA) annual meeting in Orlando, Fla. The study was funded by AMG145 manufacturer Amgen Inc.

High cholesterol is a major risk factor for heart disease. The first step toward lowering cholesterol is typically lifestyle changes, which include eating a low-fat diet and regular physical activity. For some, medications such as statins must be added to get cholesterol levels where they ought to be. Even this is not enough to get everyone's numbers into the safety zone, and not everyone can tolerate currently available medications. An LDL of less than 100 mg/dL of blood is considered optimal.

Study author Clapton Dias, medical sciences director of clinical pharmacology and early development at Amgen, in Thousand Oaks, Calif., said this shot could be given as an add-on to current cholesterol-lowering therapies for people who are not getting as low as they should be or as a standalone treatment for people who can't tolerate existing lipid-lowering drugs.

"Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death in the U.S., and while statins are very effective, a good proportion of people are not meeting their goals, and in this setting the shot could be a valuable addition," he said.

The study included 54 men and two women aged 18 to 45 who did not have elevated cholesterol levels. Participants received one of five doses of the new drug delivered via shot or intravenously or a placebo. Researchers measured LDL cholesterol levels for 85 to 113 days after treatment.

The new drug did hit its target, PCSK9, and decreased levels of LDL cholesterol by up to 64 percent. There were also decreases seen in levels of total cholesterol and apo-B (tiny fat particles in the blood that also increase the risk for heart disease). Levels of triglycerides and "good" HDL cholesterol were not altered by the medication, and there were no serious side effects reported. Now, researchers are testing the new shot in people who have high cholesterol.

Cardiologists were cautiously optimistic about the novel therapy.

Former AHA President Dr. Ralph Sacco said that it is too early to make any predictions about what role, if any, this therapy will have in lowering cholesterol levels, but it could one day fill an important void.

"Even though statins are so effective at lowering cholesterol and reducing risk for heart disease and stroke, they do need to be taken every day and they can have certain side effects in some people," said Sacco, who is also chairman of neurology at the University of Miami. Statin side effects can include liver damage and/or muscle pain.

"This new shot may provide a more long-lasting approach, especially if it could be given once a month," Sacco said.

Dr. Dan Rader, director of preventive cardiology at the University of Pennsylvania, said that PCSK9 is "the hottest target for new treatments to lower LDL cholesterol." And these study results will probably fuel that fire, he added.

"A 60-plus percent reduction in LDL with a single dose of this antibody is impressive," he said. "It is the early days, but the data look strong. We now need more data with people who have repeated dosing and are followed for longer periods of time," Rader added.

"There are still plenty of people who can't achieve adequate LDL levels with existing drugs, including statins," he noted. Plus, "people may find it easier to get a shot every two weeks or monthly than to take a pill every day."

Research presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

Learn about existing treatments for high cholesterol at the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The says that AMG 145 decreased LDL cholesterol by up to 64%. Although this description isn’t quite as useful as simply telling us what the cholesterol numbers were before and after treatment, the number does convey the point that this was an impressive amount of cholesterol lowering — which is accurate. The story also explains other features of the drug that might be attractive — e.g. the potential for less frequent dosing and fewer muscle-related adverse effects compared with statins. As already noted, the potential limitation of impacting a surrogate marker was worth mentioning. There was room for improvement here, but we’ll call it satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About one in 20 men is estimated to have Peyronie’s, but figures are not precise because people with the condition tend not to discuss it publicly.

Although the company selling Xiaflex will be Auxilium Pharmaceuticals of Malvern, Pa., the F.D.A. approval was a belated triumph for the drug’s original developer, BioSpecifics Technologies of Lynbrook, N.Y., on Long Island. Founded in 1957, it struggled for decades to find uses for the product, almost going out of business before licensing the drug to Auxilium in 2004.

“It sort of proves to people that if you really believe in a drug you should never give up,” said Matthew Geller, a biotechnology investment banker who is a member of the BioSpecifics board.

Shares of BioSpecifics closed Monday at $27.61, up from $1 as recently as late 2006.

Some people treated with Xiaflex in clinical trials for the Dupuytren’s hand condition said it had made a big difference in their lives, and had allowed them to avoid painful surgery.

“When I looked down and saw my finger straightened out, I cried,” said Kenneth Nelson, 65, of Indianapolis. “It was to me just like a miracle.”

Xiaflex is an enzyme produced by a gangrene-causing bacterium, Clostridium histolyticum, which uses it to eat away the tissues of its victims. The enzyme, called collagenase, breaks down collagen, a major component of the body’s connective tissue that is found in skin, tendons, cartilage and other organs.

But collagenase by itself does not cause gangrene. And there are times doctors need to break down collagen, such as when an excess builds up in the hand or penis, causing Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. The ailments are named for French surgeons who described the conditions in the 18th and 19th centuries.

The enzyme was first extracted from the bacteria around 1950 by Ines Mandl, a young biochemist at Columbia University. Edwin H. Wegman, a Long Island entrepreneur, learned about Dr. Mandl’s work and set up a company called Advance Biofactures, which later became BioSpecifics, to turn collagenase into a drug.

In 1965, the company won approval of an ointment containing collagenase for use in removing dead tissue from skin ulcers and burns. The ointment, sold by licensees under the name Santyl, was a modest success, but the company never truly prospered.

So in the 1970s the company began developing what it thought would be a bigger money-maker, an injectable collagenase. It tested that drug for numerous uses, including herniated disks. Finally, in the early 1990s, two professors of orthopedics at the nearby State University of New York at Stony Brook suggested using the drug for Dupuytren’s.

The professors, Dr. Lawrence C. Hurst and Marie A. Badalamente, injected the drug into the tails of rats, as a stand-in for human fingers. They found they could dissolve the collagen in tendons, making the tails floppy, without harming nearby nerves and arteries. Then they organized clinical trials in patients and got federal grants to help pay for the work. The professors and Stony Brook will share a royalty of one half of 1 percent of sales of Xiaflex for use in treating Dupuytren’s.

But work was slowed by lack of money, and by 2004, BioSpecifics was about out of cash. In desperation, Ed Wegman’s son Mark, a top computer scientist at I.B.M., called a childhood friend, Laurence Korn, who had been the chief executive of a successful biotechnology company now known as PDL BioPharma.

With Dr. Korn’s help, BioSpecifics licensed the drug to Auxilium in a matter of weeks, receiving $5 million initially.

Auxilium was interested because of Peyronie’s disease. It already was selling a gel for men with low testosterone and had learned from urologists about the need for better treatments for bent penises.

“From talking with surgeons and patients who have Peyronie’s, neither of them wants to do the surgery,” said Will Sargent, a spokesman for Auxilium.

Two years ago, the drug giant Pfizer, which sells the erectile dysfunction drug Viagra, licensed the European rights to Xiaflex from Auxilium for an initial payment of $75 million. BioSpecifics got $6.4 million of that amount and will receive 8.5 percent of additional payments of up to $410 million that Pfizer might make.

Auxilium sought approval for treating Dupuytren’s first because it was easier to measure success in straightening fingers. But the company hopes to begin late-stage trials of Xiaflex for Peyronie’s disease later this year. In a midstage trial, injections of Xiaflex into the collagen plaque in the penis reduced the curvature. But the drug did not reduce pain or discomfort during intercourse by a statistically significant amount.

While collagenase itself is not patented, the companies do have patents on the use of the enzyme to treat Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. They are also shielded from competition for seven years under a federal law aimed at spurring development of drugs for rare, or “orphan,” diseases — even though newer estimates suggest these two diseases are not as rare as thought when the drugs were given orphan status.

Auxilium and BioSpecifics hope that the half-century-old collagenase might eventually become as versatile as Botox, another bacterial product. They are looking at uses that range from loosening up immobile “frozen shoulders” to eliminating fat bulges and cellulite.

With its belated success, BioSpecifics has sold off its ointment business. It now has only five employees and a business of collecting a roughly 11 to 12 percent royalty on sales of Xiaflex.

“We will be a cash machine going forward,” said Thomas L. Wegman, the president and the other son of the company founder. “We don’t have to pay for marketing. We don’t have to pay for manufacturing.”

The Wegman family — the two sons and the founder’s 75-year-old wife, Toby — controls about 25 percent of the company’s stock.

Ed Wegman, the company’s founder, did not live to see the F.D.A. approval, dying at age 87 in 2007. On Feb. 2, the day the drug was approved, one BioSpecifics director sent an e-mail message to the others saying, “Well done. Hope Ed is looking on.”

Meanwhile, Dr. Mandl, the biochemist who first isolated collagenase from the bacteria, is nearing 93. Last year, when BioSpecifics stock rose above $30, she sold the last 1,000 shares she had been given for serving as a consultant to the company over the years.

Unfortunately, she had sold most of her holdings years earlier for a relative pittance. “If I still had what I originally had,” she said. “I’d be very rich.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The sidebar describes the outcomes of the main clinical trial of Xiaflex in absolute terms. It reports that 64% of treated joints straightened out, compared with 7% of control group joints. The story relied a bit heavily on a positive patient anecdote in the sidebar lead-in, but it also managed to find a second patient who offered a unique perspective on the treatment. This second patient had successful Xiaflex injections on three fingers and open surgery on a fourth finger which didn’t respond to the drug. In this patient’s view, the drug was preferable to surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking multivitamins may help women without cardiovascular disease to ward off a heart attack, new research shows.

But vitamin pills seemed to have less of an effect in women with heart disease, Dr. Susanne Rautiainen of the Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm, Sweden, and her colleagues found.

The results don’t settle the question of whether it’s actually the vitamin pills that are protective, Rautiainen told Reuters Health via e-mail.

“It is very important to keep in mind that multivitamin users tend be ‘healthier’ in general. They usually smoke less, are more physically active and have a healthier diet,” the researcher wrote. “Even if we have controlled for many of those factors that are associated with a healthy behavior we cannot exclude the possibility that we might measure a healthy lifestyle via multivitamin use.”

In industrialized countries, Rautiainen and her team note in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, multivitamin use is widespread. While conventional wisdom holds that taking vitamins could help prevent heart disease, the researchers add, there’s actually little evidence to back up this claim.

To investigate the relationship between vitamin use and heart disease in women, Rautiainen and her team followed 31,671 women with no history of heart disease and 2,262 women who did have cardiovascular disease for about 10 years. The women ranged in age from 49 to 83 at the study’s outset, and about 60 percent in each group used some type of dietary supplement.

During the observed period, 932 heart attacks occurred among the women without heart disease, while 269 women with existing heart disease had heart attacks.

Among the women who initially had no heart disease and did not take any dietary supplements, 3.4 percent had heart attacks, compared to 2.6 percent of the women who took multivitamins plus other supplements; this translated to a 27 percent lower heart attack risk with vitamins. Among the women with heart disease, 13 percent of the non-supplement-users had heart attacks, compared to 14 percent of women who took multivitamins only, which wasn’t a statistically significant difference (meaning it could have been due to chance).

For the women without heart disease at the study’s outset, taking a multivitamin for less than five years reduced heart attack risk by 18 percent compared with non-users of supplements. Taking vitamins for 10 or more years cut risk by 41 percent.

Similar studies have been done in men, with some confirming the current findings and others contradicting them, Rautiainen said. She concluded: “The question of whether multivitamins are good for you still remains!”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provided the numbers so that readers could calculate the absolute reduction in heart attacks in the group of women taking multivitamins who did not have heart disease (with multivit = 2.6%; without multivit = 3.4%).  However, it is unfortunate that instead of choosing to report that there was  a1% reduction in heart attacks, a decision was made to report it as a 27% reduction in heart attacks.  While a 27% difference sounds pretty exciting, it is a bit misleading.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Three long-awaited studies have shown that mechanically removing a blood clot from a stroke patient’s brain is no more useful than the older treatment of giving an IV dose of a clot-dissolving drug to the whole body.

The results of the clinical trials, presented this week at a meeting in Hawaii, shocked and surprised stroke physicians. Many had already adopted the more aggressive strategy over the past decade.

“For the stroke field, this is a really big deal,” Walter Koroshetz, deputy director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, said of the findings, which were presented over three days at the International Stroke Conference in Hono­lulu.

NINDS paid for two of the trials, one of which cost $27 million. One study took eight years to complete because it was so difficult to enroll patients willing to take the chance that they would be randomly assigned to get the older treatment.

Practitioners hoped that “endovascular treatment,” in which a catheter is threaded into a blocked artery and the clot pulled out, would do for stroke patients what it has done for heart attack patients. In them, going after clots with angioplasty balloons and stents is clearly more effective than giving clot-dissolving drugs through a vein in the arm.

“We did this study with the strong expectation that we would find a positive benefit. We were surprised,” said Joseph P. Broderick of the University of Cincinnati Neuroscience Institute, who headed one of the studies.

His view was echoed by Alfonso Ciccone, a neurologist from Milan who led a clinical trial in Italy: “We were surprised. We wanted the superiority of endovascular treatment.”

Whether the findings will cause physicians to abandon the practice is uncertain.

Insurance companies and Medicare, the health insurer for the elderly, already cover the endovascular procedure. It costs about $23,000 compared with $11,000 for acute stroke treatment using intravenous clot-dissolving drugs, known as thrombolytics.

Further, many practitioners think that newer clot-retrieving devices work better than the ones used in the three trials. Because endovascular procedures were shown to be no more dangerous than IV thrombolytics, physicians may continue to perform them and assume the outcomes can only get better.

“Will it change practice? That’s a good question,” said Koroshetz. “The payers may look at this and wonder if they should continue paying for these procedures. If it gets to that point, then clearly things will change.”

Stroke is the fourth-leading cause of death in the United States. About 800,000 people suffer a stroke each year, and about 130,000 die.

Nearly 90 percent of strokes occur when a clot blocks an artery in the brain, starving the region downstream of blood and oxygen. If flow isn’t restored quickly, brain tissue and the functions it controls — movement, speech, cognition — are damaged or can die.

Over the past 20 years, studies showed that if a person having a stroke gets a thrombolytic drug within three hours of when the symptoms start (4½ hours for certain patients), the process can be reversed and a lifetime of disability avoided. Later than that, little is gained; the brain cells are too damaged to survive. In fact, giving the drugs too late can make matters worse. Uncontrolled bleeding can occur as the dying tissue breaks down.

Early observations suggested that approaching the clot with a catheter and either injecting clot-dissolving drugs into it or snagging it and pulling it out produced better results. In 2004, the FDA began approving use of the catheters in the brain because they had been proved useful elsewhere in the body. The three studies reported this week (which will eventually be published in the New England Journal of Medicine) tested the hypothesis in a rigorous way.

In the largest trial, called IMS III, all patients got the IV clot-dissolving drug tPA within three hours of the start of stroke symptoms. Half were then assigned to get an imaging study that looked at the arteries of the brain to see whether a blockage remained. If it did, the doctors went after it with an endovascular procedure. The other half of the patients got standard treatment, which didn’t include the procedure. Forty-one percent of patients recovered completely in the endovascular group and 39 percent recovered completely in the control group, outcomes that were no different statistically. Death within three months was essentially the same too: 19 percent vs. 22 percent.

In the Italian study, called SYNTHESIS Expansion, 362 stroke patients were randomly assigned to get either IV tPA or endovascular treatment. At three months, 35 percent of the patients in the tPA group were alive without any disabilities, compared with 30 percent of the endovascular group. That also was not significantly different.

The third study, called MR RESCUE, run out of Georgetown University, was more complicated.

It randomly assigned 118 patients less than eight hours out from the start of their strokes to receive standard care or have the clot removed with a catheter device. They also got CAT or MRI scans to see whether they had a large or small amount of brain tissue still alive and salvageable. Removing the clot wasn’t better than standard care in either group — those with a lot or a little brain tissue to lose.

“I think everybody was a little surprised. But mainly disappointed,” said Chelsea S. Kidwell, the Georgetown neurologist who headed the study.

Why endovascular treatment wasn’t better is a mystery that the researchers are struggling to explain. The answer could be in the patients, the device or the timing of the procedure.

In IMS III, patients with large strokes benefited from clot removal more than those with small ones, but there weren’t enough patients in the study to make such a fine distinction with certainty.

“It’s a hint. But it’s not proof,” Broderick said.

In MR RESCUE, only 67 percent of arteries opened up completely after the clot was grabbed. Current devices, which use a mesh stent to hold the clot more firmly, are successful more than 80 percent of the time.

“The stroke community is hopeful that with the new generation devices we will show better outcomes,” Kidwell said.

In the Italian study, patients getting endovascular treatment were 3.75 hours into their stroke — an hour longer than those getting IV treatment, because of the logistics of assembling the procedure team. “That hour could have made a difference. We know that ‘time is brain,’ ” Ciccone said.

The three trials demonstrated how hard it is to test things once they’re in widespread use. History is replete with treatments (such as supplemental oxygen for premature infants) and devices (such as pulmonary artery catheters) used routinely before being shown to be harmful or of little value.

It took from 2004 to 2011 for the MR RESCUE team to recruit the 118 patients in the trial. It had permission to run the study in 30 hospitals but found only 22 that were willing to participate. More than 10 other hospitals were invited to join but declined because their neurologists were already convinced the catheter treatment was better — a view that turns out not to be true.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Strong lead:
“mechanically removing a blood clot from a stroke patient’s brain is no more useful than the older treatment of giving an IV dose of a clot-dissolving drug to the whole body.”
Absolute numbers provided later.  Another strong point in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A low-carbohydrate diet helps people shed as many pounds as a low-fat diet plus the weight-loss drug orlistat does, and the low-carb plan may be better at helping lower blood pressure, researchers report.

Their study, published in the Jan. 25 issue of the Archives of Internal Medicine, found that both diets helped participants lose almost 10 percent of their body weight.

"Weight loss was similar but substantial in both groups we studied, but blood pressure improved more in the low-carb dieters," said study author Dr. William Yancy Jr., an associate professor of medicine at Duke University Medical Center and a staff physician at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Durham, N.C.

"There are options out there. Pick a diet you think you could stick to better, and work with your physician to help you target the right intervention for you," he advised. Two other studies in the same issue of the journal look at the effectiveness of the anti-hypertension DASH diet and a physician-supervised plan.

Obesity is a significant contributor to many illnesses, including heart disease, stroke, diabetes and many cancers, according to an editorial in the same journal by Dr. Robert Kushner of Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine. More than one-third of American adults are obese, and the incidence of obesity has gone up 140 percent over the past decade, Kushner notes.

Yancy's study included 146 overweight or obese adults who were randomly assigned to a low-carbohydrate diet or orlistat with a low-fat diet. The average age of the study participants was 52 and the average body-mass index was 39 (30 and over is considered obese). Orlistat is marketed as Xenical, a prescription medication, and Alli, available over the counter.

The low-carb diet began with a carbohydrate intake of less than 20 grams of carbohydrates a day. The group taking orlistat received a 120-milligram dose of the drug three times daily and got less than 30 percent of their calories from fat.

Over 48 weeks, the low-carbohydrate group lost 9.5 percent of their body weight, while the orlistat group lost 8.5 percent. "Good" cholesterol (HDL) and triglyceride levels improved in both groups. LDL, or "bad" cholesterol, was only reduced in the orlistat group. Insulin and glucose markers improved only in the low-carb group, and there was a significant drop in blood pressure in the low-carb group compared to the orlistat group -- systolic blood pressure (the top number) dropped by 5.9 mm Hg on the low-carb diet vs. 1.5 mm Hg for the orlistat group. Similar reductions were seen for diastolic blood pressure.

Yancy said the blood pressure and cholesterol drops might have been even more impressive if people had stayed on their medications, but as they lost weight and normalized these readings, the doctors took them off blood-pressure and cholesterol drugs.

Two other studies in the same issue of the journal looked at the effects of the DASH diet and a physician-supervised plan.

Researchers compared the DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet alone and in combination with exercise and weight management on blood pressure. The researchers found that combining the DASH diet with weight management and exercise resulted in a 16.1 mm Hg drop in systolic blood pressure compared to 11.2 mm Hg on the DASH diet alone. Additionally, those in the exercise, weight management and DASH plan lost an average of 19 pounds over four months vs. less than one pound for the DASH diet alone.

The third study compared an Internet weight-management program with a physician-managed program for extremely obese people that included a liquid diet component, followed by a structured diet, behavioral counseling and diet medications. The more intensive intervention was more successful with 31 percent losing more than 5 percent of their body weight, compared to just 9 percent of the Internet group.

"There are many paths to weight loss," said registered dietitian Karen Congro, director of the Wellness for Life Program at The Brooklyn Hospital Center in New York City. What often makes the difference in whether or not a diet is successful, she said, is whether or not there's a counseling and support component to the plan.

And, she said, these studies show that you don't necessarily need to get to your "ideal body weight" to make substantial improvements to your health. Losing 5 percent to 10 percent of your body weight can make positive changes in blood pressure, cholesterol and glucose control.

"If it can make you a healthier person, then a diet is a success," said Congro.

For advice on selecting a weight-loss plan, visit the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story gives a reasonable overview of the effects of the two interventions on a variety of different markers associated with health. Although it earns points for noting the absolute reduction in blood pressures and not just providing them as a percentage, it should have provided the weight loss in similar terms of actual pounds or kilograms lost instead of as a percentage of bodyweight.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (AP) -- A medical implant that slowly dissolves into the body could be the answer to long-standing safety concerns with devices used to treat clogged arteries.

But not so fast, say experts.

Abbott Laboratories' newly approved Absorb stent comes with one important caveat: it hasn't yet been shown to be safer than older metal implants.

The Food and Drug Administration approved the device Tuesday for patients with coronary artery disease, the artery-narrowing condition that causes about 370,000 U.S. deaths each year, according to government figures. The new stent is designed to gradually dissolve over three years.

Currently-available stents are permanent, mesh-wire tubes that hold open arteries after a procedure used to clear fatty plaque.

Experts describe Abbott's device as an important step in finding a better approach to treating the leading cause of death in the U.S.

"This is presumably a better technology going forward, at least that's the theory, but it will take years to prove," said Dr. George Vetrovec, professor emeritus at Virginia Commonwealth University. Vetrovec was part of an FDA advisory panel of cardiologists who overwhelmingly endorsed the device in March.

The Absorb stent, already sold in Europe and Asia, is made of a degradable material that's designed to stay intact for one year then break down over the next two years.

Use of metallic stents surged in the early 2000s as a treatment for people who suffered a heart attack or experienced chest pain caused by clogged arteries that restrict blood flow. They are still implanted in about 850,000 U.S. patients annually.

But doctors have scaled back their use due to safety concerns, insurance cost-cutting and evidence that they are overused. Studies in 2007 and 2008 suggested that stented arteries faced a higher risk of blood clots, potentially triggering heart attack a year or more down the road. Results of another five-year study showed that patients who received stents to treat chest pain fared about as well as those treated with drugs.

Amid these concerns, Abbott and others began developing dissolving stents that would slowly melt away like stitches, presumably reducing complications.

In the company study submitted to the FDA, patients who got Absorb fared about as well as those receiving Abbott's older metal stent after one year. But heart-related complications were actually slightly higher with Absorb - 7.8 percent of patients, versus 6.1 percent of patients with the metal stent. That 1.7 percent difference is not considered statistically significant.

Other complications with the new device include allergic reactions, infections and internal bleeding.

Doctors who studied Absorb said it may take several years before its advantages become clear. Long-term safety results aren't expected until 2020.

"We have good theoretical reasons to believe that by getting rid of the stent, and allowing the coronary artery to restore its normal shape, that will prevent many of those late events," said Dr. Gregg Stone, of Columbia University Medical Center, who helped conduct the pivotal trial of Absorb. Stone was not paid by Abbott for his work on the trial.

Some Wall Street analysts are betting that products like Absorb will allow companies to raise prices and boost revenue.

"The key for the stent market will be whether pricing returns to rational levels and the success of the new bio-absorbable stent platforms," states Evercore ISI analyst Vijay Kumar, in an investment note. He says a "perfect storm of events," including safety concerns and the economic downturn led Abbott and competitors Medtronic Inc. and Boston Scientific Corp. to slash prices in recent years.

Stent sales fell roughly 30 percent to $4.1 billion in 2014 from 2006 levels, according to Evercore.

Abbott said it does not disclose the price of its stents. Hospitals often bill $30,000 for stenting procedures, which includes the costs of the stent, medical staff and other equipment and services.

Chicago-based Abbott controls a little more than a third of the U.S. stent market. More than a dozen medical device makers are working on their own dissolving stent technologies.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: A major message of this story, to its credit, is that the benefit of these dissolving stents has not yet been established–there is no data yet. This is important, because the whole point of designing a dissolvable stent is to minimize longer-ranging complications resulting from metal stents.
The story does briefly describe a company-conducted study. It says “patients who got Absorb fared about as well as those receiving Abbott’s older metal stent after one year.” However, we’re not told really what that means in terms of survival and reduced cardiac events.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 10, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Offering your baby a special formula when weaning off breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of the antibodies associated with type 1 diabetes, if you have a family history of the disease, new research suggests.

When Finnish researchers randomly assigned 230 babies at high risk of type 1 diabetes to receive either a regular infant formula, or one that was extensively hydrolyzed -- which means the proteins in the formula are already partially broken down and more readily available for digestion -- they found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula cut the rate of developing diabetes-linked antibodies in the blood by about half.

"We observed that early dietary intervention [with extensively hydrolyzed formula] decreased the frequency of diabetes-associated autoantibodies, which are markers of an ongoing disease process, by about 50 percent by the age of 10 years," said the study's lead author, Dr. Michael Knip, a professor of pediatrics at the Hospital for Children and Adolescents in Helsinki, Finland.

The results of the study were published in the Nov. 11 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease, which means the body's immune system mistakenly turns against healthy insulin-producing cells in the pancreas, instead of a foreign material, such as bacteria. No one knows for sure what causes this process to begin, but some research suggests that the initial autoimmunity may begin early in life.

Five immune system autoantibodies have been linked to type 1 diabetes. Having one of these antibodies isn't a guarantee that you'll develop type 1 diabetes, but it does indicate an increased risk for the disease. People who have two or more type 1 antibodies have between a 50 and 100 percent risk of developing type 1 diabetes, according to background information in the study.

Previous research has suggested that breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of these antibodies, possibly because breastfeeding delays the introduction of infant formula, which contains complex proteins. Formula may somehow trigger the development of autoantibodies as these proteins are broken down for digestion.

The current study was randomized and double-blind (meaning neither the parents nor the researchers knew who was getting what), and compared regular baby formula to one that was made easier for babies to digest because the proteins were broken down (extensively hydrolyzed).

Babies were offered the formula during the first 6 to 8 months of life, any time breastfeeding wasn't available. They were then followed till they were about 10 years old, according to the study.

After adjusting the data to try to account for the duration of exposure to one of the study formulas, the researchers found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula reduced the risk of having one diabetes autoantibody by 49 percent, and the risk of having two or more autoantibodies by 53 percent.

How the highly hydrolyzed formula might reduce the risk of developing diabetes-predictive antibodies is unknown, but the researchers speculated that it might contribute to reduced gut permeability or changes in gut microflora, among other things.

According to Knip, the take-home message from the study is that "it is possible to reduce considerably the initiation of the diabetes disease process in at-risk children in a simple and safe way: weaning to an extensively hydrolyzed formula." He added that, "based on the current results, we think that it is justified to recommend weaning to a highly hydrolyzed formula for babies in families with a member affected by type 1 diabetes."

Not everyone agreed with that notion, however.

"The data in this study is not sufficiently strong to support recommending any changes for parents," said the author of an accompanying editorial, Dr. David Harlan, co-director of the Diabetes Center of Excellence at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center in Worcester.

"I think the authors designed this study to address their hypothesis that proteins present in non-hydrolyzed formula might incite an immune response, and by breaking them down, you might eliminate the immune response. But, there are quite a few steps between that and how the immune system or diabetes are triggered," added Harlan's editorial co-author, Dr. Mary Lee, a professor of pediatrics and cell biology and chief of the pediatric endocrine division at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center.

"I think this is an important study because we need to understand what causes type 1 diabetes," said Harlan, who added the caveat: "In this study, while there is an apparent signal, there are also some causes for withholding complete faith in the conclusion that the formula caused diabetes."

Both Lee and Harlan stressed that there is currently no definitive evidence to suggest that the use of standard cow's milk formulas leads to an increased incidence of diabetes compared to breastfeeding. The hydrolyzed formula is also considerably more expensive than standard formula, experts point out.

Learn more about type 1 diabetes from the American Diabetes Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’ve already penalized the story in “evidence” above for not giving the absolute risk reduction, so we won’t do it again here. The story reports on a study which showed about 50% fewer diabetes antibodies in at-risk children who were fed special hydrogized infant formula. But 50% of what?  This may or may not translate into fewer cases of childhood diabetes. If there are other side effects or harms associated with using hydrolyzed versus standard formula, they are not described.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Scientists in Canada and Sweden have used laboratory-made biosynthetic corneas to restore vision to patients in a small human trial, and shown for the first time that they can help to repair damaged eye tissue.

The scientists, whose work was published Wednesday in the Science Translational Medicine journal, said their findings offered hope for the millions of people who go blind each year because of a worldwide shortage of corneas for donation. “This study ... is the first to show that an artificially fabricated cornea can integrate with the human eye and stimulate regeneration,” said May Griffith of the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, who led the study.

“With further research, this approach could help restore sight to millions of people who are waiting for a donated human cornea for transplantation.”

The cornea is a tiny piece of transparent, film-like tissue that covers the surface of our eyes. Made from parallel strands of the protein collagen, it refracts light to focus images on the retina.

Although the fragile film is easily destroyed by trauma or infection, replacement human corneas can be used to restore vision, although this depends on a steady supply of donors.

A team led by Griffith and Per Fagerholm, an ophthalmology professor and eye surgeon at Linkoping University in Sweden, conducted the study by removing diseased tissue from the corneas of 10 patients and replacing them with biosynthetic implants designed to mimic a normal human cornea.

For the process they used recombinant human collagen, a substance synthesized in the laboratory to mimic human tissue and supplied by the San Francisco biotech firm FibroGen Inc.

The patients were monitored for two years after surgery. The researchers found that, eventually, the cells and nerves from nine of the 10 patients regrew completely and packed themselves into the implant, resulting in a kind of “regenerated” cornea that looked and functioned like normal, healthy eye tissue.

The biosynthetic corneas also became sensitive to touch and the treated eyes began producing normal tears, the researchers said. Vision improved in six of the 10 patients.

After the patients were also fitted with contact lenses, which is common after corneal transplants, their vision was comparable with that of patients who undergo regular human corneal tissue transplants.

“The results were pretty encouraging and there is great potential here,” Fagerholm said in a telephone interview.

Loss of vision due to corneal disease or trauma affects over 10 million people a year, but lack of access to donor tissue limits the number of transplants, particularly in poorer countries.

In the United States, an estimated 42,000 corneal grafts a year are performed using tissue from posthumous donors, but there are sometimes problems with rejection and experts say failure rates are significant.

Fagerholm said the patients in this trial had no problems with rejection and did not need long-term immune suppression drugs to help their bodies accept the corneas.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Like the other two stories reviewed, this reporter made the smart choice of avoiding the use of percentages in explaining the benefits. It would have been easy to say that 60% of the patients had improved vision, which sounds more impressive than six of the 10. More numbers and more context would have been ideal, but, given the size of the study, the amount of explanation of the potential benefits is adequate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But it's not clear that women concerned strictly about breast cancer will line up for this drug, either. A closer look at the recent study suggests that raloxifene's advantages may not be as great as the government announcement implied. Some cancer experts were less than enthusiastic, and patient advocates were downright skeptical.

"The outcome of the study is not as clear cut as we might have hoped for," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society. "It will take some time for experts to review the data to determine which of the two treatments is preferable."

Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, said the new study had been hyped adding, "We have many concerns about it on many levels."

Another group, Breast Cancer Action, said, "We are very concerned that treating risk as a medical condition will result in substituting one disease for another."

The study included nearly 20,000 women 35 and older who were past menopause and had an increased risk of developing breast cancer. To qualify, their risk had to be at least that of an average 60- to 64-year-old woman — a 1.66 percent chance of getting the disease within 5 years. On average, the participants actually had more than twice that risk, around 4 percent, meaning that 40 of 1,000 would be affected. (Women can quickly figure out their own risk at the Web site cancer.gov/bcrisktool).

Half the participants took one drug, and half the other for about five years. Their rates of invasive breast cancer were the same, 163 cases for tamoxifen and 167 for raloxifene — about half as many as would have been expected without treatment.

So raloxifene looked just as good as tamoxifen. Even better news, the cancer institute said, was that those taking raloxifene "had 36 percent fewer uterine cancers and 29 percent fewer blood clots." Based on those findings, it is easy to see why raloxifene was declared the winner.

But numbers can be tricky. Expressed as percentages, the differences between the drugs for uterine cancer and blood clots sound large.

"But the actual numbers are small," Dr. Lichtenfeld said.

Among women taking tamoxifen in the study, 36 of 4,732 got uterine cancer, while for raloxifene the number was 23 of 4,712. (Women who had had hysterectomies were not counted.) As for blood clots, there were 141 in the 9,726 women on tamoxifen and 100 in the 9,745 on raloxifene

"Women who took raloxifene did get uterine cancer, and they did have blood clots," Dr. Lichtenfeld said. "Any suggestion that tamoxifen is the only drug saddled with getting these diseases is not accurate."

More important, the difference between the numbers of side effects was not statistically significant, meaning that it could have occurred by chance and that the drugs could be similar or even the same. That fact was not stated in the news release, and the researchers mentioned it only briefly during the news conference, calling the results "borderline" significant.

Many researchers say that results don't count unless they pass the statistical tests. But Dr. Leslie Ford, an associate director for clinical research at the cancer institute, said that the differences could not be ignored because they came so near to being significant. Had the study gone on a little longer, they might have crossed the line, she said.

Another issue is that the message from the cancer institute seemed to play down a shortcoming of raloxifene that cancer doctors consider important. The institute emphasized that raloxifene lowered the risk of "invasive" breast cancer, tumors that have penetrated surrounding tissue and that have the potential to spread and turn deadly.

But raloxifene did not prevent two other serious breast conditions, whereas tamoxifen did reduce their risk by 50 percent. Those conditions, sometimes called noninvasive breast cancers, are L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., for lobular and ductal carcinomas in situ. Lobular growths increase the likelihood of invasive cancer, and ductal ones can become invasive. D.C.I.S. is often treated like breast cancer, with surgery and radiation.

"D.C.I.S. is not inconsequential," said Dr. Lichtenfeld, adding that it leads some women to have both breasts removed. Since tamoxifen lowers the risks of both invasive and noninvasive tumors, he said, it "has a broader spectrum of activity against breast cancer."

Dr. Larry Norton, a breast cancer expert at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said he also found it worrisome that raloxifene did not share tamoxifen's ability to prevent the noninvasive growths.

When it came to L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., the difference between the two drugs was statistically significant, meaning it was likely to be real and not due to chance. Yet that distinction was not pointed out in the news release, and, Dr. Lichtenfeld noted, it was "de-emphasized" during the news conference.

But Dr. Ford of the cancer institute said raloxifene's ability to prevent invasive cancers was more important.

"Invasive cancer is what kills you," she said, adding that only about 10 percent of D.C.I.S. turn invasive, and that those that do can be treated. She called it "twisted logic" to dwell on tamoxifen's superior ability to prevent the noninvasive cancers because, she said, "We're not preventing noninvasive cancers because nobody's taking tamoxifen anyway."

Given that there are shades of gray and room for debate about these findings, some critics questioned the way they were made public.

The results were announced by the cancer institute in a news release and a telephone conference for news reporters. Contrary to usual practice, the complete data had not yet been revealed to scientists or published in a medical journal, though the institute said it intended to do so. Officials said they announced the findings before publishing them because they had implications for public health.

Ms. Visco said, "How is it ethical to do that, to make this much hype around something that is not a health emergency, and you can't check their data?"

She said she also worried that the announcement might have left the impression that the drugs could prevent breast cancer entirely.

"It's not prevention," Ms. Visco said. "It's risk reduction, short term, for a subset of women we cannot identify."

The concern is that many women would have to take tamoxifen or raloxifene for a few to benefit. In 1,000 high-risk women like those in the study, for instance, without treatment 40 would be expected to develop invasive breast cancer over the next five years. If all 1,000 were treated, only 20 cases would occur.

But since there is no way to predict who will actually get cancer, everyone has to be treated, meaning that 980 will be exposed to the drug's risks but will get no cancer benefit.

"The hope is that at some point we'll be able to pinpoint who really is at high risk of breast cancer and then we'll know what to do," Ms. Visco said. "But we're not anywhere near there."

In the meantime, Dr. Ford said, at least tamoxifen and raloxifene give women at risk the chance to do something. She compared the drugs to statins and blood pressure drugs, which people take even though they feel well, to lower their risks of heart attacks and strokes. But others argue that heart attacks are far more common than breast cancer, and the drugs to prevent them much safer.

To Dr. Norton, the most important conclusion to be drawn from the study is that more research on breast cancer prevention is needed. He said the next step should be to test another class of drugs called aromatase inhibitors, already in use to treat breast cancer, to see if they can do better at risk reduction than tamoxifen or raloxifene.

"Until we have zero cancer," he said, "I'm not going to make any claims about a great advance."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a very good job of quantifying the benefits of raloxifene compared to tamoxifen. Not only did the story provide absolute numbers in quantifying the benefit, but it also explained why presenting only relative risk reductions can be deceiving.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
They say they boosted the effectiveness in melanoma patients by carefully selecting and cloning T cells from patients' blood.

The approach outlined in the new study by researchers from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle identifies several ways to make it better, said Dr. Cassian Yee, the study's senior author. The key is to identify specific cancer-fighting cells already circulating in the blood of patients and make thousands of copies of them in the lab.

Immunotherapy is one of medicine's most promising — and most problematic — approaches to cancer treatment. It aims to charge up the patient's immune system to attack cancer cells and halt their out-of-control growth.

The study, published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academies of Science, contributes to hopes that a tumor-fighting strategy called immunotherapy can slow, halt or even reverse the growth of a range of cancers — and do so with fewer dangerous side effects.

In a bid to make cancer immunotherapy more effective, researchers report they have succeeded in halting the progress of aggressive melanoma in its tracks — at least briefly — in seven patients treated with an army of cloned cancer-fighting immune cells. In one of those patients, the treatment resulted in complete remission of his metastatic melanoma and evidence that his immune system stands ready to fight any return of the cancer after three years.

This type of "adoptive immunotherapy" could be effective against a wide range of cancers, Yee said. His research group is making plans to try the technique on patients with advanced ovarian cancer and sarcomas — rare tumors that arise from connective tissue in bones and muscle.

Several independent researchers said the study results were promising. But they also noted that the trial involved only 11 patients and said the therapy was less effective than in other published trials.

"Someday, cell-based therapy will be mainstream in cancer therapy," said Dr. Jeff Miller of the University of Minnesota's cell therapy core laboratory. "Each article that shows clinical activity is giving us a piece of the puzzle" that will make it safer and more effective, he said.

Immunotherapy usually starts with clinicians harvesting immune system cells called T cells that have attached themselves to a tumor in an effort to attack. They then coax the cells to multiply, either in the lab or in the body, and let them loose in the bloodstream so they can attack cancer wherever they find it.

Yee's team tried to do this more precisely. The researchers hoped that by choosing T cells more selectively and cloning only those judged most likely to vanquish their foe, the treatment would be more effective. Sorting through the body's vast and diverse population of T cells to select just the right ones is a painstaking process. But Yee bet that the extra effort would pay off with better results and fewer side effects.

Researchers drew blood from patients and scoured it to find the rare type of immune cell — a melanoma-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte cell — that specifically homes in on proteins expressed by the cancer. Then they put their harvest — as few as a few hundred cells — into a test tube and cloned them, creating millions. The last step was to infuse the resulting army of cancer-fighting clones back into the patient.

In six of the 11 patients in the trial, the melanoma stopped progressing for 12 to 19 weeks. Another patient was declared in remission because his cancer ceased to spread and, after several months, disappeared altogether. Three years later, researchers continue to detect the presence of the cloned cells they infused into the patient, 61-year-old high school history teacher Gardiner Vinnedge of North Bend, Wash.

For six years, Vinnedge endured painful rounds of chemotherapy, only to have his melanoma return. The immunotherapy allowed him to return to work three weeks after treatments began. The only side effect, he said, was a raging rash that lasted for three days.

"My back, my legs were just covered with a hot red rash," Vinnedge said. "It meant the treatment was working — the war was on between my T cells and the melanin in my skin." Now he says he is optimistic he may live to see retirement age, though he's not sure he'll ever stop teaching.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt for reporting:
“In six of the 11 patients in the trial, the melanoma stopped progressing for 12 to 19 weeks. Another patient was declared in remission because his cancer ceased to spread and, after several months, disappeared altogether. Three years later, researchers continue to detect the presence of the cloned cells they infused into the patient”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A daily vitamin D supplement may help young men enjoy more sick-free days during cold and flu season, a small study suggests.

Vitamin D has been the subject of much research of late, with studies linking low vitamin D levels in the blood to higher risks of type 1 diabetes and severe asthma attacks in children and, in adults, heart disease, certain cancers and depression.

But whether vitamin D is the reason for the excess risks — and whether taking supplements can curb those risks — has yet to be shown.

The body naturally synthesizes vitamin D when the skin is exposed to sunlight. Because rates of vitamin D insufficiency rise during the winter in many parts of the world, researchers have been interested in whether the vitamin might play a role in people’s susceptibility to colds, flu and other respiratory infections.

Some past research has indeed found that people with relatively lower vitamin D levels in their blood tend to have higher rates of respiratory infections than those with higher levels of the vitamin, said Dr. Ilkka Laaksi of the University of Tampere in Finland, the lead researcher on the new study.

Along with that evidence, recent lab research has shown that vitamin D may play an “important role” in the body’s immune defenses against respiratory pathogens, Laaksi wrote in an email to Reuters Health.

“However,” the researcher said, “there is a lack of clinical studies of the effect of vitamin D supplementation for preventing respiratory infections.”

For the current study, Laaksi’s team randomly assigned 164 male military recruits to take either 400 international units (IU) of vitamin D or inactive placebo pills every day for six months — from October to March, covering the months when people’s vitamin D stores typically decline and when respiratory infections typically peak.

At the end of the study, the researchers found no clear difference between the two groups in the average number of days missed from duty due to a respiratory infection — which included bronchitis, sinus infections, pneumonia, ear infections and sore throat.

On average, men who took vitamin D missed about two days from duty because of a respiratory infection, compared with three days in the placebo group. That difference was not significant in statistical terms.

However, men in the vitamin D group were more likely to have no days missed from work due to a respiratory illness.

Overall, 51 percent remained “healthy” throughout the six-month study, versus 36 percent of the placebo group, the researchers report.

The findings, Laaksi said, offer “some evidence” of a benefit from vitamin D against respiratory infections.

Still, the extent of the benefit was not clear. While recruits in the vitamin group were more likely to have no days missed from duty, they were no less likely to report having cold-like symptoms at some point during the study period.

Moreover, recent studies on the usefulness of vitamin D for warding off respiratory ills have come to conflicting conclusions.

A study of Japanese schoolchildren published earlier this year found that those given 1,200 IU of vitamin D each day during cold and flu season were less likely to contract influenza A. Of 167 children given the supplement, 18 developed the flu, compared with 31 of 167 children given placebo pills.

On the other hand, a recent study of 162 adults found that those who took 2,000 IU of vitamin D everyday for 12 weeks were no less likely to develop respiratory infections than those given placebo pills.

Laaksi said that larger clinical trials looking at different doses of vitamin D are still needed before the vitamin can be recommended for curbing the risk of respiratory infections.

In the U.S., health officials recommend that adults up to the age of 50 get 200 IU of vitamin D each day, while older adults should get 400 to 600 IU. The upper limit is currently set at 2,000 IU per day; higher intakes may raise the risks of side effects.

Symptoms of vitamin D toxicity are often vague and include nausea, vomiting, constipation, poor appetite and weight loss. Excessive vitamin D in the blood can also raise blood pressure or trigger heart rhythm abnormalities.

Some researchers believe that people need more vitamin D than is currently recommended, and that intakes above 2,000 IU per day are safe. However, exactly what the optimal vitamin D intake might be remains under debate.

Food sources of vitamin D include milk, breakfast cereals and orange juice fortified with vitamin D, as well as some fatty fish, like salmon and mackerel. Experts generally recommend vitamin pills for people who do not get enough of the vitamin from food.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



As noted above, the body of the story makes clear that the results of this trial did not show a clear benefit from taking 400 IU daily. However, the headline and lead sentence both state that vitamin D might fight colds, something this trial failed to clearly demonstrate. We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt for what’s in the middle, not at the top. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) The first large head-to-head comparison of two opioid addiction medications found that, although they were equally effective in getting people off of high levels of opioids, users had a significantly more difficult time starting a regimen of naltrexone, compared with buprenorphine.

Buprenorphine is commonly known by the the brand name Suboxone, and naltrexone is sold under the brand name Vivitrol.

The study, published Tuesday in the Lancet , looked at 570 patients with opioid addiction at eight inpatient treatment centers across the country for 24 weeks. Half of the group was assigned to naltrexone and the other half to bupenorphine.

Six percent of those enlisted to use buprenorphine were unable to start their treatment, whereas 28% of those assigned to naltrexone dropped out before starting the therapy.

That hurdle is attributed to the fact that in order to start naltrexone, a person has to have detoxed or not used opioids for several days, whereas a user can transition from opioids to buprenorphine seamlessly. "If you're currently opiate-dependent ... (naltrexone) takes more work," said Dr. Joshua Lee , the lead author of the study, who studies opioid addiction behavior and treatment at New York University.

Once on either of the medications, people fared equally well. "They tend to stay on medications about the same rate. They report good outcomes, avoiding heroin use," Lee said. However, both groups also reported similar challenges staying with the regimens: Just 40% of patients still used the drugs after 24 weeks.

What was important, Lee said, was for opioid addicts as well as treatment providers to understand that addiction isn't one-size-fits-all. "Much like you would expect if the doctor told you 'you have cancer' or 'you have diabetes,' then there are different ways you could pursue treatment," he said.

Public health experts consider medicated-assisted treatment the gold standard of opioid addiction treatment. It combines medication with counseling to help addicts wean off of high opioid use. Public health experts say it can help solve the staggering opioid overdose epidemic.

Methadone may be the best-known form of medicated-assisted treatment, but it requires patients to have the drug administered daily in a clinic. Two other options have become increasingly popular: buprenorphine, which can be taken outside a clinic, and naltrexone, which is administered monthly.

Legally prescribed opioid drugs like oxycodone and hydrocodone work in the same manner as illicit drugs like heroin. They all chemically bind to the opioid receptors in the brain to help dull pain and, in some people, provide euphoria.

The body also produces natural opioids, but the more narcotics a person takes, the less opioids the body naturally produces. Without the opioids, people can go into withdrawal, all contributing to a cycle of dependency.

"To feel normal, they need opiates on those receptors," Banta-Green said. Buprenorphine and methadone, which are opioids, work by reducing people's cravings. "They bind to prevent withdrawal, giving some opiate effect," he said.

On the other hand, naltrexone works by chemically blocking those receptors, which is why someone needs to detox before starting the regimen. "You're not getting an opiate effect," Banta-Green explained.

If a person takes an opioid while on naltrexone, it is unlikely they will feel any opioid sensation. If a person is using opioids and takes naltrexone, it can induce a feeling of withdrawal. "It addresses craving in a different way. The person knows they can't use," he said.

So, for example, a person who is actively using opioids and can't manage the withdrawals may be better suited for buprenorphine, while someone coming from a facility where he or she has detoxed and who doesn't want to use opioids may be better suited for naltrexone.

What is key, said Dr. Miriam Komaromy, is meeting a patient where they are and understanding what best meets their needs.

Addiction "is an incredibly deadly disease," said Komaromy, an addiction specialist at the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center. And as public policymakers, prisons and drug courts play a larger role in treating addiction, public health experts like Komaromy argue that it is imperative to look at "evidence-based ways instead of having a moralistic view."

Banta-Green says he talks to a lot of judges who are trying to understand addiction treatment. "I say this a lot to judges: You can't just offer one medication. Just like any other medication, some people are going to feel right with one as opposed to the other."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story describes duration of staying on the treatments and rates of relapse, reporting that the rates are roughly equal. The story is also clear that that those randomized to Vivitrol did not do nearly as well as those randomized to Suboxone–because over a quarter did not tolerate or receive the first dose of Vivitrol. If a person is hardy enough to tolerate detoxing in preparation for Vivitrol, then their likelihood of abstaining from opioids may be similar to those getting Suboxone (a little less than half of all people in the trial were still taking the drugs after six months).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- An intrauterine device that releases a progestin hormone may be an effective treatment for younger women with early-stage uterine cancer, Italian researchers report.

By delaying a total hysterectomy, which is the usual treatment for endometrial cancer, the IUD allows women to remain fertile and possibly to have families, according to the study published online Wednesday in Annals of Oncology, the monthly journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology.

"The study was done to see if this was a viable option for younger women who want to preserve fertility," said Dr. Jamie Bakkum-Gamez, senior associate consultant in the division of gynecologic surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. "We see it as buying more time to have a family and, once that's completed, to have a hysterectomy."

"It's a very important trial," added Dr. Angeles Alvarez Secord, associate professor of gynecologic oncology at Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center in Durham, N.C. "I've been using [the IUD] clinically for several years now for this purpose in patients who desire future fertility and some patients who cannot undergo surgery or who are at high risk for surgical complications. It's a fantastic alternative to treat patients with these diseases, and this study will help doctors when they discuss [treatment options] with patients."

Bakkum-Gomez has also used the method in her practice and is conducting a study of the IUD, which was originally designed as a contraceptive device, for this purpose.

About 3 percent to 5 percent of women who get endometrial cancer, which affects the womb lining, are under the age of 40 and will lose their fertility if they undergo a hysterectomy. The majority of these women have not yet had children, according to background information in the article.

Although the IUD is not yet approved to treat endometrial cancer, it is approved and widely used to treat endometriosis and abnormal uterine bleeding.

While hysterectomy or removal of the uterus is the accepted treatment for this kind of cancer, doctors have been using the hormone in oral form for the past 20 years, but only for "well-selected groups of women," said Dr. Elizabeth Poynor, a gynecologic oncologist and pelvic surgeon with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Well selected," in this case, means those with early-stage disease who want to maintain their fertility, much like the group in this trial.

Oral hormone treatment to slow down the cancer's growth is a systemic therapy, however, and can have adverse side effects such as skin rashes, nausea and vomiting, headaches and abnormal uterine bleeding, according to background material accompanying the study.

The theoretical -- but still unproven -- advantage to this new IUD method, Poynor said, is that "there is a lower risk of systemic side effects . . . and that you may be giving higher doses of the drug directly into the uterus."

The authors followed 20 Italian patients from January 1996 to June 2009 with atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH), which often precedes the cancer, and 14 women with early-stage endometrial cancer confined to the inner layer of the womb.

Participants -- all of whom were between ages 20 and 40 -- had an IUD known as Mirena, which released levonorgestrel, inserted for a year. They also received monthly injections of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which halts estrogen production, for six months.

The IUD was removed at the end of the year if there was no evidence of cancer.

Ninety-five percent of women with AEH initially saw their lesions disappear completely, while 57.1 percent of women with early-stage cancer also responded completely to the treatment. (The disease progressed in one of the women with AEH and four of the women with early-stage cancer.)

Of the patients with AEH, four later relapsed and required further treatment; of the women with early-stage cancer, two who had an initial complete response relapsed. However, all the women were alive and seemingly cancer-free by the end of the study after further treatment (either the IUD and GnRH treatment or a hysterectomy), the study reported.

"They did show a higher recurrence or progression rate with endometrial cancer than with AEH and that is consistent with other data," said Bakkum-Gamez, who added that the IUD method would not be appropriate for later-stage cancers, which tend to be more aggressive.

No adverse effects from treatment were noted, according to the researchers, who declared no conflicts of interest.

In background material, the researchers stated the progestin-releasing IUD should be effective in treating AEH and also early endometrial cancer, as long as those patients were evaluated with laparoscopy, ultrasound and MRI to make sure their cancer had not spread and there was no simultaneous ovarian cancer.

Nine of the women in the study successfully delivered babies.

The National Cancer Institute has more on endometrial cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantifies the benefits of the progestin IUD in several ways.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Patients who have robot-assisted surgeries on their kidneys or prostate have shorter hospital stays and a lower risk of having a blood transfusion or dying — but the bill is significantly higher, a study found.

The analysis, which appeared in the Journal of Urology, compared increasingly common robotic surgery with two other techniques for the same surgery and found that direct costs can be up to several thousand dollars higher for the robotic type.

Touted as less invasive and more efficient, robotic surgeries typically use a laparoscopic or “keyhold surgery” approach, in which tools and a tiny video camera are inserted into the body through one or two small incisions.

Robotic surgery replaces a surgeon’s hands with ultra-precise tools at the ends of mechanical arms, all operated by the surgeon from a console.

“I think the take home message is that robotic (surgery), looking at our study, had certain beneficial outcomes compared to open and laparoscopic procedures,” said study leader Jim Hu at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

Hu and his team analyzed surgery data from a national government database to see if the costlier robotic surgeries were cost effective with extra benefits over older techniques.

During the last three months of 2008 — the most recent data available that allowed a comparison among robotic, open and laparoscopic surgeries — more than half of all prostate removals involved robot-assisted surgery.

About three percent of prostate patients had standard laparoscopic surgery and 44 percent had open surgery. Open and laparoscopic surgeries were still more common than robotic surgeries for kidney repairs and removals.

Among patients who had their prostate removed, none died from laparoscopic or robotic surgery, whereas two out of every 1,000 died after the open procedure.

About five percent of the men who had open surgery needed a blood transfusion, compared to less than two percent of men who had robot-assisted surgery. The open-surgery group also stayed in the hospital about one day longer than the robotic group.

The results were similar for people who had kidneys removed.

The trade-off was the cost, with robotic prostate removal costing about $10,000 on average, roughly $700 more than laparoscopic surgery and $1,100 more than open surgery.

For kidney removal, robotic surgery cost $13,900, which was $2,700 more than laparoscopic and $1,300 more than open surgery.

David Penson, a surgeon at Vanderbilt University Medical Center who was not part of the study, said more consideration should have been given to the state of patients afterwards. Emphasis should be lmited on procedure, he said, as opposed to surgical skill.

“Years ago, this was thought to be the be-all-end-all operation, particularly with prostate surgery. We were going to get patients out of the hospital quicker, have better potency and incontinence outcomes,” he told Reuters Health.

"And the reality of it is that... there are some benefits -- but not as much as we had hoped." SOURCE: bit.ly/zZIYa1
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did an adequate job quantifying the operative mortality, blood transfusion and length-of-stay rates among the three groups studied. (Unfortunately, it did so inconsistently – sometimes giving data for all 3 types of surgery, sometimes providing results for only 2 surgical approaches.)
We’ll give it a satisfactory score here.
But are these the outcomes that really matter?  That’s something we address in the “Evidence” criterion below.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Warfarin is a blood thinner that is commonly prescribed to patients to prevent life-threatening blood clots. Despite its longtime use, warfarin remains tricky to dose because a person's genetic makeup influences how the drug is processed in the body. Too much warfarin can cause internal bleeding; too little warfarin fails to prevent blood clots.

Now, a new study led by Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis shows that dosing warfarin (Coumadin and others) is safer -- producing fewer adverse events such as hemorrhage -- when key elements of a patient's genetic makeup are considered.

The research, published Sept. 26 in the Journal of the American Medical Association, reports results from the clinical trial known as GIFT (Genetics Informatics Trial of Warfarin to Prevent Deep Venous Thrombosis).

"Physicians have been prescribing warfarin since the Eisenhower administration," said first author Brian F. Gage, MD, a professor of medicine at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. "It's a widely used anticoagulant, but it causes more major adverse events than any other oral drug. Thousands of patients end up in the emergency department or hospital because of warfarin-induced bleeding. But we continue to prescribe it because it is highly effective, reversible and inexpensive. So our goal is to make warfarin safer. GIFT showed that precision-medicine based on clinical factors and three genes improves the safety of initiating warfarin therapy."

Patients in the trial were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group received warfarin dosing based on standard factors such as age, height and weight; the second group was dosed based on these clinical factors plus genetic variants. Participating sites in the trial included Washington University School of Medicine, Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, Intermountain Healthcare, University of Utah, and Rush University Medical Center.

Of the 789 patients who were dosed in the traditional manner, 116 experienced at least one adverse event (14.7 percent). Of the 808 patients whose warfarin dosing was guided by genetic testing, 87 experienced an adverse event (10.8 percent). Compared with patients receiving traditional warfarin dosing, patients dosed with the genetic approach had a 27 percent reduction in adverse events, which was statistically different. The adverse events were bleeding, formation of blood clots in the veins and warfarin overdoses. No patient died during the trial.

Earlier studies looking at whether genetic testing could improve warfarin dosing had produced conflicting results. However, these studies were smaller and considered fewer genes than GIFT. GIFT enrolled 1,600 patients age 65 and older at high risk of blood clots because they underwent hip- or knee-replacement surgeries.

Unlike prior studies, GIFT took into account genetic variants in three genes for 11 days of warfarin therapy. Genetic variants were assessed on a commercial platform called GenMarkDx. Variants in one gene affect vitamin K recycling. Variants in another gene affect warfarin sensitivity. Variants in the third gene alter warfarin metabolism in the liver and can cause an overdose if the dose is not adjusted soon enough.

"There are additional genetic variants that may help to guide warfarin dosing, especially among patients with African ancestry," Gage said. In the future, we hope to quantify how these variants affect warfarin."

Gage also noted how health-care costs relate to dosing warfarin in a genetically guided manner. "Although genetic testing is more expensive than clinical dosing, the cost is falling," he said. "In our study, we estimated that genetic testing costs less than $200 per person, which is less than one month of a newer anticoagulant."

This work was supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers R01HL097036 and UL1TR000448; the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, grant number CAG-00400N; and GenMarkDx, which supplied instrumentation.

Gage BF, Bass AR, Lin H, Woller SC, Stevens SM, Al-Hammadi N, Li J, Rodriguez Jr. T, Miller JP, McMillin GA, Pendleton RC, Jaffer AK, King CR, DeVore B, Porche-Sorbet R, Napoli L, Merritt K, Thompson AM, Hyun G, Anderson JL, Hollomon W, Barrack RL, Nunley RM, Moskowitz G, Davila-Roman V and Eby CS for the GIFT investigators. Effect of genotype-guided warfarin dosing on clinical events and anticoagulation control among patients undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty: the GIFT randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. Sept. 26, 2017.

Washington University School of Medicine's 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked seventh in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release gives results in both actual numbers of patients and the percentage of reduction of adverse events in those given the genetic test and a comparison group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using a high sensitivity blood test [1], researchers have identified the optimal level of a protein called troponin that could rule out a diagnosis of heart attack for two-thirds of people attending the emergency department, according to new research published in The Lancet. Using this threshold in routine practice could potentially double the number of patients suitable for immediate discharge directly from the emergency department, say the authors.

"Until now there were no quick ways to rule out a heart attack within the emergency department," explains lead author Dr Anoop Shah from the University of Edinburgh in the UK. "We have identified a cardiac troponin concentration (less than 5 nanograms per deciliter; <5 ng/L) below which patients are at very low risk of heart attack either during the admission or in the ensuing 30 days. These patients are therefore potentially suitable for immediate and safe discharge from the emergency department. These findings could dramatically reduce unnecessary hospital admissions and provide substantial cost savings for healthcare providers."[2]

One of the most common causes of hospitalisation worldwide is acute chest pain. In the UK alone, chest pain is responsible for around 1 million visits to the emergency department every year. International guidelines recommend that individuals presenting with chest pain are admitted to hospital for testing for very high levels of troponin (above the 99th percentile)--a sign that a heart attack has occurred. Current approaches for assessing patients with suspected heart attacks either require admission into hospital or lengthy stays in the emergency department for repeat testing. Until now, whether new high-sensitivity cardiac troponin tests could identify very low-risk patients who may be suitable for immediate and safe discharge from the emergency department was unknown.

The test used in this study is more sensitive than the standard version and can detect far lower levels of troponin in the blood. Using this test, troponin levels were measured in over 6000 patients with chest pain admitted to four hospitals in Scotland and the USA. Dr Shah and colleagues prospectively evaluated the negative predictive value (the probability that patients were not at risk) of heart attack or subsequent death from a heart condition after 30 days for a range of troponin concentrations.

The researchers found that a troponin threshold of <5 ng/L at presentation identified around two-thirds (61%) of patients at very low risk of heart attack and may have been eligible for early, safe discharge--with a high negative predictive value of 99.6%. This high negative predictive value persisted irrespective of age, sex, cardiovascular risk factors, or prior cardiovascular disease. At one year, these patients had a three times lower risk of heart attack and cardiac death than those who had troponin levels 5 ng/L or higher.

According to Dr Shah, "Over the last two decades the number of hospital admissions due to chest pain has tripled. The overwhelming majority of these patients do not have a heart attack. This study shows that low plasma cardiac troponin concentrations at presentation identify up to two-thirds of patients who are at very low risk of heart attack and could be safely discharged from the Emergency Department. Use of this approach is likely to have major benefits for both patients and healthcare providers."[2]

Writing in a linked Comment, Louise Cullen and William Parsonage from the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Queensland, Australia, and Martin Than from Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand, say, "The ultimate validation for the safety and efficacy of discharging patients with cardiac troponin concentrations less than 5 ng/L will be the report of clinical outcomes after this threshold is implemented in routine clinical practice...Finally, what further assessment, if any, is needed for those patients identified as low risk and suitable for early discharge? Trials are needed to assess the safety and effectiveness of clinical pathways that involve no further testing for such patients."

This study was funded by the British Heart Foundation and Chief Scientists Office (Scotland).

[1] A troponin test measures the level of troponin proteins in the blood. These proteins are released when the heart muscle has been damaged, like during a heart attack. The more damage there is to the heart, the greater the amount of troponin there will be in the blood. Even a slight increase in the troponin level will often mean there has been some damage to the heart. Very high levels of troponin are a sign that a heart attack has occurred.

[2] Quotes direct from author and cannot be found in text of Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This is a mixed bag. On the one hand, the news release refers to the high negative predictive value of the test (99.6%), which suggests that the test is very good at finding those who aren’t at risk of a heart attack or death over the next 30 days. But it also relies on relative risk comparisons, and does not offer data in absolute terms about risks of heart attack or cardiac death in those with various ranges of troponin levels. It refers to patients “at very low risk” of a heart attack in the next 30 days, but never tells readers what that means (1%? 5%? 15% chance of a heart attack?).  Despite these shortcomings, we think the reader will come away with a decent understanding of the potential benefits of the more sensitive test, and so we’ll award a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Human growth hormone is a promising tool in treating cystic fibrosis, a new University of Connecticut study suggests.

Although HGH not a cure for the disease, which afflicts 30,000 people in the U.S., the researchers found that it reduced the number of hospitalizations among those who have the disease.

The study, published Monday in the journal Pediatrics, was produced by the UConn/Hartford Hospital Evidence-based Practice Center and was funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

While the study offers insights on managing the disease, there's not enough evidence yet on whether HGH treatments could extend the lives of those with cystic fibrosis.

"It's intuitive that it might be beneficial as far as length of life goes, but we won't be able to go ahead and tell that just yet," said one of the researchers, Craig Lapin of UConn's Department of Pediatrics and the Connecticut Children's Medical Center.

Caused by defective genes, cystic fibrosis affects multiple organs. Lungs are clogged with a thick mucus, which can lead to lung infections. The disease also affects the pancreas, making it difficult for the body to absorb food, which significantly stunts growth and often leads to early deaths.

The researchers studied cases of children and adolescents with cystic fibrosis going back to the 1990s who received an injection of human growth hormone every day for six months to a year.

In the 1950s, children with cystic fibrosis generally died before age 8. But with antibiotics and other medical advances, the median age for people with the disease increased to 37 by 2008.

"As the kids with cystic fibrosis are living longer and longer, a lot of these ancillary problems are become more apparent," said C. Michael White, director of the Evidence-based Practice Center and lead author of the study.

In the cases studied, the researchers found that human growth hormone added 1.25 inches in height and three pounds to the patients. That growth also resulted in larger internal organs, particularly the lungs, making breathing easier.

HGH also appears to improve the mineral content in bones, making them stronger. There's not enough evidence that it prevents osteoporosis, a common result of cystic fibrosis, but White said the results are "promising."

For those who received human growth hormone, White said, annual hospitalizations decreased by half, from about three per year to 1.5.

HGH therapy can be expensive, but fewer hospitalizations should balance out the expense.

"Hopefully, this is going to encourage cystic fibrosis care providers to use it more frequently in patients at the lower end of weight and of short stature," Lapin said of the findings.

A daily injection can be difficult for a child who is already taking several other medications, White said, but going to the hospital fewer times might make up for it.

"I could see that, for a lot of kids, the injections would become just part of the daily routine," he said. "They would probably be a lot less scary than hospitalizations."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
IRVINE, Calif., Aug. 2, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- MDxHealth SA (OTC: MDXHF.BR) today announces that a new study validates the cost-effectiveness of the SelectMDx® for Prostate Cancer test, a non-invasive, urine-based (liquid biopsy) test that helps identify patients at increased risk of aggressive prostate cancer. The SelectMDx test can help predict the likelihood that clinically significant prostate cancer will be found by a biopsy.

The study published in The Journal of Urology, led by researchers at the Vanderbilt University Medical Center, was designed to elucidate the cost-effectiveness of SelectMDx in a population of U.S. men with elevated PSA, a marker of prostate cancer risk. Researchers analyzed the impact of utilizing the non-invasive diagnostic test prior to prostate biopsy. The primary objective was to characterize changes in health outcomes, measured in quality-adjusted life years, and a secondary objective was evaluating healthcare costs.

The researchers found that incorporating SelectMDx resulted in an average gain of 0.045 life years, or approximately 16 days, in full health gained at a cost-savings of $1,694 for each patient undergoing biopsy. Extrapolating these data to a conservative estimate of 311,879 patients per year undergoing biopsy resulted in 14,035 life years in full health gained with an annual cost saving of more than $500 million for each cohort.

"This study demonstrated that routine use of SelectMDx to guide biopsy decision-making improves health outcomes and lowers healthcare costs associated with prostate cancer risk assessment in a population of U.S. men," said Dr. Matthew Resnick from the departments of Urologic Surgery and Health Policy at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN. "We believe that this strategy improves the value of conventional risk assessment strategies through improvements in both quality and cost, the numerator and denominator of the health care value equation."

Every year, 1.3 million men in the U.S. undergo a prostate biopsy.i Although a biopsy is the only way to diagnose prostate cancer, the procedure is invasive and results in complications in 18 percent of patients, with 3 percent hospitalized for infection within 30 days.ii,iii,iv Common complications from a prostate biopsy may include bleeding, infection, sepsis/bacteremia, urinary symptoms/retention, and sexual dysfunction.

"While biopsy is the only path to prostate cancer diagnosis, no man wants to, nor should have to, go through the uncomfortable, costly procedure if it can be avoided," said Dr. Jan Groen, Chief Executive Officer of MDxHealth. "We developed SelectMDx to help reduce unnecessary biopsies and now we have the data to show how we can both improve outcomes and save the system money."

The full paper is accessible via the online edition of The Journal of Urology.

About SelectMDx® for Prostate Cancer 

SelectMDx for Prostate Cancer is a proprietary urine-based, molecular diagnostic test that offers a non-invasive 'liquid biopsy' method to assess a man's risk for prostate cancer. SelectMDx helps identify men at increased risk of harboring aggressive, potentially lethal, prostate cancer who may benefit most from a prostate biopsy and earlier detection. The test helps to reduce the need for MRI procedures and invasive prostate biopsies by up to 50%, thereby improving quality of life and lowering healthcare costs per patient. SelectMDx is available in the US and all EU member states. Since the introduction of the SelectMDx test in mid-2016, over 23,000 patients have been tested and 15 commercial contracts have been signed with US based insurance companies. The test has been included in the 2018 European Association of Urology (EAU) clinical guidelines.

About MDxHealth® 

MDxHealth is a multinational healthcare company that provides actionable molecular diagnostic information to personalize the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. The company's tests are based on proprietary genetic, epigenetic (methylation) and other molecular technologies and assist physicians with the diagnosis of urologic cancers, prognosis of recurrence risk, and prediction of response to a specific therapy. The Company's European headquarters are in Herstal, Belgium, with laboratory operations in Nijmegen, The Netherlands, and US headquarters and laboratory operations based in Irvine, California. For more information, visit mdxhealth.com and follow us on social media at: twitter.com/mdxhealth, facebook.com/mdxhealth and linkedin.com/company/mdxhealth.

This press release contains forward-looking statements and estimates with respect to the anticipated future performance of MDxHealth and the market in which it operates. Such statements and estimates are based on assumptions and assessments of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, which were deemed reasonable but may not prove to be correct. Actual events are difficult to predict, may depend upon factors that are beyond the company's control, and may turn out to be materially different. MDxHealth expressly disclaims any obligation to update any such forward-looking statements in this release to reflect any change in its expectations with regard thereto or any change in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statement is based unless required by law or regulation. This press release does not constitute an offer or invitation for the sale or purchase of securities or assets of MDxHealth in any jurisdiction. No securities of MDxHealth may be offered or sold within the United States without registration under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or in compliance with an exemption therefrom, and in accordance with any applicable U.S. securities laws.

NOTE: The MDxHealth logo, MDxHealth, ConfirmMDx, SelectMDx, AssureMDx, PredictMDx and UrNCollect are trademarks or registered trademarks of MDxHealth SA. All other trademarks and service marks are the property of their respective owners.

i NCI Seer Data 2015. www.seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/prost.html 

ii Gershman et al.; Eur Uro 2016 

iii Loeb et al.; Eur Uro 2013. 

iv Loeb et al.; J Urol. 2011.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of explaining the benefits of the SelectMDx test at both individual and societal levels.  Those benefits are pretty modest for a patient: a gain of 16 days of health at a cost savings of nearly $1700, on average.  But they are impressive when one ramps up to a societal level, given that more than 300,000 patients a year consider undergoing biopsies.
But it needs to be recognize that benefits and cost savings are estimated. The authors acknowledged that literature estimates for clinical benefits may not be applicable for the general population and the actual cost savings are uncertain because commercial payment rates are unknown.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking fish oil may help prevent full-blown psychotic illness in at-risk adolescents and young adults, a study released today hints.

These at-risk individuals may have weak or transient psychotic symptoms, and already show schizophrenia-like brain changes, Dr. G. Paul Amminger of The University of Melbourne in Australia, a researcher on the study, told Reuters Health. But while psychiatrists now know how to identify these individuals, he added, they don’t know what to do with them. “At the moment there’s no state-of-the-art guideline (on) how to treat those people.”

Prescribing antipsychotic medications may be helpful, Amminger added, but these medications have serious side effects, and can also be stigmatizing. “For young people they don’t want to commit themselves to a treatment which they might need to take for the next five to ten years,” he said. Furthermore, only about a third of people at high risk for psychotic disorders will go on to develop full-fledged mental illness in a given year.

There’s considerable evidence that abnormal fatty acid metabolism may contribute to the development of schizophrenia, Amminger and his team note in the Archives of General Psychiatry. To investigate whether omega-3 fatty acids might help prevent psychotic illness, they randomly assigned 81 at-risk individuals, 13 to 25 years old, to take 1.2 grams a day of omega-3s in fish oil capsule form or a placebo for 12 weeks and then followed them for another 40 weeks.

The researchers included people who met at least one of the following three criteria: having low-level psychotic symptoms; having transient psychotic symptoms; or having a schizophrenia-like personality disorder or a close relative with schizophrenia, along with a sharp decline in mental function within the past year.

Seventy-six of the 81 study participants, or 94 percent, completed the trial, Amminger noted, which underscores the safety and tolerability of fish oil.

At one year, 5 percent of the study participants taking omega-3s had developed a psychotic disorder (2 of 41 people), compared to 28 percent of those on placebo (11 of 40). People taking fish oil also showed significant reductions in their psychotic symptoms and improvements in function, while they were at no greater risk of adverse effects than people taking placebo capsules.

The effect of fish oil capsules, Amminger noted, was similar to that seen in two trials of antipsychotic drugs in at-risk individuals.

There are a number of mechanisms through which omega-3s could protect the brain, Amminger said; they are a major component of brain cells. They are also key to the proper function of two brain chemical signaling systems, dopamine and serotonin, which have been implicated in schizophrenia. Fish oil also boosts levels of glutathione, an antioxidant that protects the brain against oxidative stress.

Trials of medications for treating mental illness typically don’t include people younger than 18, Amminger noted, while starting minors on these medications is “always very difficult, and always quite controversial.”

But if future research bears out the current findings, he added, fish oil promises to offer a safe way to help prevent psychosis in at-risk people, and could also potentially be used to prevent or delay the onset of chronic depression, bipolar illness, and substance abuse disorder — all of which are far more common than psychotic illness.

He and his colleagues are now planning a multicenter trial of fish oil for the prevention of psychotic illness in 320 at-risk people.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job quantifying benefits. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using an artificial breath-sensor system dubbed the "electronic nose," Italian researchers were able to spot more cases of asthma than with traditional diagnostic tools.

The electronic nose detected nearly 90 percent of people with asthma compared to about 70 percent who were accurately diagnosed in the traditional way with lung function tests, according to new research published in the April issue of the journal Chest.

When combined with another test, called the fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) test, the electronic nose did an even better job at detecting asthma, the study found.

"The electronic nose discriminates between patients with asthma and healthy subjects and its performance is increased when combined with FENO," wrote the Italian team led by Dr. Paolo Montuschi of the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Rome.

The device works by identifying volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in exhaled breath. These VOCs produce a unique smell print for each individual and specific patterns are seen in people with asthma.

The new study included 27 people with intermittent or mild persistent asthma and 24 healthy people. None of the study volunteers had a history of smoking. Those with asthma had a history of allergies, and none had been treated with corticosteroids for at least four weeks prior to the start of the study.

Currently, asthma is diagnosed "based on your medical history and symptoms, and with spirometry (lung function testing) and exhaled nitric oxide," said Dr. Thomas Leath, director of allergy and immunology at Scott & White Healthcare in Round Rock, Texas.

The Italian researchers wanted to compare the electronic nose to the other commonly used tests -- spirometry and FENO -- to see which test was best at confirming a diagnosis of asthma.

To do this, all of the study volunteers were given all three tests. Each test is non-invasive, requiring only the use of exhaled air.

The electronic nose was able to correctly differentiate healthy people from those with physician-diagnosed asthma in 87.5 percent of the cases. FENO was able to correctly identify asthma in 79.2 percent of the study volunteers and lung function testing (spirometry) discerned just 70.8 percent of the people with asthma.

When the electronic nose and FENO were combined, the two tests together correctly identified almost 96 percent of the asthma cases.

"This is potentially a great tool. It could be used for screening if it's affordable or for seeing the effect of anti-inflammatory medicines. But, it definitely needs more research," said Leath.

"This device is interesting and warrants a further look, but it still needs to be perfected and the researchers need to figure out its niche," said Dr. Jennifer Appleyard, chief of allergy and immunology at St. John Hospital and Medical Center in Detroit. "We need to know if it's good for diagnostics or for measuring improvements after treatment. In some diseases, you use blood markers to monitor treatment response. Could you use this to see if patients are responding? We also need to know if it's good for diagnosing all types of asthma."

Dr. David Rosenstreich, director of the division of allergy and immunology at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, added: "An objective and fast test for diagnosing asthma would be helpful, and this test seems to be a non-invasive way of sampling for the underlying problem. This test seems relatively easy for patients and it does have potential, but they've only looked at a very narrow collection of people who have allergic asthma."

Both Appleyard and Leath noted that cost might initially limit the use of an electronic nose.

Learn more about how asthma is currently diagnosed from the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story tells us the percentage of asthma patients who were correctly diagnosed by the electronic nose, fractional exhaled nitric oxide, and spirometry. It provided this data in absolute terms and didn’t muddy the waters with relative comparisons of the three techniques. Although the study data by itself might suggest that the new device is superior to the other methods, the comments from the expert sources put the results in the appropriate context. They make it clear that we can’t tell yet whether this technology represents a better option than existing techniques.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Patients gave universally positive feedback about the app's ease of use and the ability to have wounds monitored

CHICAGO (Jan. 19, 2018): A new smartphone app called WoundCare is successfully enabling patients to remotely send images of their surgical wounds for monitoring by nurses. The app was developed by researches from the Wisconsin Institute of Surgical Outcomes Research (WiSOR), Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, with the goal of earlier detection of surgical site infections (SSIs) and prevention of hospital readmissions. The study results appear as an "article in press" on the website of the Journal of the American College of Surgeons ahead of print.

SSIs are the most common hospital-acquired infection and the leading cause of hospital readmission following an operation.1,2,3 Due to the prevalence off SSIs, the WiSOR research team decided to see if postoperative wound monitoring could be effectively achieved by having patients upload photos through the WoundCare app and answer a few brief questions to gather information not easily captured through images.

"Patients cannot identify [infections] and frequently ignore or fail to recognize the early signs of cellulitis or other wound complications," study authors wrote. "This drawback leads to the common and frustrating scenario where patients present to a routine, scheduled clinic appointment with an advanced wound complication that requires readmission, with or without reoperation. However, the complication may have been amenable to outpatient management if detected earlier."

Forty vascular surgery patients were enrolled in the study. There was an overall data submission rate of 90.2 percent among participants, and submissions were reviewed within an average of 9.7 hours. During the study, seven wound complications were detected and one false negative was found.

"We set out to come up with a protocol where patients could become active participants in their care and allow us to be in closer communication and monitor their wounds after they leave the hospital," said lead study author and general surgery resident Rebecca L. Gunter, MD. . "This approach allows us to intervene at an earlier time rather than waiting for patients to come back in after the problem has already developed past the point of being able to manage it on an outpatient basis."

Patients were enthusiastic about the app's ease of use and the reassurance they felt having their wounds regularly monitored. The nurse practitioners responsible for reviewing the submitted images attested to the value of the photos and patient satisfaction, although they also noted it was difficult to find time to review the submitted images on top of an already heavy clinical workload. Study authors note that the success and sustainability of a post-discharge wound-monitoring protocol requires a dedicated transitional care program and not simply adding a task to the current staff workload.

This protocol also has a cost-savings component, in addition to the patient safety and satisfaction aspects. Study authors note that SSIs are the most expensive hospital-acquired infection, costing an average of nearly $30,000 per wound-related readmission and an estimated $3-10 billion annually.

"If you could imagine saving the cost from the number of patients whose readmission you were able to prevent, that result could provide significant savings to the health system," Dr. Gunter said. Although capturing specific numbers related to cost-savings was not part of this study, Dr. Gunter said it is an important area of focus for future studies.

A limitation to telemedicine protocols that call for the use of smartphones is that not every patient has the necessary technology or knowledge to upload images on their own. The WiSOR research team addressed this issue by having participants undergo tailored training to learn to use the WoundCheck app. They provided each patient with an iPhone 5S and an accompanying visual reference guide to further assist in using the phone and app. Dr. Gunter said they were very successful in giving patients knowledge and access to technology so they could participate in the study. She said this is a model easily adaptable to other medical centers, whether through providing participants with a phone, having a rotating supply of phones at the hospitals for patients to borrow, or relying on a patient's personal device.

"We have demonstrated that a population of complex and high-risk patients, many of whom are older adults and novice smartphone users, can complete this protocol with high fidelity and satisfaction," the researchers concluded.

Study coauthors from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, include Sara Fernandes-Taylor, PhD, Shahrose Rahman, BS, Lola Awoyinka, MPH, Kyla M. Bennett, MD, Sharon M. Weber, MD, FACS, Caprice C. Greenberg, MD, MPH, FACS, and K. Craig Kent, MD, FACS.

"FACS" designates that a surgeon is a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons.

Support for this study came from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: AHRQ R21 HS023395. Dr. Gunter is supported by the National Institutes of

Health: NIH T32 HL110853. This study was presented at the 13th Annual Academic Surgical Congress, Las Vegas, Nev., February 2017.

Citation: Feasibility of an Image-Based Mobile Health Protocol for Postoperative Wound Monitoring. Journal of the American College of Surgeons.

1Wiseman JT, Guzman AM, Fernandes-Taylor S, et al. General and vascular surgery readmissions: a systematic review. J Am Coll Surg 2014;219:552-569.e2.

2Weber DJ, Sickbert-Bennett EE, Brown V, et al. Completeness of surveillance data reported by the National Healthcare Safety Network: an analysis of healthcare-associated infections ascertained in a tertiary care hospital, 2010. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012;33:94-96.

3Lewis SS, Moehring RW, Chen LF, et al. Assessing the relative burden of hospital-acquired infections in a network of community hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013;34:1229-1230.

About the American College of Surgeons

The American College of Surgeons is a scientific and educational organization of surgeons that was founded in 1913 to raise the standards of surgical practice and improve the quality of care for surgical patients. The College is dedicated to the ethical and competent practice of surgery. Its achievements have significantly influenced the course of scientific surgery in America and have established it as an important advocate for all surgical patients. The College has more than 80,000 members and is the largest organization of surgeons in the world. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release reports “an overall data submission rate of 90.2 percent among participants, and submissions were reviewed within an average of 9.7 hours. During the study, seven wound complications were detected and one false negative was found.”
But with no control group and no long term outcomes studied, it’s likely the benefits of the app are much more modest than these numbers suggest.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
What's New The Pill. The Ring. The Sponge. They're all temporary means of birth control -- devices you have to keep ingesting or inserting. Even the IUD can't stay in place for more than 10 years.

The only once-and-be-done-with-it option for women has been tubal ligation ("tying the tubes") -- surgery that renders a woman sterile. Now a procedure called Essure, recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration, gives women an alternative. The nonsurgical approach uses a hysteroscope -- a camera-tipped instrument -- to thread two small wires through the vagina, cervix and uterus and into the fallopian tubes. The wires, composed of polyester fibers and metals, cause inflammation and, over time, scar tissue that blocks the fallopian tubes, preventing sperm from reaching eggs. Women can undergo the procedure in 35 minutes in their doctor's office, under local anesthesia; they are advised to rest for 24 to 48 hours before resuming normal activity. Essure is 99.8 percent effective in preventing pregnancy -- a rate similar to that of tubal ligation, according to the manufacturer, Conceptus Inc. of Mountain View, Calif.

Pros and Cons Ellen Whitaker, a gynecologist at the Washington Hospital Center, says "the biggest advantage" of Essure is that it involves no incisions or general anesthesia, which both carry risks. By going through the vagina, she says, you "avoid all the organs in the abdomen." In a tubal ligation, she says, "there's always the possibility of bowel injury, bladder injury . . . which can be very serious."

The biggest drawback, Whitaker says, is the need for X-rays three months after the procedure to confirm the fallopian tubes are blocked. Until then, the patient must use another form of birth control.

Side effects may include pain, cramps and mild bleeding or spotting. There is the risk of infection or a puncture of the vagina or uterus while inserting the hysteroscope. As with tubal ligation, there is also an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy -- a pregnancy that develops outside the uterus.

One for the Guys Men, too, have an option for a faster, less painful procedure than vasectomy to tie the vas deferens -- the tubes that carry sperm from the testicles to the penis. In the increasingly popular "no-scalpel vasectomy," a doctor uses an instrument called a dissecting forceps to poke a very small hole in the skin of the testicles to reach the vas deferens. There is very little bleeding, and no stitches are needed to close the tiny openings (one on each side). The procedure is very effective (there is less than a 1 percent chance the man's partner will get pregnant) and takes about 10 minutes to perform in the doctor's office.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does quantify the effectiveness of Essure compared to tubal ligation.  But it cites the manufacturer as the source of the information.  Why not turn to the studies? 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A sweet tooth isn’t necessarily bad for your health— at least not when it comes to chocolate, hints a new study.

Researchers studying more than 33,000 Swedish women found that the more chocolate women said they ate, the lower their risk of stroke.

The results add to a growing body of evidence linking cocoa consumption to heart health, but they aren’t a free pass to gorge on chocolate.

“Given the observational design of the study, findings from this study cannot prove that it’s chocolate that lowers the risk of stroke,” Susanna Larsson from Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm told Reuters Health in an email.

While she believes chocolate has health benefits, she also warned that eating too much of it could be counterproductive.

“Chocolate should be consumed in moderation as it is high in calories, fat, and sugar,” she said. “As dark chocolate contains more cocoa and less sugar than milk chocolate, consumption of dark chocolate would be more beneficial.”

Larsson and her colleagues, whose findings appear in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, tapped into data from a mammography study that included self-reports of how much chocolate women ate in 1997. The women ranged in age from 49 to 83 years.

Over the next decade, there were 1,549 strokes, and the more chocolate women ate, the lower their risk.

Among those with the highest weekly chocolate intake — more than 45 grams — there were 2.5 strokes per 1,000 women per year. That figure was 7.8 per 1,000 among women who ate the least (less than 8.9 grams per week).

Scientists speculate that substances known as flavonoids, in particular so-called flavanols, may be responsible for chocolate’s apparent effects on health.

According to Larsson, flavonoids have been shown to cut high blood pressure, a risk factor for stroke, and improve other blood factors linked to heart health. Whether that theoretical benefit translates into real-life benefits remains to be proven by rigorous studies, however.

Nearly 800,000 Americans suffer a stroke every year, with about a sixth of them dying of it and many more left disabled. For those at high risk, doctors recommend blood pressure medicine, quitting smoking, exercising more and eating a healthier diet — but so far chocolate isn’t on the list.

SOURCE: bit.ly/qhsaZ0 Journal of the American College of Cardiology, October 10, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story went the extra mile here, providing the absolute rates of stroke seen in the groups consuming the lowest and highest quantities of chocolate.  “Among those with the highest weekly chocolate intake — more than 45 grams — there were 2.5 strokes per 1,000 women per year. That figure was 7.8 per 1,000 among women who ate the least (less than 8.9 grams per week).” These statistics weren’t provided in the study text, suggesting that the writer made the calculations based on data contained in one of the study tables. We applaud the extra effort made to provide meaningful statistics to readers!
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHAPEL HILL - University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center researchers have found that mailing self-collection kits to test for high-risk human papillomavirus infection has the potential to boost cervical cancer screening - especially for low-income women who are overdue for testing.

In the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology, researchers published the results of mailing at-home, HPV self-collection kits to 193 low-income women in North Carolina who were overdue for screening according to national guidelines. They reported this screening approach detected high-risk HPV in all of the cases of women who were found to have high-grade, abnormal cervical precancerous growths, showing that self-collection at home for HPV may be a viable method to identify women at high-risk for cervical cancer.

"This is a demonstration that mailing self-collection kits and returning them to test for high-risk HPV infection has big potential to increase screening access among under-screened women, and to do that successfully," said UNC Lineberger's Jennifer S. Smith, the study's senior author, and a professor in the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health.

Although cervical cancer is preventable through early detection and treatment, the American Cancer Society estimates that more than 4,100 women will die from cervical cancer in the United States this year. Nearly 20 percent of women in the United States who are eligible for cervical cancer screening report they haven't been tested for cervical cancer within the recommended time interval, national surveys have shown.

"Women are dying unnecessarily of cervical cancer because they either haven't been vaccinated against HPV in adolescence, or they've not been getting screened according to national guidelines," Smith said. "Increasing screening rates among under-screened women is of paramount importance."

In 2014, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration signed off on using an HPV test alone to screen for cervical cancer for women 25 years and older, in conjunction with the Pap test. Earlier this year, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force gave an "A" rating to HPV primary screening alone for women aged 30 to 65.

"There are a lot of different barriers that cause women to be underscreened," said the study's first author Andrea Des Marais, MPH, project manager with the UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health. "HPV tests are being widely used now in the United States, but only through physician collection in clinical practice, which requires that women come to a clinic. Offering HPV testing using self-collection by mail has a lot of potential to reach women who are the highest risk of being screened: those who don't access regular medical care."

For the study, researchers mailed at-home, self-collection kits to low-income women in North Carolina who were overdue for screening by national guidelines. They included women between the ages of 30 and 64 years who had reported no history of receiving a Pap test, which checks for precancerous or cancerous cells, within the past four years.

Researchers provided study participants with self-collection brushes along with instructions for how to take a sample from inside the vagina. The brush samples were then tested in a lab for HPV and other sexually transmitted infections. Participants also self-collected samples at a clinic and handed them to a nurse, and had a pelvic exam for a clinician to collect a Pap smear sample.

The researchers compared the results from self- and clinician-samples - which were tested for high-risk HPV strains that are linked to cervical cancer - to the Pap results and the results of cervical biopsies collected during colposcopy, which is a secondary diagnostic test that confirms the presence of cervical pre-cancerous lesions among women with abnormal Pap smear results.

The home self-collection test indicated that 12.4 percent of women were infected with high-risk HPV, the self-collection tests used in the clinic found 15.5 of the women had high-risk HPV infection, and the clinician-collected test identified 11.4 percent of the women had high-risk HPV infection.

"We found comparable detection between self-collection and physician-collection," Des Marais said.

All women found to have high-grade cervical lesions by Pap smear or by cervical biopsy were positive for high-risk HPV on their home self-collected sample.

"We found in this sample, all of the women who had high-grade lesions had HPV-positive home self-collection results," Smith said. "We didn't miss any of those high-grade cases by conducting home self-collection."

Smith said there is more work to be done, such as identifying ways to make the self-collection process more efficient and cost-effective, and getting FDA approval for the clinical use of self-collection for cervical cancer screening.

"This is a proof-in-principle study that we used to determine whether home self-collection is highly effective for detecting high-grade disease," Smith said. "We are already working on the next step, which is a clinical trial in which women who aren't up-to-date on screening get either a referral to a free clinic appointment to receive a screening, or receive a self-collection kit in the mail, followed by referral to a free clinic appointment. This will allow us to determine the effect that self-collection has on screening uptake."

In addition to Des Marais and Smith, other authors included Yuqian Zhao, Marcia M. Hobbs, Vijay Sivaraman, Lynn Barclay, and Noel T. Brewer.

The study was supported by the National Cancer Institute, the National Institutes of Health, and the University Cancer Research Fund. Individual researchers were supported by the China Scholarship Council.

Financial disclosure: High-risk HPV and sexually transmitted disease tests, sample preservation media, ThinPrep processor slides, and other equipment were donated by Hologic, Inc. Self-collection brushes were donated by Rovers Medical Devices. Some travel expenses for Des Marais were paid by Hologic, and others have consulted for the company. Smith has received research funding, supply donations, and consultancies, and served as a paid speaker for Arbor Vita, BD Diagnostics, Hologic, Rovers Medical Devices, and Trovagene. Neither Hologic nor Rovers had input into the research design, analysis or interpretation of results.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This is a tricky question, as it is not clear how one should define the relevant benefit. The paper itself defines the goal of the study as evaluating the “validity and acceptability” of at-home self-collection of samples for HPV screening. If part of assessing “acceptability” was determining whether mailing self-collection kits improved screening rates, should the benefit be defined as successfully submitting a sample for screening? If so, the release failed, since it doesn’t even tell readers how many women received screening tests through the mail (284 women, according to the related paper). However, validity is easier to address. How well did the at-home, self-collected samples compare to other screening tests? The release does address this head on. It states that the at-home, self-collected test indicated 12.4% of women had high-risk HPV infections. In-clinic, self-collected tests indicated 15.5% had high-risk HPV infections. And clinician-collected tests indicated 11.4% of women had high-risk HPV infections. Those are hard numbers, and we’ll give the release the benefit of the doubt on this one. However, those three different numbers raise some questions, which the release doesn’t do a good job of addressing. More on that below.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON – (February 19, 2015) – In the first clinical trial directly comparing three drugs most commonly used to treat diabetic macular edema, researchers found all were effective in improving vision and preventing vision loss. However, one drug, aflibercept, provided greater improvement for people with more severe vision loss when treatment was initiated. The trial was conducted by the National Eye Institute Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net) including researchers from Joslin Diabetes Center. The results appeared in the February online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Diabetes is a significant risk factor for developing eye diseases. The most common diabetic eye disease and a leading cause of blindness is diabetic retinopathy, which is caused by elevated blood sugar levels damaging the blood vessels of the retina and affects approximately 7.7 million Americans. About 750,000 Americans with diabetic retinopathy have diabetic macular edema (DME) in which fluid leaks into the macula, the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The fluid causes the macula to swell, blurring vision. “DME is the leading cause of moderate vision loss in working-age adults with diabetes. With the rate of diabetes increasing dramatically worldwide, many individuals will be at risk for vision loss from diabetic eye complications and DME is a major global health concern,” says Jennifer K. Sun, M.D., M.P.H., a member of the study research team and writing committee, and an Investigator in the Section on Vascular Biology, an ophthalmologist in Beetham Eye Institute at Joslin and an Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical School.

In an earlier study, Joslin researchers reported that VEGF, a major growth factor for blood vessels, is elevated in the eye fluids of patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy and DME, causing leakage and the growth of abnormal blood vessels. Over the past few years, drugs that target VEGF have become a standard treatment for DME, providing a preferred alternative or adjunct to laser treatment. The standard Medicare per-injection costs of the three anti-VEGF drugs evaluated in the study are about $1960 for aflibercept (Eylea), $1200 for ranibizumab (Lucentis) and $70 for bevacizumab (Avastin).

At the start of the trial, 660 adults with DME were enrolled: their average age was 61 years and 90 percent had type 2 diabetes. About half of the participants had 20/32 or 20/40 vision and the other half had vision of 20/50 or worse. They were randomized into three treatment groups and received the assigned study drug by injection into the eye until the DME resolved or stabilized. Participants on bevacizumab and ranibizumab received, on average, 10 injections, versus nine for those on aflibercept.

One year after starting treatment, all participants had improved vision. Those with mild vision loss (20/32 to 20/40) at baseline in all three treatment groups gained on average almost two lines on an eye chart. For participants with more severe vision loss (20/50 or worse), aflibercept improved vision on average nearly four lines, bevacizumab about 2.5 lines, and ranibizumab almost three lines.

“The results clearly remove any doubts about anti-VEGF drugs’ efficacy in treating DME. All three drugs improved vision substantially, with aflibercept showing more visual gains in patients with worse vision at the start of the trial. Physicians now have robust data to help them counsel patients and make informed decisions regarding treatment options,” says study co-author Lloyd P. Aiello, M.D., Ph.D., Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, Director of Joslin’s Beetham Eye Institute, co-head of Joslin's Section of Vascular Cell Biology, and founding chair of the DRCR Network.

In light of these positive results, “it is more important than ever for patients with diabetes to be evaluated on a regular basis for eye disease and receive treatment promptly once indicated as we now have excellent success in treating patients with DME,” says Dr. Aiello.

The trial was supported through a cooperative agreement from the National Eye Institute and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Regeneron Pharmaceutical provided the aflibercept and Genentech provided the ranibizumab for the study. The DRCR.net had complete control over the design of the study, data ownership and content of presentations and publications related to this study.

Joslin Diabetes Center, based in Boston, Massachusetts, undertakes diabetes research, clinical care, education and health and wellness programs on a global scale. Joslin is dedicated to ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives and offers real progress in preventing and curing diabetes. Joslin is an independent, nonprofit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and is recognized worldwide for driving innovative solutions in diabetes prevention, research, education, and care.

Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit www.joslin.org.

Joslin Research comprises the most comprehensive and productive effort in diabetes research under one roof anywhere in the world. With 30‐plus faculty‐level investigators, Joslin researchers focus on unraveling the biological, biochemical and genetic processes that underlie the development of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and related complications.

Joslin research is highly innovative and imaginative, employing the newest tools in genetics, genomics and proteomics to identify abnormalities that may play a role in the development of diabetes and its complications. Joslin Clinic patients, and others with diabetes, have the option of participating in clinical trials at Joslin to help translate basic research into treatment innovations.

Joslin has one of the largest diabetes training programs in the world, educating 150 M.D. and Ph.D. researchers each year, many of whom go on to head diabetes initiatives at leading institutions all over the globe. For more information, visit www.joslinresearch.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: These drugs are already used for treatment of macular edema and the purpose of the study was to compare the three. In general, all three show good results, with aflibercept producing slightly better results for those initially exhibiting poorer vision. The release quantifies this clearly in terms of improved ability to read an eye chart.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TAMPA, Fla. (Jan. 3, 2016) - Deregulation and inhibition of the immune system contributes to cancer development. Many therapeutic strategies aim to re-stimulate the immune system to recognize cancer cells and target them for destruction. Researchers from Moffitt Cancer Center report that a dendritic cell vaccine that targets the HER2 protein on breast cancer cells is safe and effectively stimulates the immune system leading to regression of early-stage breast cancer.

The HER2 protein is overexpressed in 20-25% of all breast cancer tumors and is associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis. Researchers have previously shown that immune cells are less able to recognize and target cancer cells that express HER2 as breast cancer progresses into a more advanced and invasive stage. This suggests that strategies that can restimulate the immune system to recognize and target HER2 early during cancer development may be effective treatment options.

The researchers previously developed a vaccine that helps the immune system recognize the HER2 protein on breast cancer cells. Their approach involves creating the vaccine from immune cells called dendritic cells that are harvested from each individual patient to create a personalized vaccine.

In order to determine if the HER2-dendritic cell vaccine is safe and effective, the researchers performed a clinical trial in 54 women who have HER2-expressing early-stage breast cancer. The dendritic cell vaccines were prepared by isolating dendritic cells from each patients' blood and exposing them to fragments of the HER2 protein. Patients were injected with a dose of their personal dendritic cell vaccine once a week for 6 weeks into either a lymph node, the breast tumor, or into both sites.

The researchers report that the dendritic cell vaccines were well-tolerated and patients only experienced low-grade toxicities. The most common adverse events were fatigue, injection site reactions, and chills. They also show that the vaccine was able to stimulate an immune response in the majority of the patients. Approximately 80% of evaluable patients had a detectable immune response in their peripheral blood and/or in their sentinel lymph node wherein their cancer is most likely to spread to first. Importantly, the immune responses among the patients were similar, regardless of the route of vaccine administration.

The Moffitt researchers assessed the effectiveness of the vaccine by determining the percentage of patients who had detectable disease within surgical specimens after resection. The absence of disease is termed a pathological complete response (pCR). They report that 13 patients achieved a pCR and patients who had early non-invasive disease called ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) achieved a higher rate of pCR than patients who had early-stage invasive disease. Interestingly, patients who achieved a pCR had a higher immune response within their local sentinel lymph nodes.

"These results suggest that vaccines are more effective in DCIS, thereby warranting further evaluation in DCIS or other minimal disease settings, and the local regional sentinel lymph node may serve as a more meaningful immunologic endpoint," said Brian J. Czerniecki, MD, PhD, Chair of the Department of Breast Oncology at Moffitt Cancer Center.

The study was published in the December 13th online issue of Clinical Cancer Research and was supported by funds received from R01-CA096997, P30-CA016520, Pennies-in-Action®, and the Henle Foundation.

Moffitt is dedicated to one lifesaving mission: to contribute to the prevention and cure of cancer. The Tampa-based facility is one of only 47 National Cancer Institute-designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers, a distinction that recognizes Moffitt's excellence in research, clinical trials, prevention and cancer control. Moffitt is the No. 6 cancer hospital in the nation and has been listed in U.S. News & World Report as one of the "Best Hospitals" for cancer care since 1999. Moffitt devotes more than 2.5 million square feet to research and patient care. Moffitt's expert nursing staff is recognized by the American Nurses Credentialing Center with Magnet® status, its highest distinction. With more than 5,200 team members, Moffitt has an economic impact in the state of $2.1 billion. For more information, call 1-888-MOFFITT (1-888-663-3488), visit MOFFITT.org, and follow the momentum on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that “approximately 80% of evaluable patients had a detectable immune response in their peripheral blood and/or in their sentinel lymph node wherein their cancer is most likely to spread to first.” It also states that 13 patients achieved an absence of disease after treatment, though it doesn’t give a percentage, and that patients who had early non-invasive disease called ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) achieved a higher rate of disease absence than patients who had early-stage invasive disease.
Further, it says those patients who saw absence of disease had a higher immune response in their lymph nodes, which, says a researcher, “may serve as a more meaningful immunological endpoint.”
The news release states that immune responses were similar regardless of whether the vaccine was administered into a lymph node, a breast tumor, or both, though it doesn’t explain why this is an important finding.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 17, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- People who have narrowed carotid arteries in the neck and show no symptoms may be at risk for stroke and not know it, but a simple ultrasound test can identify the problem, a new study suggests.

This condition, known as asymptomatic carotid stenosis, is caused by plaque build-up in the arteries that carry blood from the heart to the brain. This can cause less blood to reach the brain and, in rare cases, may also trigger a stroke if plaque breaks off and becomes lodged in the small vessels in the brain.

"Only a small minority of patients with carotid stenosis will suffer a stroke," said lead researcher Dr. Raffi Topakian, from the Academic Teaching Hospital Wagner-Jauregg in Linz, Austria.

The problem is identifying the patients at the highest risk for stroke, he said. Most patients with carotid stenosis can be managed with medications such as cholesterol-lowering drugs, blood pressure-lowering drugs and blood thinners such as aspirin, he added.

But those at highest risk may need a surgical procedure called an endarterectomy, which clears the carotid arteries of plaque.

"We found with two ultrasound methods we could differentiate the patients who are at very low risk of suffering a stroke -- lower than 1 percent per year -- from patients at high risk of stroke -- higher than 8 percent per year," Topakian said.

The patients who are at high risk are candidates for surgery, he said. Endarterectomy is not recommended for most people with carotid stenosis since the problem can be managed with drugs and there are risks, including stroke, with the procedure, Topakian said.

Those who would benefit from the ultrasound test are people with known carotid stenosis who are fit for surgery, Topakian said. "If they are too sick or frail for surgery, it makes no sense to do the ultrasound," he said.

In addition, people at high risk for stroke are also candidates for ultrasound, Topakian said. This would include people with high cholesterol, high blood pressure or heart disease, he said. "This test could be a good tool to identify the right patients for surgery," Topakian said.

Of course, anyone with symptomatic carotid stenosis is a candidate for immediate surgery, Topakian said. Warning signs include transient ischemic attacks (TIAS), or mini-strokes, which cause no permanent damage but are often followed by a stroke within a few days.

The report was published in the Aug. 17 online edition of Neurology.

For the study, a research team led by Topakian followed 435 people with asymptomatic carotid stenosis for two years.

Each participant had an ultrasound to see if there were signs that a stroke might occur. These included tiny blood clots, which pass into the brain, and a type of plaque called echolucent plaque, which is fattier than other plaque and linked with an increased risk for stroke.

Among those in the study, 38 percent had the fattier-than-normal plaque, 17 percent had signs of blood clots and 27 percent had both the fattier plaque and blood clots, the researchers found.

In addition, over the two years of the study, 10 people had TIAs.

Moreover, people with the fattier plaque were more than six times more likely to have a stroke than those people without the plaque, and those with the fattier plaque and clots had a risk that was 10 times higher, Topakian's team found.

Nonetheless, some experts said that research suggests that patients with no symptoms are better off without the surgery.

Dr. Lars Marquardt,a professor of surgery at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg in Germany and co-author of an accompanying journal editorial, said surgery for people with asymptomatic carotid steno sis is done too frequently.

Marquardt noted that the risks associated with the surgery are a lot higher than leaving the stenosis as it is and starting aggressive medical treatment.

"Patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis don't get the surgical procedure early enough, and patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis have too many surgical interventions," Marquardt said.

When treating asymptomatic carotid stenosis, Marquardt doesn't think the case has been made for distinguishing between high- and low-risk patients. Right now, the work done by Topakian's group is still "experimental," he said.

Another expert, Dr. Larry B. Goldstein, director of the Duke University Stroke Center, said that "what remains uncertain is whether surgical intervention would result in an overall improvement in stroke-free survival."

"It is also unclear how optimal medical management [lifestyle changes in addition to anti-platelet medication and statins] would affect overall stroke and cardiovascular risk, and stroke-free survival," he said.

Both the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and the American Heart Association currently recommend against general population screening for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis, Goldstein noted.

For more information on stroke, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story got the “gist” correct that surgery’s benefit increases with increasing risk. One of the saving graces of the piece was this independent perspective:
“It is also unclear how optimal medical management [lifestyle changes in addition to anti-platelet medication and statins] would affect overall stroke and cardiovascular risk, and stroke-free survival,” he said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This story is part of an occasional series.

As more women postpone motherhood into their 30s, even 40s, they're hitting that age-old constraint: the biological clock. Now, technology is dangling the possibility that women can stop that clock, at least for a while.

In a Manhattan office building on a recent evening, two dozen women — all in their 30s and 40s — sit in folding chairs, balancing cellphones and glasses of wine. They're gathered for a seminar called "Take Control of Your Fertility."

Dr. Alan Copperman of Reproductive Medicine Associates of New York wastes no time laying out this harsh reality: By the time a woman hits her 40s, 90 percent of her eggs are abnormal. The chances of a typical 40-year-old getting pregnant in any given month? Ten percent. Unless, that is, she gets pregnant with her younger eggs — eggs she had frozen years before.

Copperman explains the procedure, introduces someone who has gone through it and takes a flurry of questions.

Afterward, women crowd a counter to set up appointments with Copperman's clinic, which offers egg freezing. Sally Montgomery is among the youngest here, and the most upbeat. Her mom had trouble conceiving, so she wants to be proactive.

"I'm 31, your typical New Yorker," she says. "I'm single, I'm bouncing around, and I'd like the opportunity to have a family, so I just figured, 'Why not?' I don't think it's a guarantee, but it's a nice insurance policy, and I think it takes some of the pressure off."

Others, though, slip out quietly. One 40-year-old says she wishes she'd learned about egg freezing earlier. Esther Montoro, a 37-year-old photographer, looks a little stunned.

"I think it's fantastic," she says, "but I think it's so incredibly expensive."

The whole process — a week of hormones, plus the procedure to collect the eggs — runs $12,000 to $14,000. And because it takes 10 to 20 eggs for a reasonable shot at success, some may need to do this several times. Plus, there are annual storage fees. Then, when you're ready to use your eggs, you'll need in vitro fertilization, another pricey procedure. All told, costs can easily exceed $40,000, money Montoro doesn't have.

"I guess there's a big assumption that most women that need to do this [are] career, successful, rich women," she says. "And I'm not!"

In his office later, Copperman empathizes and says he hopes the procedure eventually becomes easier and cheaper. Still, he says, freezing eggs offers many women the biggest game changer since the birth control pill 50 years ago.

"Women began to have reproductive choices," he says. "They got to decide when not to get pregnant. This technology has the potential to help women decide when they can get pregnant."

Clinics in the U.S. have long frozen fertilized eggs, or embryos. But eggs alone are more delicate and prone to damage. Over the years, egg freezing has been offered mainly to cancer patients facing radiation, but success rates were pretty dismal. Of late, though, the technology has exploded thanks to scientific leaps, including a flash-freeze method called vitrification.

In Copperman's lab, you can hear the sizzle as a tiny tube is plunged into liquid nitrogen.

"Snap freeze, snap thaw," he says. "And what's really impressive is that when it comes out, it comes out looking just like it went in."

Ironically, much of this research was pioneered in Italy and Spain, where Catholic influence discouraged the creation of too many embryos, leaving fertility researchers with unused eggs instead.

With the better survival rate from vitrification and other new freezing methods, more and more clinics are now offering what they call "fertility preservation." Meanwhile, the early adopters are starting to come back and use their eggs.

In a New York high rise, 8-month-old Camden squeals in delight as she bounces in her walker. She's here thanks to eggs her mom froze several years ago.

"My best friend and I made a pact together that at age 38, if we were both still single, we were going to have a child on our own," says Robyn Ross.

When that time came, Ross decided she wasn't ready for single motherhood. Instead, she froze 14 eggs. Within a year, she fell in love and soon got married.

Her husband, Mark Cohen, says he wasn't at all put off by the fact that his new love had her eggs in the freezer. As it turned out, his sperm was weakened by earlier cancer treatment, so conceiving their baby in a lab was the perfect solution.

"And this is our miracle baby," Cohen says, planting a kiss on Camden. "We are one little happy family."

Ross has already evangelized to her younger sister.

"I made her promise me that if she's still single by the age of 32, she would freeze her eggs," she says. "The younger the better."

Now, before you run out to a fertility clinic, there is a big note of caution. The Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology, which sets industry guidelines, still considers egg freezing experimental.

"If the question were just, 'Does egg freezing and thawing work to achieve a pregnancy?' I think we're close," says Dr. Eric Widra, a member of the society's executive council.

But only 1,000 to 2,000 babies in the world have been born using frozen eggs. So far, they're fine — no abnormalities. Still, Widra would like a larger-scale, longer-term track record. It's not clear when — or if — a big-scale study might happen. But Widra says women need to understand that success rates will never be 100 percent.

"It's an insurance policy that you may or may not actually ever need," he says. "And it's an insurance policy that if you do need, may not pay out."

And yet, even Widra agrees that egg freezing has appeal if it can help avoid the anguish of infertility. At Shady Grove Fertility, the Washington, D.C., clinic where he practices, he offers it to his own patients.

The Challenge Of Setting An Age Limit

It's quite a concept: Put your eggs in deep freeze and disconnect from that nagging biological clock. But, until when? How old is too old to use your younger eggs?

"There should be guidelines, I think, that are more clearly defined," says Dr. Geoffrey Sher, who heads the Sher Institutes for Reproductive Medicine and is based in Las Vegas.

He says many clinics suggest a cutoff of 50, the average age of menopause. After that, pregnancy can be riskier, and the large age gap raises complicated social issues. But the limit is tricky to impose. Sher remembers one couple who wanted to use donor eggs to conceive. The husband was 45, his wife, 55. Sher hesitated.

"And she said, 'That's discriminatory. If my husband was my age and I was his age, you wouldn't hesitate.' And she had a point," Sher says.

The woman was healthy. And the uterus doesn't decline like eggs do; in some cases, it can actually be coaxed back into working order. Sher's ethics board said OK.

"And she went ahead and had a baby at 57 years of age without any problems whatsoever," Sher says. "I get a postcard from them at Christmas every year."

The bigger challenge, Sher and others say, is reaching out to younger women — getting them to take action before it's too late. They envision a time when society considers freezing eggs an act not of desperation but of empowerment.

This story was produced for broadcast by Marisa Penaloza.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Yes. The story is generous with describing the potential benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A new blood test may be as accurate as a test requiring a painful spinal tap for differentiating Parkinson's disease from similar disorders, according to a study published Wednesday in Neurology, the medical journal of the American Academy of Neurology.

Parkinson's disease is a neurological disorder that can cause tremors, stiffness, slowness of movement, trouble balancing, problems walking and difficulty coordinating movement. Less obvious symptoms include depression, insomnia, anxiety, fatigue and constipation.

Neurological disorders that mimic the symptoms of Parkinson's disease are called atypical parkinsonism disorders.

Many doctors cannot tell whether a patient has Parkinson's disease or atypical parkinsonism.

"This can be very challenging, especially during the early stages of the diseases and if the responsible doctor is not a neurologist specialized in movement disorders," said Dr. Oskar Hansson, lead author of the new study, a neurologist and an associate professor at Lund University in Sweden.

Non-specialists "do not really know exactly what questions to ask the patient and the special signs to look for," Hansson wrote in an email. Yet patients with atypical disorders "usually have a much worse prognosis, with faster disease progression, (with) more disabling symptoms" than Parkinson's patients, so early identification is crucial.

The correct diagnosis is also key to treatment since "most patients with atypical parkinsonism disorders do not respond well to dopamine-targeting medications" that are usually prescribed for Parkinson's patients, Hansson said.

Hansson and his colleagues developed a blood test that is, essentially, a variation on an existing test capable of detecting neurofilament light chain protein in spinal fluid. This protein is a component of nerve cells, and when these cells die, it can be detected in both spinal fluid and blood.

Because spinal fluid is not easily obtained by a primary care doctor, this diagnostic test is not very useful, so Hansson developed a blood test and investigated its accuracy in the new study.

When validating a new biomarker for disease, "one should always analyze at least two different (groups of patients and controls) to make sure that the results are reproducible," said Hansson, who added that participants should also include both early- and late-stage patients established at different clinics.

All told, a total of 244 people with Parkinson's and 79 healthy volunteers serving as a comparison group participated in Hansson's study, along with 181 patients with atypical parkinsonism disorders.

Of these, 88 patients had multiple system atrophy, which impairs the body's involuntary functions such as heart rate, blood pressure and digestion.

Seventy patients had progressive supranuclear palsy, which affects movement, walking, balance, speech, swallowing, vision, mood and thinking.

And 23 patients had corticobasal degeneration, which causes decreased movement on one side of the body, muscle rigidity, tremor and a disconnection between thought and action.

Testing these participants, the researchers found that nerve protein levels ranged higher in people with atypical parkinsonism and lower in patients with Parkinson's disease as well as the healthy volunteers. However, the test cannot distinguish between the different atypical disorders, which doctors must rely on symptoms to diagnose.

Blood test accuracy is defined based on sensitivity, the percentage of positives that are correctly identified, and specificity, the percentage of negatives that are correctly identified. In Sweden, the blood test had a sensitivity of 82% and a specificity of 91%, while in the United Kingdom, sensitivity was 80% and specificity 90%. For early-stage study participants, generally, sensitivity was 70% and specificity was 80%.

Overall, the blood test showed equal accuracy as the spinal fluid test when diagnosing Parkinson's or an atypical parkinsonism disorder, in both early and later stages of disease.

Hansson imagines that blood-based tests will be used in the future "in the diagnostic work-up of patients with parkinsonism by most doctors who are not very specialized with these movement disorders." He also believes the test will be used by specialists for Parkinson's patients who "do not exhibit a very typical symptomatology" or do not respond as expected to treatment.

Though atypical parkinsonism conditions look very similar to Parkinson's at first, they "have a different underlying molecular cause," according to Bronstein, and so it is important to recognize them early in order to treat them properly. "Disease-specific therapies are now in trials, so accurate diagnosis is essential in determining if these new treatments work," he said.

According to Dr. Paul Wright, chairman of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, New York, and Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, New York, the importance of this study is that it brings to light that there are new biomarker tests that can delineate between these neurological diseases.

"A lot of time, people come in and say they or a family member has a tremor, and they believe it's Parkinson's disease," said Wright, who also was not involved in the study. This early assumption may impede diagnosis of a less recognized atypical parkinsonism condition.

Or a patient has "horrible blood pressure fluctuations," Wright said, and no obvious tremor or rigidity symptoms, so a doctor suspects a heart condition. Instead, the cause is multiple system atrophy, a neurodegenerative disease. Though other symptoms will show up eventually and help in diagnosing the patient, in the meantime, the patient will be receiving the wrong medicines.

An accurate blood test, then, would be good news in these situations.

"It's a lot more reassuring to a patient to say 'we're just going to take a blood test to check for a few things,' " Wright said. "It's much easier and less anxiety-provoking for patients than taking a spinal tap."

Up until now, many diseases have been diagnosed based on symptoms, with patients asking, "How do you know I have this?" Meanwhile, doctors are not always correct, Wright said. This is true even of Parkinson's, which is diagnosed based on symptoms, a patient's history, neurological exams, a patient's response to medicine and, in some cases, brain imaging tests.

Still, Wright is hopeful and believes a biomarker test for Parkinson's "will be down the line. ... In general, researchers are looking for biomarkers of disease."

Specialists and sub-specialists are available only in big cities, Wright said, and access to a simple blood test would enable a correct diagnosis in a primary care office.

"We always assume there's luxury," Wright said. "But that's not really what's real in most of the country."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Atypical for many news stories like this, this one provided the actual specificity and sensitivity numbers for the blood test, and how that compares (in general) to the typical spinal fluid test.
That said, the story could have been a little more thorough in its discussion of what sensitivity and specificity mean. It says sensitivity is “the percentage of positives that are correctly identified, and specificity, the percentage of negatives that are correctly identified.” That’s accurate, but the story could have gone further to explain, for example, that a low specificity test means it will have a high false-positive rate (more people who don’t have the disease are erroneously told that they have it). A low-sensitivity test, by contrast, will have a high false-negative rate (more people who actually have the disease are falsely reassured by a negative test result).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The delivery virus, carrying a good version of the human gene for the clotting agent known as Factor IX, was prepared by researchers at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis. The patients had been recruited and treated with the virus in England by a team led by Dr. Amit C. Nathwani of University College London; researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia monitored their immune reactions.

Hemophilia B is caused by a defect in the gene for Factor IX. Fatal if untreated, the disease occurs almost only in men because the Factor IX gene lies on the X chromosome, of which men have only a single copy.

Women who carry a defective gene on one X chromosome can compensate with the good copy on their other X chromosome, but they bequeath the defective copy to half their children. About one in 30,000 of newborn boys have the disease, with about 3,000 patients in the United States.

Dr. Nathwani and his team reported that they treated the patients by infusing the delivery virus into their veins. The virus homes in on the cells of the liver, and the gene it carries then churns out correct copies of Factor IX. A single injection enabled the patients to produce small amounts of Factor IX, enough that four of the six could stop the usual treatment, injections of Factor IX concentrate prepared from donated blood. The other two patients continued to need concentrate, but less frequently.

Treating a patient with concentrate costs $300,000 a year, with a possible lifetime cost of $20 million, but the single required injection of the new delivery virus costs just $30,000, Dr. Katherine P. Ponder of the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis notes in her commentary in The New England Journal of Medicine, calling the trial “a landmark study.”

The patients have continued to produce their own Factor IX for up to 22 months, said Dr. Edward G. D. Tuddenham, director of the Hemophilia Center at the Royal Free Hospital in London. One patient, a geologist, had a good response at first, but his level of Factor IX has declined to 1 percent of normal, the level at which the disease kicks in.

“We attribute this to the fact that he had an inflammation, and although we treated it promptly, we should have been quicker off the mark,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

The patient cannot be injected again with the same virus because his immune system is now primed to attack it. “He’s very philosophic about it, but he’s a scientist, and his motivation is to help the science,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

Twenty more patients will be treated to assess the best dose of the virus, the goal being the highest dose that does not set off an immune system attack, Dr. Tuddenham said. “We are pretty close to the sweet spot,” he said. If all goes well, a genetic treatment for hemophilia B “could be available for widespread use in a couple of years.”

In a trial in 2006, a patient injected with a corrective gene produced his own Factor IX but only for 10 weeks. The designer of that treatment, Dr. Katherine A. High of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, said the new therapy had worked because the delivery virus had been made more efficient and because the research team had treated the patients with steroids to suppress immune system attacks on the virus.

“I think it’s incredibly exciting, and I say that even though these people are my competitors,” she said. Dr. High is listed as a co-author of the report because her laboratory helped monitor the patients and provided proof for regulators that the virus would not insert its human gene into the patients’ sperm and make the change hereditary.

A serious problem with other delivery viruses is that they insert themselves randomly into chromosomes, sometimes disrupting a gene. The virus used by Dr. Nathwani’s team, known as adeno-associated virus-8, generally stays outside the chromosomes, so it should not present this problem. Still, patients will need to be monitored for liver cancer, a small possibility that has been observed in mice.

“I don’t think it’s a showstopper, but it’s a critical safety issue that has to be assessed,” Dr. High said.

Patients have little or no immunity to the adeno-associated virus, which infects rhesus monkeys. The virus has a propensity for making liver cells its target, which is good for the therapy because these cells are the natural producers of Factor IX. However, liver cells do not live forever and slowly replenish themselves, possibly limiting how long the therapy will last.

About 80 percent of hemophilia cases are of the type known as hemophilia A, which is caused by defects in a different blood-clotting agent, Factor VIII. Researchers have focused on hemophilia B, in part, because the Factor IX gene is much smaller and easier to work with.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story states that six patients were “successfully treated” and explained that treated patients “continued to produce their own Factor IX for up to 22 months,” and notes that one patient had an initial good response but his Factor IX levels declined.  It also points out that because his immune system recognized the viral vector, it is now sensitized to respond in the future and he now can’t be treated again.  That would mean that five of six – not six of six – were successfully treated.
There was also no comment about what difference these blood test changes made in patients’ lives – how they felt.
Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Highlight
• A healthy diet high in fruits, vegetables, fish, legumes, cereals, whole grains, and fiber, and low in red meat, salt, and refined sugars was linked with a reduced risk of early death in an analysis of 7 studies.

Newswise — Washington, DC (December 8, 2016) — A diet that emphasizes healthy foods rather than individual nutrients may help patients with chronic kidney disease live longer. The findings appear in an upcoming issue of the Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology (CJASN).

Patients with chronic kidney disease are advised to follow dietary recommendations that restrict individual nutrients such as phosphorus, potassium, protein, and sodium; however, empirical evidence suggests that these restrictions—which can be difficult to abide by—have limited effects on reducing patients’ risk of premature death.

Emerging evidence indicates that overall eating patterns may have greater effects on patients’ health and longevity. To investigate, a tem led by Giovanni Strippoli, MD, PhD (University of Bari, in Italy and Diaverum, in Sweden), and Jaimon Kelly (Bond University, in Australia) analyzed the medical literature, finding 7 relevant studies that included a total of 15,285 participants.

Healthy dietary patterns were generally higher in fruits, vegetables, fish, legumes, cereals, whole grains, and fiber, and they were lower in red meat, salt, and refined sugars. In 6 studies, healthy dietary patterns were consistently associated with a 20% to 30% lower rate of mortality, with 46 fewer deaths per 1000 people over 5 years. There was no significant association between healthy dietary patterns and risk of kidney failure.

“Chronic kidney disease now affects about 10% to 13% of the adult population and substantially increases risks of cardiovascular complications and early death,” said Prof. Strippoli. “In the absence of randomized trials and large individual cohort studies, this study is the best available evidence to drive clinical decision-making by patients and doctors on whole dietary approaches in chronic kidney disease.”

Disclosures: The authors reported no financial disclosures.

The article, entitled “Healthy Dietary Patterns, Mortality and End-Stage Kidney Disease in CKD: A Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies,” will appear online at http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/ on December 8, 2016, doi: 10.2215/CJN. 06190616.

The content of this article does not reflect the views or opinions of The American Society of Nephrology (ASN). Responsibility for the information and views expressed therein lies entirely with the author(s). ASN does not offer medical advice. All content in ASN publications is for informational purposes only, and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, drug interactions, or adverse effects. This content should not be used during a medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. Please consult your doctor or other qualified health care provider if you have any questions about a medical condition, or before taking any drug, changing your diet or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment. Do not ignore or delay obtaining professional medical advice because of information accessed through ASN. Call 911 or your doctor for all medical emergencies.Since 1966, ASN has been leading the fight to prevent, treat, and cure kidney diseases throughout the world by educating health professionals and scientists, advancing research and innovation, communicating new knowledge, and advocating for the highest quality care for patients. ASN has nearly 16,000 members representing 112 countries. For more information, please visit www.asn-online.org or contact us at 202-640-4660.# # #
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release does provide some numbers around the benefits, but they are mostly in relative terms, not allowing reporters or other readers to assess how many people really ended up benefiting from the healthy diets. It says, for example, “In 6 studies, healthy dietary patterns were consistently associated with a 20% to 30% lower rate of mortality, with 46 fewer deaths per 1000 people over 5 years.” It’s hard to understand from this sentence what this means. If it is a range from 20% to 30% lower mortality rates, does this mean that “46 fewer deaths per 1,000 people” is the average reduction in mortality? And this is 46 fewer deaths than what? Than 100? Than 900? Precision would have helped here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A new study calls into question the value of removing blood clots from a patient's heart arteries during angioplasty, a procedure to open blocked arteries.

Although manually removing clots has become common medical practice, this study of more than 10,000 heart attack patients found no benefit in terms of reducing death, heart attack or heart failure in the six months after the procedure. Removing clots appears to have increased the risk of stroke in the month after clots were removed, the Canadian researchers report.

"There has been some controversy about removing blood clots during the treatment of heart attacks," said lead researcher Dr. Sanjit Jolly, an associate professor of cardiology at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.

A study in 2008 suggested that removing clots during an angioplasty might save lives, he said. "Guidelines changed based on this study," Jolly noted. Another trial in 2013, however, suggested that removing clots was not beneficial, he added.

In this latest trial, researchers found that routinely removing clots was not beneficial, Jolly said.

Jolly isn't sure why removing clots causes additional problems. It is possible that parts of the clot break off and travel elsewhere in the heart or brain, he said.

"This is an unexpected finding, and we want to confirm this in other studies," Jolly said.

Jolly said there are mechanical methods of removing clots, which were not tested in this study. Whether these methods would have produced better results isn't clear. "The jury is out on that. It needs to be tested in large trials," he said.

However, preliminary results from small trials of mechanical clot removal have not been promising, Jolly noted.

Jolly said the lesson from his team's trial is that clot removal should be used only as a rescue treatment when an angioplasty fails to clear an artery.

"As a routine therapy, clot removal is not beneficial and could have some significant downsides," he said.

The results of the study were published online March 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with a planned presentation of the findings at the American College of Cardiology's annual meeting in San Diego.

For the study, Jolly and colleagues randomly assigned 10,732 patients undergoing an angioplasty after a heart attack to have clots manually removed or to not have them removed.

Among all the patients, 6.9 percent who had clots removed, and 7 percent of those who didn't, died, had another heart attack or developed heart failure in the 180 days after the procedure.

In the 30 days after the procedure, 0.7 percent of the patients who had clots removed suffered a stroke, as did 0.3 percent of those who only had angioplasty, Jolly's team found.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said, "This is a very important and eagerly awaited clinical trial."

A number of studies have suggested a benefit from manually removing clots during an angioplasty, but this trial found no clinical benefits for doing so, he said.

"These findings will likely have important implications for clinical practice," Fonarow said.

Visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine for more on angioplasty.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story reports the absolute difference in the primary composite outcome in the two groups in this study (in fact there was no difference between those groups, indicating no added benefit for clot removal), which earns the story a satisfactory rating here.
With that being said, the general benefits of angioplasty are not really discussed in the story. The assumption made is that after a heart attack, where clogged arteries occur, angioplasty is an accepted and effective treatment.  A bit of background on angioplasty as a treatment and stent placement might have filled out this story and made it clearer why these two approaches were being evaluated in the first place.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Sierra Riddle stormed into the conference room at Denver’s child protective services office, the director of the agency was seated there, along with her son’s team of doctors, top administrators from the Children’s Hospital Colorado oncology department and lawyers. She recalls looking one of the physicians in the eye, defiant. “I’m done with this shit,” she remembers saying. “I’m done with you guys bullying us.”

Then, she took out a bag and dumped the contents on the table: nine months of cancer drugs prescribed to her son, Landon, who was 4 at the time. He had been diagnosed more than a year before with an aggressive form of leukemia and undergone months of grueling treatment. But his mother was now refusing to follow his doctors’ orders. “Listen: Here’s all this chemo you told CPS he cannot live without, and if I didn’t give it to him, he would relapse and die.”

But Landon, who underwent only one year of cancer treatment instead of the recommended four, was still alive—thriving, in fact—even though he’d stopped taking that massive pile of drugs prescribed for him. That’s why his mother had called this meeting. She implored the CPS director—whom by then she knew by first name—to restrain the oncologists who had threatened to take her child away and put him in foster care. Riddle believes the doctors wanted to prove she was a neglectful, abusive mother, but she knew she could convince the world that the hospital was wrong about her son’s treatment. (Due to HIPAA patient privacy laws, Children’s Hospital Colorado was unable to comment on Landon’s case for this story.)

Landon’s cancer, diagnosed in September 2012, had put Riddle in a situation that’s any parent’s worst nightmare: She had to watch him undergo lifesaving treatment that appeared to be killing him. Riddle says she was left with no choice but to defy his doctors’ orders.

RELATED: What we know about how cancer starts could all be wrong

In January 2013, nearly four months after Landon’s initial diagnosis, the two went from Utah to Colorado, where Riddle purchased an alternative treatment fraught with complicated politics and plenty of skepticism—especially when it comes to saving the life of a preschooler with a potentially fatal disease. At the time, Colorado was one of only about a dozen states in the U.S. that had legalized medical cannabis. It also allowed sick children to access the drug under professional guidance. Landon became the youngest patient in the U.S. at that time to receive a medical marijuana card. Riddle’s decision to treat her child with cannabis landed the family in the center of a contentious national debate, as well as on prime-time television with CNN’s chief medical correspondent, Sanjay Gupta. In Utah, all cannabis is illegal, so when their story went public, she and Landon had to move permanently to Colorado, so he could continue to have access to the drug. Even now, at 7, he still needs to take cannabis to cope with the long-term effects of chemotherapy and radiation, she says.

By the time of that showdown with CPS and Landon’s doctors in Denver, Riddle had stopped giving her son all of the drugs prescribed by the hospital: the chemo, opiates and benzos. The latter two—which included OxyContin, morphine and Ativan—were prescribed to help Landon cope with the side effects of cancer treatment. None of them helped, she says, or they made him feel worse. But when Landon started the cannabis oil, his health miraculously improved. She was willing to do whatever it took to keep him on cannabis.

As laws that permit medical cannabis have expanded nationwide (29 states in the country now permit some form of cannabis use for medical purposes), cancer patients increasingly use the drug to alleviate the harsh symptoms of chemotherapy, such as nausea, anxiety, loss of appetite and insomnia. But there’s also an emerging body of research that suggests marijuana might be effective as a treatment for cancer on its own, or in conjunction with standard therapies.

When Riddle made the decision to give her son cannabis, the information on its safety and efficacy was (and still is) limited to anecdotal accounts, a handful of case reports and lab studies published in obscure medical journals. Initially, her hope was that the drug would lessen the side effects. But Riddle soon heard that certain compounds in cannabis—cannabinoids—have been shown to induce cancer cell death. The theory seemed to be especially promising for leukemia, at least according to studies done on cancer cells in test tubes and on mice injected with human leukemia cells. But at that point there wasn’t any evidence it would work for humans. There still isn’t. While cannabis is legal in many U.S. states, the drug is still classified by the Drug Enforcement Administration as a Schedule 1 narcotic (along with heroin and cocaine), which make it very difficult for scientists to conduct clinical trials on people. However, that may change as other nations, such as Israel, take the lead and fund marijuana research.

The findings so far from published lab studies suggest cannabidiol (CBD), one of more than 100 cannabinoids present in the plant, targets certain pathways in leukemia. The evidence indicates that leukemia cells have a high number of cannabinoid receptors—primarily the receptor CB2. The proteins on the cell membrane (receptors) recognize the chemical compound, CBD. The shape of the receptor mirrors the shape of the compound, enabling the CBD to land and attach to the cell. “It’s like a key in the lock,” says Dr. Bonni Goldstein, medical director of Canna-Centers in Los Angeles and the medical adviser to Weedmaps.com, a resource for people seeking specialists to oversee their medical cannabis treatment. “When compounds such as cannabidiol bond to receptors, it causes the cell to die.”

Further studies are needed to verify that CBD could potentially kill leukemia, says Robert McKallip, an associate professor of immunology at Mercer University School of Medicine, who conducted some of the earliest research on the anti-leukemia properties of compounds found in cannabis. McKallip suggests cannabis could be used along with other treatments for leukemia. “Combined with other targeted therapies, which again, specifically target the leukemia, you give it a one-two punch and hopefully reduce side effects and improve efficacy of treatment,” he says.

Riddle isn’t a doctor, but she theorizes that while the chemo initially cleared Landon’s cancer, it’s the cannabis that has kept his disease from coming back. Oncologists who treat pediatric patients often tell families that when the five-year mark passes, their child is in the clear. It’s been nearly five years since Riddle sat in that conference room meeting; Landon is still cancer-free. Riddle says that once he hits the five-year mark this fall, he’ll set a precedent for pediatric leukemia patients in the U.S., and maybe even worldwide.

Riddle, a single mother, was willing to do whatever it would take to rid Landon of the cancer in his blood that had spread to his brain and formed a tumor in his chest the size of a large grapefruit. She desperately wanted to trust the doctors at the Huntsman Cancer Institute in Salt Lake City, where her son was diagnosed at age 2, and who admitted to her that they weren’t sure they could save his life.

She knew the leukemia treatment protocols are backed by decades of research. But they are infamously rough for a child and drag on for years. First, there would be several months of aggressive inpatient chemo and other therapies for what’s known as “remission reduction.” After that, even when blood work showed the disease had entered remission, Landon would need years of chemo and monitoring—called “consolidation”—to make sure his body wasn’t harboring leukemia cells.

This aggressive approach is one of the main reasons pediatric leukemia, depending on its more specific classification, has at least an 80 to 90 percent survival rate. The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society estimates that nearly 5,000 kids will be diagnosed in the U.S. with some form of leukemia in 2017. For most of the kids who go through the entire course of treatment, the illness turns out to be a mere blip on the screen of childhood. Riddle hoped the same would be true for her son. But Landon appeared to be among a small percentage of children with leukemia for whom the treatment was unbearable, excruciating. The chemo caused him to vomit up to 50 times a day, which made it difficult for him to speak because his esophagus was burned and closed up. The chemo had compromised his immune system so severely that he caught every bug in the hospital, just about every strain of stomach viruses, influenza and the common cold. He eventually developed numbness, tingling, pain and weakness (neuropathy) in his feet and ankles, and was no longer able to walk.

Within the first 90 days of treatment, Landon lost half his body weight. He stopped eating for more than a month. He needed blood and platelet transfusions. Doctors kept adding prescription after prescription to alleviate the side effects of treatment—narcotics, anti-depressants, anti-anxiety drugs, prescriptions for pain. “The sad thing is they didn’t seem to help Landon,” she says. “At this point, they kept telling us we have to keep going. I said, ‘He’s dying. It’s very apparent that he’s dying.’”

Landon began to refuse chemotherapy and turn into a “little psychopath,” says Riddle. He kicked and screamed when nurses forced pills into his mouth, so eventually everything needed to be administered with an IV. “The chemo actually has healed a lot of kids, but it almost killed me,” he says.

Most children with leukemia go into remission within the first 30 days of treatment, which was why Landon’s doctors insisted on several more years of chemotherapy, says Riddle. By the time Landon was nearing the end of his first stage of treatment, Riddle says her son was on the brink of death. The doctors told her to bring him home for a two-week break from chemo, adding that they would arrange to send a hospice nurse—an ominous hint that Landon was about to die.

A plea for help posted on Facebook by Riddle’s mother, Wendy, led the family to a group of brothers in Denver, the Stanleys, who were cultivating cannabis for medicinal purposes and had made the news for a strain they called Charlotte’s Web. Riddle and her mother had seen the story about Charlotte Figi, a 6-year-old girl with Dravet syndrome, a rare type of epilepsy that was unresponsive to standard treatment. She had up to 300 seizures per day. But the seizures stopped when she began taking CBD oil supplied by the brothers.

The Stanleys visited the Riddles in Utah to educate them about Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)—the psychoactive chemical in the plant—and CBD. She decided to start Landon on cannabis. But to do that, the family would need to leave Utah, where all cannabis is illegal. So Riddle and Landon moved in with the brothers for about a year, says Joel Stanley, the CEO of the company that is now known as CW Hemp. “It was just so sad to see someone that young and that small going through such harsh treatment,” Stanley says of Landon. “He also had elements of what I know a lot of folks would call ‘chemo brain.’ He would get very frustrated and very angry, all normal because his little body was just being invaded by this intense medication and rounds of chemotherapy treatment.” Throughout that year, Riddle and her son traveled back and forth from Colorado to Utah, so he could continue chemo, but this time with the aid of cannabis, to make treatment more bearable. That meant Riddle had the drug on hand, and Landon was under its influence while in Utah, which made mother and son both felons.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story gives the impression that the mother made the right choice for her son: stopping conventional chemotherapy and other treatment, and instead giving him cannabis oil. But more than once, the story warns that there is no evidence that cannabis oil fights cancer in people. It reports the mother’s beliefs that the cannabis oil benefited her son, but it does not tell readers that her beliefs are supported by any independent scientific evidence; in other words, there are no specific claims that the cannabis oil provided proven benefits. So we will give the story a passing grade on this criterion.
However, the story could have more clearly noted that the improvements in the boy’s quality of life could be explained by the end of toxic chemotherapy and other treatments, and that it’s just a coincidence that the cannabis oil treatment started at the same time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Step inside the lounge at Evolved Science and you’ll find a cocktail menu unlike any you’ve ever seen.

The ritzy Manhattan medical office — which says it serves high-powered clients and celebrities — shakes and stirs up tailored IV infusions using a slurry of vitamins and amino acids. There’s a Jet Lag Eraser, for use after hopping off a long international flight, a Detoxification saline smoothie for “improving alertness and mental acuity,” and a Late Night Rescue cocktail to undo the effects of too many actual cocktails the night before.

The company claims liquid vitamins, minerals, and amino acids delivered straight to the bloodstream can protect users from getting a cold, boost athletic performance, “annihilate toxins,” and stave off headaches. “We put together the ideal combination for them to obtain the results they want: clearer skin, clearer mind, better hair, better nails,” said Dr. Erika Schwartz, who runs the clinic.

And though the IV lends a medical air to the procedure, the infusions suffer from the same problem as many supplements taken orally — there isn’t any robust evidence to back up their health claims.

“Supplements don’t fix anything and they don’t prevent anything. It’s simple,” said Dr. Pete Miller, a clinician and nutrition researcher at Johns Hopkins.

Vitamin IV infusions aren’t anything new. Celebrities from Simon Cowell and Rihanna to the Real Housewives have proclaimed their love for vitamin drips. They’re part of a huge — and wildly popular — supplement industry which goes largely unregulated. Supplement makers aren’t allowed to claim that their products can cure or treat a particular condition, but they are allowed to make sweeping claims that the products promote health.

The infusion treatments can be traced back to an intravenous supplement known as the Myers’ cocktail, a slurry of magnesium, calcium, B vitamins, and other products developed decades ago by a Baltimore physician. There is a published review on the use of Myers’ cocktail — but it’s just a collection of anecdotal evidence. The author, Dr. Alan Gaby, has long promoted the use of intravenous vitamins for a wide range of clinical conditions.

The research on injectable vitamins of any kind is thin and the results unimpressive. One study looked at injectable vitamins to treat asthma, but there was no placebo group to compare outcomes against. Two studies have examined intravenous vitamin use in fibromyalgia patients. One didn’t turn up any significant improvement in patients who received the infusions. The other — which was also missing a placebo group — involved just seven patients and showed only short-term improvement in symptoms.

Schwartz, though, said the supplements are completely safe.

“We’re doing it in a sterile environment, it’s administered by a nurse, and everything is sterile,” she said. “The only difference is it’s kind of a beautiful environment.”

Customers at Evolved Science shell out anywhere from $325 to $875 for an infusion. For first-time clients, Schwartz recommends weekly injections for the first month or so, and then a routine infusion once a month. Patients kick back in cream-colored chairs together while they’re hooked up to IVs in the “infusion lounge.”

“It doesn’t look like a doctor’s office. It’s very relaxed, not like a spa. But like a private club. It’s a SoHo house kind of thing,” said Schwartz, a former trauma surgeon.

But as for whether they’ll help a client prepare for an important presentation?

“There is not not substantial evidence that vitamin supplements have a large impact on cognitive function,” said Dr. Francine Grodstein, a public health researcher at Harvard who has studied the subject. A longitudinal study would be needed to back those claims with evidence, she added.

Still, the trend seems to be going strong. The I.V. Doc — an in-home vitamin infusion service — offers on-demand nutrient drips in places including Boston, Los Angeles, Chicago, and the Hamptons. In Las Vegas, hangover buses deliver pick-me-up infusions on the go.

And despite a lack of sound evidence, experts expect consumers to keep coming back for infusions.

“What drives the market is not the science,” said Miller. “In spite of that lack of evidence, there’s still a market for it.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story hinges on the lack of benefits, and we think it chose credible sources for questions about that. Besides quoting nutrition researchers Goodstein and Miller, we liked how the story explained the history behind the “Myers” cocktail and links to a review published in an alternative medicine journal. Readers are given their own way to check the credibility of claims of “evidence.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Active older people resemble much younger people physiologically, according to a new study of the effects of exercise on aging. The findings suggest that many of our expectations about the inevitability of physical decline with advancing years may be incorrect and that how we age is, to a large degree, up to us.

Aging remains a surprisingly mysterious process. A wealth of past scientific research has shown that many bodily and cellular processes change in undesirable ways as we grow older. But science has not been able to establish definitively whether such changes result primarily from the passage of time — in which case they are inevitable for anyone with birthdays — or result at least in part from lifestyle, meaning that they are mutable.

This conundrum is particularly true in terms of inactivity. Older people tend to be quite sedentary nowadays, and being sedentary affects health, making it difficult to separate the effects of not moving from those of getting older.

In the new study, which was published this week in The Journal of Physiology, scientists at King’s College London and the University of Birmingham in England decided to use a different approach.

They removed inactivity as a factor in their study of aging by looking at the health of older people who move quite a bit.

“We wanted to understand what happens to the functioning of our bodies as we get older if we take the best-case scenario,” said Stephen Harridge, senior author of the study and director of the Centre of Human and Aerospace Physiological Sciences at King’s College London.

To accomplish that goal, the scientists recruited 85 men and 41 women aged between 55 and 79 who bicycle regularly. The volunteers were all serious recreational riders but not competitive athletes. The men had to be able to ride at least 62 miles in six and a half hours and the women 37 miles in five and a half hours, benchmarks typical of a high degree of fitness in older people.

The scientists then ran each volunteer through a large array of physical and cognitive tests. The scientists determined each cyclist’s endurance capacity, muscular mass and strength, pedaling power, metabolic health, balance, memory function, bone density and reflexes. They also had the volunteers complete the so-called Timed Up and Go test, during which someone stands up from a chair without using his or her arms, briskly walks about 10 feet, turns, walks back and sits down again.

The researchers compared the results of cyclists in the study against each other and also against standard benchmarks of supposedly normal aging. If a particular test’s numbers were similar among the cyclists of all ages, the researchers considered, then that measure would seem to be more dependent on activity than on age.

As it turned out, the cyclists did not show their age. On almost all measures, their physical functioning remained fairly stable across the decades and was much closer to that of young adults than of people their age. As a group, even the oldest cyclists had younger people’s levels of balance, reflexes, metabolic health and memory ability.

And their Timed Up and Go results were exemplary. Many older people require at least 7 seconds to complete the task, with those requiring 9 or 10 seconds considered to be on the cusp of frailty, Dr. Harridge said. But even the oldest cyclists in this study averaged barely 5 seconds for the walk, which is “well within the norm reported for healthy young adults,” the study authors write.

Some aspects of aging did, however, prove to be ineluctable. The oldest cyclists had less muscular power and mass than those in their 50s and early 60s and considerably lower overall aerobic capacities. Age does seem to reduce our endurance and strength to some extent, Dr. Harridge said, even if we exercise.

But even so, both of those measures were higher among the oldest cyclists than would be considered average among people aged 70 or above.

All in all, the numbers suggest that aging is simply different in the active.

“If you gave this dataset to a clinician and asked him to predict the age” of one of the cyclists based on his or her test results, Dr. Harridge said, “it would be impossible.” On paper, they all look young.

Of course, this study is based on a single snapshot of an unusual group of older adults, Dr. Harridge said. He and his colleagues plan to retest their volunteers in five and 10 years, which will provide better information about the ongoing effects of exercise on aging.

But even in advance of those results, said Dr. Harridge, himself almost 50 and an avid cyclist, this study shows that “being physically active makes your body function on the inside more like a young person’s.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story made a reasonable attempt to quantify the study results in a way that would make sense to readers. It explained what the “Timed Up and Go” test is, and compared the results from the study participants with those of typical older adults and normal young adults.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Thirty percent of Americans say they’re trying to reduce or eliminate gluten in their diets. But only about 1 percent of the population has an autoimmune response to gluten. Somewhere in that gap, a diet fad is thriving.

There are two groups of people who should definitely avoid gluten: those diagnosed with wheat allergies and those who have celiac disease. The latter is more common, affecting about 1 percent of the population. The former affects perhaps 0.1 percent of people and is more common in children, who often grow out of it.

What is less clear is whether there is another group of individuals whose digestive systems have some “gluten sensitivity” and who would, therefore, benefit from avoiding gluten. The people who think they’re sensitive to gluten are filling the gap between those who should avoid gluten and those who are doing it anyway. But how many people really are sensitive?

Gluten, for those of you who have not kept up with dietary fads, is a component of wheat. You eat it in bread, pasta, pizza and so on. Gluten-avoiders are helped by an increasing array of gluten-free breads, pastas and other products. Entire aisles of Whole Foods Market stores appear to be devoted to this trend.

Despite the growing availability of alternative products, avoiding gluten can be a challenge. The satisfying, slightly chewy texture of bread requires gluten. For those of us who care about our health but, let’s face it, like a nice baguette, it seems worth asking: Is there any actual health benefit to gluten avoidance?

The earliest report on whether gluten could muck with some digestive tracts comes from the late 1970s. Two authors reported on a woman in her early 40s who was experiencing significant “gastrointestinal distress” (bloating, gas, diarrhea, constipation, etc.) and did not have celiac disease or a wheat allergy. After being put on a gluten-free diet, she improved immediately. When gluten was reintroduced to her diet as a test, the symptoms returned, only to disappear when the gluten was again removed. The authors diagnosed the woman with what they termed “non-celiac gluten sensitivity” (NCGS).

Gluten sensitivity fell off the radar for many years, but researchers have returned to it and adopted the same term. In contrast to celiac disease or a wheat allergy, NCGS is not diagnosed through direct testing. Rather, it refers to a condition in which someone experiences some problematic gastrointestinal symptoms that resolve when gluten is avoided. Gastrointestinal symptoms are the hallmark of NCGS — although some people also complain of fatigue or a foggy head.

Of course, it’s difficult to distinguish between someone who is sensitive to gluten and someone who is sensitive to the placebo effect. Since there is no test for gluten sensitivity, “diagnoses” are based on whether people say they feel better when they avoid gluten. But the mind is a powerful thing. If you think avoiding gluten will make you feel better, there is a reasonable chance that it will — even if gluten is irrelevant.

This effect makes it hard to test for gluten sensitivities even in a randomized controlled trial. If a researcher enrolls people in a standard randomized controlled trial and has some participants eat bread and some not, those who avoid bread may feel better simply because they think they should. The placebo effect may lead a researcher to falsely conclude that avoiding bread is beneficial.

But that’s not enough. To really get a sense of whether gluten sensitivity is a thing, researchers need to conduct a double-blind randomized controlled trial in which one group eats gluten, another does not, and no one knows which group they are in. That means putting everyone on a gluten-free diet and then directly supplementing some people with gluten protein and others with something that seems similar but has no gluten.

There have been two small studies like this. They were run by the same team. And, unfortunately for our ability to draw conclusions, they find different results. The first of these, published in 2011, followed 34 people for up to six weeks. The study population was made up of people who complained of gastrointestinal symptoms consistent with NCGS.

Everyone participating in the study was on a gluten-free diet. Half had their diet supplemented with a regular muffin and regular bread; the other half received a gluten-free muffin and gluten-free bread. The authors found that 40 percent of patients on the entirely gluten-free diet reported a continuation of symptoms, compared with 68 percent of those who had consumed gluten. The groups also differed on such measures as “satisfaction with stool consistency,” a phrase that I honestly never thought I would write.

The second study, published in 2013, had a similar set up — 37 people complaining of gastrointestinal problems, randomized into high-gluten, low-gluten and no-gluten groups. This time, rather than using bread and muffins, the authors used gluten and whey protein supplements. They found no difference in symptoms among the groups.

Why the results of these studies differ is unclear. One possibility is that some participants in the first study guessed which group they were in based on the muffin and bread and therefore the placebo effect became pronounced. Another possibility is simply that given how small the studies were, the differences occurred by chance. Regardless of the reason, we are left with little convincing evidence that gluten avoidance matters.

But let’s say you take heart in the first of these studies and now believe that avoiding gluten will make some people feel better even though they don’t have an allergy or celiac disease. How many people? Estimates of prevalence of NCGS are based, more or less, on information on gluten avoidance. In the 2009-10 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, about 0.6 percent of people without celiac disease or an allergy say their diet is gluten-free. And in a large Italian study of people who complain of gastrointestinal problems, the authors conclude that NCGS is slightly more common than celiac disease, putting it at a prevalence of a bit above 1 percent of the population.

For those of you keeping track at home, that means that while 30 percent of Americans are trying to cut gluten from their diet, probably at most only 1 percent of Americans may have NCGS.

If you don’t have celiac disease or a wheat allergy and are experiencing distressing gastrointestinal symptoms after eating gluten — lack of satisfaction with your stool consistency, for example — there is something like a 1 in 30 chance that the gluten is potentially responsible. If you cut out gluten and it makes you feel better, great. Although it may all be in your head.

If you are cutting out gluten for any other reason, all that will happen is you’ll feel the same, but without the pleasure of bread that tastes like bread.

CORRECTION (Feb. 12, 11:50 a.m.): An earlier version of this article incorrectly state that it is hard to test for gluten allergies. It’s hard to test for gluten sensitivities. The previous version also misstated the probability that gluten is responsible for gastrointestinal distress for those who experience gastrointestinal distress after consuming gluten and who don’t have celiac disease or a wheat allergy. The probability is 1 in 30, not 1 in 100.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of addressing the symptoms associated with NCGS, which would presumably be eliminated by adopting a gluten-free diet. It also provides useful numbers on the size and duration of the studies mentioned and how big the effects observed were. Example: “The authors found that 40 percent of patients on the entirely gluten-free diet reported a continuation of symptoms, compared with 68 percent of those who had consumed gluten.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON, May 17 (Reuters) - Psilocybin, the psychedelic compound in magic mushrooms, may one day be an effective treatment for patients with severe depression who fail to recover using other therapies, scientists said on Tuesday.

A small-scale pilot study of psilocybin’s use in cases of treatment-resistant depression showed it was safe and effective, the British researchers said.

Of 12 patients given the drug, all showed some decrease in symptoms of depression for at least three weeks. Seven continued to show a positive response at three months. Five remained in remission beyond the three months.

Robin Carhart-Harris, who led the study at Imperial College London’s department of medicine, said the results, published in the Lancet Psychiatry journal, were striking.

Many patients described a profound experience, he said, and appeared to undergo a shift in the way they perceived the world.

“But we shouldn’t get carried away with these results,” he told reporters at a briefing in London. “This isn’t a magic bullet. We’re just learning how to do this treatment.”

Magic mushrooms grow worldwide and have been used since ancient times, both for recreation and for religious rites.

British researchers led by David Nutt, a professor of neuropsychopharmacology at Imperial, have been exploring the potential of psilocybin to ease severe forms of depression in people who don’t respond to other treatments.

The World Health Organization estimates that some 350 million people worldwide are affected by depression, a common mental disorder characterized by sadness, loss of interest or pleasure, tiredness, feelings of guilt or low self-worth, disturbed sleep and appetite, and poor concentration.

Many patients respond to treatment with anti depressants and cognitive behavioral therapy, but around 20 percent don’t get better and are classed as having treatment-resistant depression.

Psilocybin acts on the serotonin system, suggesting it could be developed for treating depression. But hallucinogenic drugs can also cause unpleasant reactions, including anxiety and paranoia, so Nutt’s team wanted to find out if psilocybin can be given safely.

The trial involved six men and six women, aged between 30 and 64, all diagnosed with treatment-resistant depression. They all went through a full screening process before being allowed to participate and they were fully supported before, during and after they received psilocybin.

The patients were given psilocybin capsules during two dosing sessions, seven days apart.

Blood pressure, heart rate and the self-reported intensity of the effects of psilocybin were monitored during each session, and the patients were seen by a psychiatrist the next day and one, two, three and five weeks after the second dose.

Carhart-Harris said no serious side effects were reported during the study, although all volunteers said they were slightly anxious before and during initial drug administration.

“Psychedelic drugs have potent psychological effects and are only given in our research when appropriate safeguards are in place,” he said. “I wouldn’t want members of the public thinking they can treat their own depressions by picking their own magic mushrooms. That kind of approach could be risky.”

Nutt said the results showed that psilocybin “is safe and fast acting, so may - if administered carefully - have value for these patients.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does offer some specific information about the outcomes of treatment for the 12 individuals in the study. Ideally it would have explained how those outcomes were actually measured–how did researchers measure what “some decrease” in symptoms meant? The same with “positive response.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Hochman presented the results yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart Association in Chicago. The study was also published online yesterday by The New England Journal of Medicine and will appear in the Dec. 7 issue.

Her report is the latest warning from researchers who suspect that stents are being overused and may even be causing heart attacks and deaths. Manufacturers sell $6 billion in stents a year, and hospitals charge $10,000 to $15,000 per patient to implant them.

The devices, which came into widespread use in the 1990s, are made of either bare metal or metal coated with a drug meant to help keep the artery from closing again. Recent studies have found that drug-coated stents can increase the risk of blood clots, even years after they are implanted.

Use of the drug-coated stents has fallen since last spring, but they still account for more than 80 percent of stents implanted in the United States.

Stents have been increasingly used in people with clogged arteries who are not having heart attacks, but some studies suggest that those patients would be better off taking drugs to reduce cholesterol, inflammation and clotting. The reasoning is that artery disease tends to be systemic and extensive, but stents can treat it only in tiny spots.

A million Americans a year have heart attacks, and half of them die, according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. A common symptom is severe pain in the chest, left arm, jaw or back, but about a third of patients do not have chest pain. Symptoms may also include feeling faint, sweaty, short of breath or nauseated and having a sensation that the heart is pounding.

Clots are often the cause of heart attacks, and health authorities urge people with symptoms to go to the hospital immediately so that doctors can use balloons and stents, or clot-dissolving drugs, to try to prevent heart damage. But some patients do not realize what is happening, or do not want to believe it.

About a million angioplasties a year are performed in the United States, including those in heart attack victims and those in people with blocked arteries who have not had heart attacks. The study did not address the use of angioplasty and stents in people who have not had heart attacks.

Dr. Hochman emphasized that angioplasty was still the best treatment for many heart attack patients who go to the hospital early, within 12 hours of when the attack began. The people who generally do best are those who arrive at the hospital and have angioplasty within 90 minutes of the heart attack.

Opening a clogged artery in the early stages of a heart attack — “early angioplasty” — can restore blood flow and reduce damage to the heart muscle. It can sometimes save the muscle after 12 hours, but then doctors decide case by case whether it is worthwhile. About a third of heart attack patients show up after 12 hours.

After a few days have passed, though, there is little or no chance of preventing heart damage. But many doctors open the artery anyway, thinking it may still have long-term benefits and prolong the patients’ lives. In that situation, the procedure is called late angioplasty. It can be helpful in people who are still suffering from chest pain or have certain other complications from the heart attack.

But what about people who see a doctor more than a day later and are medically stable and free of chest pain? The new study tried to determine if late angioplasty could help them. Although angioplasty is not open surgery, it is an invasive procedure with risks, and the researchers wanted to know if there was any reason to put these patients through it when they seemed to be on the road to recovery. The study showed there was no need for the procedure.

The findings may come as a rude surprise to many cardiologists, who have come to believe that opening a blocked artery, even days or weeks after a heart attack, is bound to be good for patients.

Even Dr. Hochman was surprised by the results. She said she and her colleagues expected to find that angioplasty would reduce the risks of heart failure, subsequent heart attacks and death. But their theory failed the test.

“This is why we have clinical trials,” she said. She added that cardiologists were such strong believers in angioplasty that some major medical centers in the United States and Europe had refused to participate in her study, saying it would be unethical to let some patients go without the procedure for a study.

The 2,166 patients in the study had all suffered heart attacks 3 to 28 days before, caused by a completely blocked coronary artery. The median time since the heart attack was eight days. They were in stable condition and free of chest pain, and were picked at random to receive either heart medicines only or balloon treatment and stents with heart medicines. Most got plain metal stents, but about 8 percent got drug-coated ones. The researchers tracked their health for an average of three years.

There were no differences between the groups. They had the same rates of heart attack, death and heart failure. If anything, those who had angioplasty seemed to fare a bit worse than those who did not, but the differences were not statistically significant and might have been because of chance, Dr. Hochman said.

An expert not involved in the research, Dr. Steven E. Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic and president of the American College of Cardiology, said the study was independent and well conducted.

“Having an artery open ought to be good for you,” Dr. Nissen said. “Why not open it late? Like a lot of things in medicine, however, when you actually test it in an organized way, in a randomized, controlled trial, you find out it doesn’t work.”

He added, “It will change what I do.”

In an editorial accompanying the study in the journal, two other cardiologists say that late angioplasty may still be worthwhile for some patients. The ones who might benefit, they say, are a small minority — perhaps 10 to 15 percent — who cannot take the class of heart medicines known as beta blockers, which have been proved to increase survival after a heart attack.

A spokesman for Boston Scientific, the leading stent maker in the United States, said Dr. Hochman’s study would not have much impact because the findings applied to only a small subgroup of patients. But the company’s stock price dropped sharply yesterday morning when news of Dr. Hochman’s study first hit the news. It recovered by the end of the day, however, as analysts said the findings were likely to have little effect on stent use. By late afternoon, the rally had wiped out all the morning losses. Boston Scientific ended trading at $15.94, up 8 cents.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefits of the two treatments in terms of reducing the risk of heart attack, heart failure, or death in this particular patient group (individuals who had had a heart attack more than 12 hours before and were no longer experiencing angina) were found not to differ as reported in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental therapy for type 1 diabetes, widely derided by mainstream diabetes researchers, lowered blood sugar levels to near normal, a small, ongoing trial found. Patients in the trial, whose blood sugar levels have remained near normal for five to eight years, take about one-third less insulin than they did before, reducing their risk of hypoglycemia, in which insulin lowers blood sugar to dangerously low levels.

The experimental treatment, a decades-old generic vaccine for tuberculosis called bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), seems to alter both cellular metabolism and the immune system, said Dr. Denise Faustman of Massachusetts General Hospital, senior author of the study published Thursday in npj Vaccines. “This cheap, old vaccine is lowering blood sugar to levels never achieved before,” she said.

While the results, from only nine patients, must be replicated in a larger study, said Dr. Joseph Bellanti of Georgetown University Medical Center, “if what they found is true, they really have something here.” Bellanti, who was not involved in the research, said the study’s eight-year follow-up and use of a placebo control arm made him “cautiously optimistic” that two doses of the BCG vaccine “can decrease levels of A1c,” a measure of blood glucose that predicts the likelihood of serious complications such as stroke and kidney failure.

JDRF (formerly the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation), the Joslin Diabetes Center, and several university diabetes centers all declined to speak about Faustman’s results. She has been a voice in the diabetes wilderness for nearly two decades, angering the establishment diabetes community by pursuing low-tech research very different from more popular approaches, such as embryonic stem cells and immunosupression.

Critics have gone so far as to send letters to newspapers that covered her work apologizing to patients “on behalf of Dr. Faustman” for “having their expectations cruelly raised.” She has also struggled for funding, receiving much of her research support from the private Iacocca Family Foundation, rather than in federal grants.

In Faustman’s Phase 1 clinical trial, three participants with type 1 diabetes received two doses of BCG vaccine, a month apart. After the vaccine showed signs of effectiveness, an additional six patients were vaccinated five years ago, and 111 more recently. The new paper and a presentation scheduled for a meeting of the American Diabetes Association this weekend focus on the patients who have been followed for more than five years.

All of those patients who received BCG had a statistically significant change in hemoglobin A1c. A normal level is below 6. In the vaccinated patients, A1c levels fell from an average of 7.36 before the first dose to 6.18 after five years, holding almost steady at 6.65 in the eighth year. In patients receiving a sham injection, levels showed almost no change from their initial levels of 7.10: 7.07 in the fifth year and 7.22 in the eighth.

“We wanted it to be good, but we didn’t know it would be this good,” Faustman said.

All of the patients remain on insulin, she said, but less of it. They are also able to monitor their blood sugar less frequently, which can be several times an hour. (The standard of care is a continuous glucose monitor, in which a probe is inserted into the abdomen, plus an insulin pump.) “If we can gradually move people to where they can control their blood sugar, their minute-to-minute lifestyle can improve dramatically,” Faustman said.

The A1c reductions could also bring significant health benefits. Every 10 percent drop, research shows, reduces complications such as stroke and heart attack by about one-third. The BCG vaccine lowered A1c levels 9 percent to 16 percent.

The new paper describes how the BCG vaccine, which has been used for nearly 100 years against tuberculosis and is considered extremely safe, might affect diabetes. According to studies in mice, it has two effects. It alters the immune system so as to increase levels of T regulatory cells; T regs keep other immune cells in check, including those that attack the pancreas’s insulin-making cells — the root cause of type 1 diabetes. In addition, BCG alters metabolism so cells consume higher levels of glucose, drawing more of it out of the blood, in a process called aerobic glycolysis.

“The clinical effects and the proposed mechanism demonstrated are exciting and add to the emerging consensus that the BCG vaccine can have a lasting and valuable impact on the immune system,” said Dr. Mihai Netea of Radboud University Medical Center in the Netherlands, who was not involved in the study.

A Phase 2 clinical trial of BCG is currently underway at Mass. General. It is testing multiple BCG doses in 150 patients with longstanding type 1 diabetes.

Although many studies of BCG are underway around the world in diabetes and other autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis, there has been little interest among U.S. researchers outside Faustman’s lab.

“There is not a lot of enthusiasm because we’re all rewarded for discovering for-profit drugs,” she said. “Potential funders come [to my lab] and ask, ‘How can we make money off this?’”

BCG, whose one licensed manufacturer in the U.S. is Merck subsidiary Organon Teknika, costs less than a dollar a dose. (Faustman used a strain made by Sanofi.) The U.S. market for insulin meters and insulin pumps is $20 billion. “With everyone thinking they need a pump and a meter, if you come along with an inexpensive vaccine that can change this standard of care, of course there will be pushback,” Faustman said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Wisely, the story quantifies reduction in absolute terms: “In the vaccinated patients, A1c levels fell from an average of 7.36 before the first dose to 6.18 after five years, holding almost steady at 6.65 in the eighth year. In patients receiving a sham injection, levels showed almost no change from their initial levels of 7.10: 7.07 in the fifth year and 7.22 in the eighth.”
The story also explains exactly how much the drop in hemoglobin A1c was (9-16%) and how that compared to the levels in patients receiving the placebo injections and to normal A1c levels. The story also noted that a 10% drop in A1c levels reduces the likelihood of complications such as stroke and heart attack by a third. In addition, the story explained that the patients treated with the BCG vaccine now need one-third less insulin than they did before the treatment, “reducing their risk of hypoglycemia, in which insulin lowers blood sugar to dangerously low levels.” One relatively minor shortcoming is that the story did not explain that the reduction in hemoglobin A1c levels didn’t occur until the third year after the vaccinations had been given.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, April 26, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- After a stroke, many patients are given the clot-busting intravenous drug alteplase, but another drug may be more effective, Australian researchers report.

Among more than 200 stroke victims, TNKase (tenecteplase) was about twice as effective as alteplase in restoring blood flow to the brain, and it also resulted in less disability, the scientists found.

"Tenecteplase is likely to become the preferred medication for clot-dissolving in stroke patients," said lead researcher Dr. Bruce Campbell, head of the stroke department at the Royal Melbourne Hospital in Parkville. "It is likely to change stroke treatment guidelines and clinical practice."

Campbell said tenecteplase is more effective than alteplase because of differences in the enzymes in each drug.

Although both drugs work in the same way, tenecteplase is better at attacking and dissolving clots, and more resistant to factors that inhibit the breakdown of clots, he said.

For either drug to be most effective, it needs to be given as soon as possible after a stroke occurs. In this study, patients were given the drugs within 4.5 hours after the onset of a stroke, Campbell said.

Although tenecteplase appears to be more effective for stroke patients, it's not approved for that use in the United States, according to Dr. Rohan Arora, director of stroke at Long Island Jewish Hospital in Forest Hills, N.Y.

In 2000, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved tenecteplase for use after a heart attack, Arora said.

"Tenecteplase is being widely used in developing countries, such as India," he said. "One reason is it's cheaper than alteplase."

In the United States, tenecteplase costs about $5,800, versus alteplase, which costs $8,000, Arora said.

In addition, tenecteplase is easier to give, requiring only a single injection, while alteplase requires an injection and an IV drip, he added.

Arora explained that tenecteplase is not widely used in the United States for heart attack patients because these patients are typically treated with angioplasty or heart bypass surgery.

For the new study, which did not receive drug company funding, Campbell and his colleagues randomly assigned 202 stroke patients to either alteplase or tenecteplase before surgery to remove clots.

The researchers specifically looked to see which drug was better at restoring blood flow to clot-blocked blood vessels in the brain, and which drug resulted in patients having better outcomes.

The investigators found that 22 percent of the patients treated with tenecteplase had more than 50 percent of blood flow return to the brain, compared with 10 percent of those treated with alteplase.

Patients treated with tenecteplase also had better functional outcomes after 90 days than those given alteplase, the findings showed.

Bleeding into the brain, the most serious side effect of either drug, occurred in 1 percent of patients, regardless of which drug they received, Campbell said.

The report was published April 26 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on stroke, visit the National Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story reported that 22% of patients treated with tenecteplase had more than 50% of blood flow return to the brain, compared with 10% of those treated with alteplase. That was the primary outcome.
It also said that patients treated with tenecteplase also had better functional outcomes after 90 days than those given alteplase, but doesn’t give data on the size of the difference.
The story didn’t mention that there were no significant differences between the two groups in two secondary outcomes: The proportion of patients who had minimal or no deficit after 90 days or the proportion of patients whose condition improved within three days.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You might not want to rush into knee surgery. Physical therapy can be just as good for a common injury and at far less cost and risk, the most rigorous study to compare these treatments concludes.

Therapy didn't always help and some people wound up having surgery for the problem, called a torn meniscus. But those who stuck with therapy had improved as much six months and one year later as those who had arthroscopic surgery right away, researchers found.

"Both are very good choices. It would be quite reasonable to try physical therapy first because the chances are quite good that you'll do quite well," said one study leader, Dr. Jeffrey Katz, a joint specialist at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

He was to discuss the study Tuesday at an American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons conference in Chicago. Results were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine.

A meniscus is one of the crescent-shaped cartilage discs that cushion the knee. About one-third of people over 50 have a tear in one, and arthritis makes this more likely. Usually the tear doesn't cause symptoms but it can be painful.

When that happens, it's tough to tell if the pain is from the tear or the arthritis — or whether surgery is needed or will help. Knee surgery for a torn meniscus is done about half a million times each year in the U.S.

The new federally funded study compared surgery with a less drastic option. Researchers at seven major universities and orthopedic surgery centers around the U.S. assigned 351 people with arthritis and meniscus tears to get either surgery or physical therapy. The therapy was nine sessions on average plus exercises to do at home, which experts say is key to success.

After six months, both groups had similar rates of functional improvement. Pain scores also were similar.

Thirty percent of patients assigned to physical therapy wound up having surgery before the six months was up, often because they felt therapy wasn't helping them. Yet they ended up the same as those who got surgery right away, as well as the rest of the physical therapy group who stuck with it and averted an operation.

"There are patients who would like to get better in a 'fix me' approach" and surgery may be best for them, said Elena Losina, another study leader from Brigham and Women's Hospital.

However, an Australian preventive medicine expert contends that the study's results should change practice. Therapy "is a reasonable first strategy, with surgery reserved for the minority who don't have improvement," Rachelle Buchbinder of Monash University in Melbourne wrote in a commentary in the medical journal.

As it is now, "millions of people are being exposed to potential risks associated with a treatment that may or may not offer specific benefit, and the costs are substantial," she wrote.

Surgery costs about $5,000, compared with $1,000 to $2,000 for a typical course of physical therapy, Katz said.

One study participant — Bob O'Keefe, 68, of suburban Boston — was glad to avoid surgery for his meniscus injury three years ago.

"I felt better within two weeks" on physical therapy, he said. "My knee is virtually normal today." He still does the recommended exercises several times a week.

Robert Dvorkin had both treatments for injuries on each knee several years apart. Dvorkin, 56, director of operations at the Coalition for the Homeless in New York City, had surgery followed by physical therapy for a tear in his right knee and said it was months before he felt no pain.

Then, several years ago, he hurt his left knee while exercising. "I had been doing some stretching and doing some push-ups and I just felt it go 'pop.'" he recalls. "I was limping. It was extremely painful."

An imaging test showed a less severe tear and a different surgeon recommended physical therapy. Dvorkin said it worked like a charm — he avoided surgery and recovered faster than from his first injury. The treatment involved two to three hour-long sessions a week, including strengthening exercises, balancing and massage. He said the sessions weren't that painful and his knee felt better after each one.

"Within a month I was healed," Dvorkin said. "I was completely back to normal."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This description of benefits observed in the study seems sufficient to us:
“After six months, both groups had similar rates of functional improvement. Pain scores also were similar.
Thirty percent of patients assigned to physical therapy wound up having surgery before the six months was up, often because they felt therapy wasn’t helping them. Yet they ended up the same as those who got surgery right away, as well as the rest of the physical therapy group who stuck with it and averted an operation.”
It would have been interesting to learn how much the patients improved from these injuries, and whether they regained total function or had lingering impairment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the late 1940s, the steroid cortisone, an anti-inflammatory drug, was first synthesized and hailed as a landmark. It soon became a safe, reliable means to treat the pain and inflammation associated with sports injuries (as well as other conditions). Cortisone shots became one of the preferred treatments for overuse injuries of tendons, like tennis elbow or an aching Achilles, which had been notoriously resistant to treatment. The shots were quite effective, providing rapid relief of pain.

Then came the earliest clinical trials, including one, published in 1954, that raised incipient doubts about cortisone’s powers. In that early experiment, more than half the patients who received a cortisone shot for tennis elbow or other tendon pain suffered a relapse of the injury within six months.

But that cautionary experiment and others didn’t slow the ascent of cortisone (also known as corticosteroids). It had such a magical, immediate effect against pain. Today cortisone shots remain a standard, much-requested treatment for tennis elbow and other tendon problems.

But a major new review article, published last Friday in The Lancet, should revive and intensify the doubts about cortisone’s efficacy. The review examined the results of nearly four dozen randomized trials, which enrolled thousands of people with tendon injuries, particularly tennis elbow, but also shoulder and Achilles-tendon pain. The reviewers determined that, for most of those who suffered from tennis elbow, cortisone injections did, as promised, bring fast and significant pain relief, compared with doing nothing or following a regimen of physical therapy. The pain relief could last for weeks.

But when the patients were re-examined at 6 and 12 months, the results were substantially different. Over all, people who received cortisone shots had a much lower rate of full recovery than those who did nothing or who underwent physical therapy. They also had a 63 percent higher risk of relapse than people who adopted the time-honored wait-and-see approach. The evidence for cortisone as a treatment for other aching tendons, like sore shoulders and Achilles-tendon pain, was slight and conflicting, the review found. But in terms of tennis elbow, the shots seemed to actually be counterproductive. As Bill Vicenzino, the chairman of sports physiotherapy at the University of Queensland in Australia and senior author of the review, said in an e-mail response to questions, “There is a tendency” among tennis-elbow sufferers “for the majority (70-90 percent) of those following a wait-and-see policy to get better” after six months to a year. But this is not the case for those getting cortisone shots, he wrote; they “tend to lag behind significantly at those time frames.” In other words, in some way, the cortisone shots impede full recovery, and compared with those adopting a wait-and-see policy, those getting the shots “are worse off.” Those people receiving multiple injections may be at particularly high risk for continuing damage. In one study that the researchers reviewed, “an average of four injections resulted in a 57 percent worse outcome when compared to one injection,” Dr. Vicenzino said.

Why cortisone shots should slow the healing of tennis elbow is a good question. An even better one, though, is why they help in the first place. For many years it was widely believed that tendon-overuse injuries were caused by inflammation, said Dr. Karim Khan, a professor at the School of Human Kinetics at the University of British Columbia and the co-author of a commentary in The Lancet accompanying the new review article. The injuries were, as a group, given the name tendinitis, since the suffix “-itis” means inflammation. Cortisone is an anti-inflammatory medication. Using it against an inflammation injury was logical.

But in the decades since, numerous studies have shown, persuasively, that these overuse injuries do not involve inflammation. When animal or human tissues from these types of injuries are examined, they do not contain the usual biochemical markers of inflammation. Instead, the injury seems to be degenerative. The fibers within the tendons fray. Today the injuries usually are referred to as tendinopathies, or diseased tendons.

Why then does a cortisone shot, an anti-inflammatory, work in the short term in noninflammatory injuries, providing undeniable if ephemeral pain relief? The injections seem to have “an effect on the neural receptors” involved in creating the pain in the sore tendon, Dr. Khan said. “They change the pain biology in the short term.” But, he said, cortisone shots do “not heal the structural damage” underlying the pain. Instead, they actually “impede the structural healing.”

Still, relief of pain might be a sufficient reason to champion the injections, if the pain “were severe,” Dr. Khan said. “But it’s not.” The pain associated with tendinopathies tends to fall somewhere around a 7 or so on a 10-point scale of pain. “It’s not insignificant, but it’s not kidney stones.”

So the question of whether cortisone shots still make sense as a treatment for tendinopathies, especially tennis elbow, depends, Dr. Khan said, on how you choose “to balance short-term pain relief versus the likelihood” of longer-term negative outcomes. In other words, is reducing soreness now worth an increased risk of delayed healing and possible relapse within the year?

Some people, including physicians, may decide that the answer remains yes. There will always be a longing for a magical pill, the quick fix, especially when the other widely accepted and studied alternatives for treating sore tendons are to do nothing or, more onerous to some people, to rigorously exercise the sore joint during physical therapy. But if he were to dispense advice based on his findings and that of his colleagues’ systematic review, Dr. Vicenzino said, he would suggest that athletes with tennis elbow (and possibly other tendinopathies) think not just once or twice about the wisdom of cortisone shots but “three or four times.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
The article might have provided better quantitative estimates of the impact of steroid injections on tennis elbow—in terms of the degree of pain relief. However, the systematic review didn’t report its results in quantitative terms that would be easily understood by the general public. And the journalist did solicit some quantitative estimates of treatment impact from one of the researchers she quoted.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Note: A media teleconference with researchers and patients from Johns Hopkins and New York University will be held on Wednesday, Nov. 30, from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. ET. To participate, U.S.-based media may call 855-698-2663; international media should dial 011-646-754-2524. The access code is 48330192. Phone lines open at 10:50 a.m., and all media should place speakers on mute unless posing a question. Reporters wishing to ask a question should email their name and outlet to david.march@nyumc.org during the briefing so they may be placed in a queue; the moderator will call on individual media members to ask a question in the order names and outlets were received.

In a small double-blind study, Johns Hopkins researchers report that a substantial majority of people suffering cancer-related anxiety or depression found considerable relief for up to six months from a single large dose of psilocybin -- the active compound in hallucinogenic "magic mushrooms."

The researchers cautioned that the drug was given in tightly controlled conditions in the presence of two clinically trained monitors and said they do not recommend use of the compound outside of such a research or patient care setting.

The Johns Hopkins team released its study results, involving 51 adult patients, concurrently with researchers from New York University Langone Medical Center, who conducted a similarly designed study on 29 participants. Both studies are published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology on Dec. 1.

The Johns Hopkins group reported that psilocybin decreased clinician- and patient-rated depressed mood, anxiety and death anxiety, and increased quality of life, life meaning and optimism. Six months after the final session of treatment, about 80 percent of participants continued to show clinically significant decreases in depressed mood and anxiety, with about 60 percent showing symptom remission into the normal range. Eighty-three percent reported increases in well-being or life satisfaction. Some 67 percent of participants reported the experience as one of the top five meaningful experiences in their lives, and about 70 percent reported the experience as one of the top five spiritually significant lifetime events.

"The most interesting and remarkable finding is that a single dose of psilocybin, which lasts four to six hours, produced enduring decreases in depression and anxiety symptoms, and this may represent a fascinating new model for treating some psychiatric conditions," says Roland Griffiths, Ph.D., professor of behavioral biology in the Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and of Neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. He notes that traditional psychotherapy offered to people with cancer, including behavioral therapy and antidepressants, can take weeks or even months, isn't always effective, and in the case of some drugs, such as benzodiazepines, may have addictive and other troubling side effects.

Griffiths says his team's new study grew out of a decade of research at Johns Hopkins on the effects of psilocybin in healthy volunteers, which found that psilocybin can consistently produce positive changes in mood, behavior and spirituality when administered to carefully screened and prepared participants. The study was designed to see if psilocybin could produce similar results in psychologically distressed cancer patients.

"A life-threatening cancer diagnosis can be psychologically challenging, with anxiety and depression as very common symptoms," says Griffiths. "People with this kind of existential anxiety often feel hopeless and are worried about the meaning of life and what happens upon death."

For the study, the investigators recruited 51 participants diagnosed with life-threatening cancers, most of which were recurrent or metastatic. They were chosen from a total of 566 individuals reached through flyers, web advertisements and physician referrals. Most participants had breast, upper digestive, GI, genitourinary or blood cancer, and each had been given a formal psychiatric diagnosis, including an anxiety or depressive disorder.

Half of the participants were female with an average age of 56. Ninety-two percent were white, 4 percent were African-American and 2 percent were Asian.

Each participant had two treatment sessions scheduled five weeks apart, one with a very low psilocybin dose (1 or3 milligrams per 70 kilograms) taken in a capsule and meant to act as a "control" placebo because the dose was too low to produce effects. In the other session, participants received a capsule with what is considered a moderate or high dose (22 or 30 milligrams per 70 kilograms).

To minimize expectancy effects, the participants and the staff members supervising the sessions were told that the participants would receive psilocybin on both sessions, but they did not know that all participants would receive one high and one low dose. Blood pressure and mood were monitored throughout the sessions. Two monitors aided participants during each session, encouraging them to lie down, wear an eye mask, listen to music through headphones and direct their attention on their inner experience. If anxiety or confusion arose, the monitors provided reassurance to the participants.

In addition to experiencing changes in visual perception, emotions and thinking, most participants reported experiences of psychological insight and often profound, deeply meaningful experiences of the interconnectedness of all people.

The researchers assessed each participant's mood, attitude about life, behaviors and spirituality with questionnaires and structured interviews before the first session, seven hours after taking the psilocybin, five weeks after each session and six months after the second session. Immediately after the sessions, participants completed questionnaires assessing changes in visual, auditory and body perceptions; feelings of transcendence; changes in mood; and more.

Structured clinical interviews, such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, and patient questionnaires, like the Beck Depression Inventory and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, assessed depression and anxiety. Other questionnaires assessed quality of life, death acceptance, meaningful existence, optimism and spirituality -- generally defined as a search for the meaning of life and a connection to something bigger than one's self. To measure the changes in attitudes, moods and behavior over time, the researchers administered a questionnaire that assessed negative or positive changes in attitudes about life, mood and behavior.

With regard to adverse effects, Griffiths says 15 percent of participants were nauseated or vomited, and one-third of participants experienced some psychological discomfort, such as anxiety or paranoia, after taking the higher dose. One-third of the participants had transient increases in blood pressure. A few participants reported headaches following the session.

"Before beginning the study, it wasn't clear to me that this treatment would be helpful, since cancer patients may experience profound hopelessness in response to their diagnosis, which is often followed by multiple surgeries and prolonged chemotherapy," says Griffiths. "I could imagine that cancer patients would receive psilocybin, look into the existential void and come out even more fearful. However, the positive changes in attitudes, moods and behavior that we documented in healthy volunteers were replicated in cancer patients."

Up to 40 percent of people with cancer suffer from a mood disorder, according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

Anticipating wide interest in the psilocybin research from scientists, clinicians and the public, the journal solicited 11 commentaries to be co-published with the study results written by luminaries in psychiatry, palliative care and drug regulation, including two past presidents of the American Psychiatric Association, a past president of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology, the former deputy director of the U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the former head of the U.K. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority. In general, the commentaries were supportive of the research and of using these drugs in a clinical setting as tools for psychiatry.

Additional authors included Matthew Johnson, Michael Carducci, Annie Umbricht, William Richards, Brian Richards, Mary Cosimano and Margaret Klinedinst, all of The Johns Hopkins University.

The study was funded by grants from the Heffter Research Institute, the RiverStyx Foundation, William Linton, the Betsy Gordon Foundation, the McCormick family, the Fetzer Institute, George Goldsmith, Ekaterina Malievskaia and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (R01DA03889).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This is a tricky one. The release does tell us what percentage of patients benefited from psilocybin treatment, but does not explicitly quantify the extent of those benefits — which is what this category is designed to address.
However, the release does address benefits in a meaningful way. Here’s how: First, the release makes clear that all of the study participants had received a formal psychiatric diagnosis. That tells us that they were suffering from symptoms of clinical anxiety or depression. Second, the release states that six months after the treatment “about 80 percent of participants continued to show clinically significant decreases in depressed mood and anxiety, with about 60 percent showing symptom remission into the normal range.” That language telling us that about 60 percent were in the normal range is important, because it means they were no longer exhibiting clinical anxiety or depression — and that is sufficiently meaningful to earn the release a satisfactory rating here.
The release would have been better if it had been more clear that this was a cross-over study so all participants received both the low-dose (placebo) and the full therapeutic dose in either the first or second treatment session. In addition, no comparison is given between the low-dose and high-dose therapeutic effects. Instead, the release describes benefits five weeks and six months after the second session, after all participants had received the strong dose.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most Americans hear “colorectal cancer screening” and think “colonoscopy” — the unpleasant cleanse, the snakelike scope, the wobbly ride home. It’s a process that’s undeniably inconvenient, yet one we’re told is unquestionably necessary.

That’s a shame. Because although colonoscopy certainly has its advantages, direct evidence that it’s the best way to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer is not one of them. And the drawbacks of colonoscopy — including the time commitment, not-so-fun preparation, expense and small chance of harm — are probably keeping some people from participating in colorectal cancer screening.

According to public health experts, that’s a bad thing. The United States Preventive Services Task Force says the net benefit for screening adults age 50-75 is “substantial,” adding that colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in the country. But as of 2012, just 65 percent of eligible adults were being screened as recommended, and almost 28 percent had never been screened.

Among those who are screened, colonoscopy is by far the most popular method in the U.S. But there is a menu of options beyond colonoscopies — and they’re not necessarily any better or worse, according to the USPSTF’s recently finalized updated recommendations for screening among average-risk adults. The group said that while some tests are backed by more evidence than others, it found no head-to-head studies suggesting any strategy — including colonoscopy — is better than another. “Choose the one that fits your preferences and lifestyle,” said Douglas Owens, a physician and member of the task force.

Included on the list are two cheap, at-home poop tests intended to be done annually: the guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) and a more sensitive test called the fecal immunochemical test, or FIT. Both look for tiny amounts of blood in the stool that might be shed by cancer or polyps. You get one from your doctor, take a poop sample at home, and then return the sample to the doctor. Only if you get a positive result do you need to have a colonoscopy. (These are different from a new stool-based DNA test, which while on the USPSTF’s list is much more expensive and has been studied less.)

Of the two, Richard Wender, a physician and chief cancer control officer of the American Cancer Society, said the FIT is preferable, both because it’s more accurate and because it requires only one poop sample and no changes in diet. It costs about $25 or less and when done every year, the USPSTF’s models estimate, it will avert 20-23 deaths from colorectal cancer per 1,000 people screened. (Wender doesn’t recommend the OTC tests that are available.)

That’s comparable to the two “scope” tests on the USPSTF’s list, flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy, which have the advantage of both detecting and removing precancerous polyps in one procedure. (Flexible sigmoidoscopy, which looks at the lower part of the large intestine, has been shown by randomized trials to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer but isn’t reimbursed as well as colonoscopy and is on the decline in the U.S.)

Colonoscopy is the most popular test in the U.S. In addition to its polyp-removing ability, if you have a negative test, you don’t have to come back for another 10 years. There is indirect evidence it reduces colorectal cancer deaths, in the form of a large study following people who did and didn’t get the test over time. And it seems logical that if sigmoidoscopy cuts colorectal cancer deaths, the more extensive colonoscopy must provide a similar benefit. But that’s not yet been proved by randomized controlled trials. Based on the available evidence and its modeling, the USPSTF estimates it reduces deaths from colorectal cancer by 22-24 per 1,000 people screened.

But that lack of trial data is why the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care earlier this year recommended against using colonoscopy as a first-line screening method. “They were very clear: We’re going to stick to the evidence, and right now we don’t have evidence for colonoscopy,” said Aasma Shaukat, section chief of gastroenterology in the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Colonoscopy also has plenty of downsides. It’s expensive, running upward of $1,000. (The test is covered without cost sharing as preventive care under the Affordable Care Act.) Most people prefer to have sedation during the procedure, which means time off from work and finding a ride home. There’s variation in the quality of the test, depending on who’s doing it. There’s a small but real risk of harm, such as a perforation.

So why do so many people prefer it to the poop test? For many, because they’ve been told it’s the best test to get. A 2012 study found primary care physicians overwhelmingly said they thought it was the best colorectal screening option. Katie Couric’s on-air colonoscopy in March 2000 boosted awareness and increased colonoscopy rates. There’s also a “more is better” attitude when it comes to medicine among many people, said Shaukat. And colonoscopies are well-reimbursed for the physicians who perform them. Hospitals have focused on marketing colonoscopies rather than alternative tests.

No one is arguing colonoscopy is a bad test. It just hasn’t been shown to be better than an annual FIT, said James Allison, a clinical professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California-San Francisco. He said the public health message is slowly changing to reflect that. The 80% by 2018 campaign from the National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, for example, which aims to increase the rate of screening, emphasizes a suite of options. “People are very motivated to get screened when they hear colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer-related death and if they know there are tests that are affordable and can be done at home,” said Wender.

So if you want a colonoscopy after talking with your physician and digging into all its pros and cons — fantastic. But if you prefer something less invasive but more frequent, you can test your poop every year without feeling like you’re opting for, um, No. 2.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This story focuses on the available methods of colorectal screening, comparing them based on available data, and points out that the two at-home screening kits are comparably effective to the two invasive procedures: sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy.  One of the at-home tests — the FIT, or fecal immunochemical test — when used, is estimated to prevent 20-23 deaths per thousand people screened, while estimates among those using colonoscopy suggest 22-24 deaths are prevented per thousand people screened.  The story is clear in saying that there has been no head-to-head comparative study pitting the techniques against each other.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Walk A Little Faster To Get The Most Out of Your Exercise Time

Some people — who are they? — have no problem fitting regular aerobic exercise into their lives. The rest of us want to know how much we have to exercise to see health benefits. Now we have some answers: You may want to go just a tad longer and harder than you'd thought.

Current government guidelines advise adults to get the equivalent of at least 2 1/2 hours of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise or 75 minutes of higher-intensity exercise every week, plus some strength training. In effect, those guidelines say there's no particular benefit from working out harder, other than saving time.

To find out if that's true, researchers at Queen's University in Ontario studied different combinations of exercise intensity and duration in a group of 300 sedentary adults with abdominal obesity. (That's generally defined as a waist circumference of more than 35 inches for women who aren't pregnant and more than 40 inches for men.) People with abdominal obesity are at higher risk of heart disease and early death than people with slimmer waistlines.

All the exercisers were told to work out under supervision five times per week for 24 weeks. One group worked out at low intensity, about 50 percent of maximum oxygen uptake (VO max, a measure of cardiovascular fitness), for about 31 minutes per session — enough to burn 180 calories for women and 300 for men. That exercise prescription was about the same as in the government guidelines. The intensity was about equivalent to walking slowly, said study author Robert Ross, a kinesiologist at Queen's University.

Another group exercised at the same low intensity but almost twice as long — about 58 minutes on average, or five hours a week, until the women had burned 360 calories and the men 600.

And a third group exercised at a higher but still moderate intensity, 75 percent of VO max, until they'd burned the same number of calories as the second group. That took about 40 minutes a day, or 3.3 hours a week. That intensity was equivalent to brisk walking for the previously sedentary participants, Ross told Shots. (Note that we're not talking about the all-out sprints of high-intensity interval training.)

A fourth group was told to do no exercise.

All the participants were told to keep a food diary and to eat a healthful diet but to keep their calorie intake constant. They also wore accelerometers to track their physical activity during the rest of the day, to make sure the more intense exercisers weren't compensating with more time on the sofa.

At the end of the study, members of all three exercise groups lost an average of about 2 inches from their waist circumference. There weren't differences between the three groups. The average exerciser also lost 5 to 6 percent of body weight.

"The take-home message here is that if you're consuming a healthful diet and engaging with exercise consistent with the guidelines, you're going to see a benefit in your waistline and on the bathroom scale," said Ross. The results were published Monday in Annals of Internal Medicine.

But there was also a benefit from going just a bit faster: Only participants in the higher-intensity group saw an improvement in glucose tolerance, a risk factor for heart disease. (It's unclear whether the 9 percent improvement seen will be enough to cut their risk of heart disease, though.)

The result makes sense, since there's some previous evidence suggesting that higher-intensity exercise is tied to improving how the body processes sugar, said Neal Pire, an exercise physiologist who puts together medically based training programs at HNH Fitness in Oradell, N.J., a program of Holy Name Medical Center. Strength training can also improve glucose tolerance, which is why it's part of the government guidelines, he told Shots.

Cardiovascular fitness also improved in all three groups, but the lower-intensity exercisers who went longer did better than those who went shorter, and the higher-intensity group did better still.

Bottom line: All the exercisers improved, but the folks who did the best walked briskly for about 40 minutes five times a week. (Ross suggests you walk as if you're late for a bus.) "It doesn't take a lot," said Ross. "That's why our participants were so surprised. They didn't have to climb Mount Everest."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story (complete with table) did a fair job of balancing a digestible message with the caveats of research. It tells us that all the exercise groups lost about 2 inches off their waistline and about 5% to 6% of their bodyweight. Since average people don’t really think about weight loss in terms of “percentage bodyweight,” however, it would have been better for the story to tell us how much participants weighed at the start of the study and how much weight each group lost in pounds.
And while the story suggests that brisker walking gives more benefit by improving glucose tolerance, it expressly cautions that this change may not be meaningful to patients: “It’s unclear whether the 9 percent improvement seen will be enough to cut their risk of heart disease, though.” That’s a useful distinction.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Pivotal trial results for Merck & Co Inc’s immunotherapy drug Keytruda show that it lengthened survival by three months, or nearly 40 percent, for patients with advanced bladder cancer who had stopped responding to chemotherapy.

The data, to be presented next month at a meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, follow last week’s announcement that rival drug Tecentriq, from Roche Holding AG, did not improve survival when used as a second-line treatment for bladder cancer in a trial.

The Merck drug is awaiting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, but Tecentriq was approved by the agency last year, contingent on verification of its clinical benefit. Roche, in an emailed statement, said it plans to discuss the data with health authorities but did not disclose the timing for the discussions. According to the FDA approval letter, the company has until December to submit the full trial data to the agency.

Merck filed in February for FDA approval of Keytruda for both initial and secondary treatment of advanced urothelial cancer, the most common type of bladder cancer. Keytruda is already approved for treating melanoma, lung cancer, head and neck cancer and Hodgkin lymphoma.

Merck announced in October that the second-line bladder cancer study met its main goal and was stopped early. The company is currently enrolling patients in a phase three trial of Keytruda, combined with chemotherapy, as an initial treatment for bladder cancer.

In addition to Tecentriq’s approval for bladder cancer patients whose disease has stopped responding to chemotherapy, the FDA last month approved the Roche drug as an initial treatment for people with a specific type of advanced bladder cancer and in people whose cancer progressed despite at least one prior platinum-containing chemotherapy.

The agency has also granted contingent approval to AstraZeneca Plc’s Imfinzi, Bristol-Myers Squibb’s Opdivo and Bavencio, developed by Pfizer Inc and Merck KGaA, as second-line bladder cancer treatments.

All five drugs are part of a new class of treatments designed to unleash the body’s immune system to fight cancer by interfering with proteins known as PD-1 or PD-L1 that help malignant cells evade immune attack.

Merck said data from an open-label Phase 3 trial of 542 advanced bladder cancer patients showed median survival of 10.3 months for Keytruda patients and 7.4 months for patients given second-line chemotherapy. The study’s median follow-up was 18.5 months.

After 18 months, 36 percent of Keytruda patients were alive, compared with 20.5 percent of chemotherapy patients, according to research published by ASCO.

The study did not detect a difference in the length of time patients lived without their disease getting worse.

Severe side effects were reported in 16.5 percent of the Keytruda patients, compared with nearly half of the chemotherapy group.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does quantify the benefits of the intervention, and it does so in absolute terms.
“Merck said data from an open-label Phase 3 trial of 542 advanced bladder cancer patients showed median survival of 10.3 months for Keytruda patients and 7.4 months for patients given second-line chemotherapy. The study’s median follow-up was 18.5 months. After 18 months, 36 percent of Keytruda patients were alive, compared with 20.5 percent of chemotherapy patients, according to research published by ASCO. The study did not detect a difference in the length of time patients lived without their disease getting worse.”
This is sufficient to be satisfactory, but we do think more could be said about if this minimal time difference truly make an impact on patients’ lives, or not. Are the patients healthy enough to make meaningful use of the additional time they receive with treatment?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 20, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Stem cell transplants may halt the progression of aggressive multiple sclerosis (MS) in nearly half of those with the debilitating disease, but picking the right patients for the treatment is key, a new study suggests.

Specifically, younger patients with a relapsing form of MS who were not severely disabled and who hadn't found relief with other treatments fared better than others over five years, the international team of researchers found.

However, in some cases the treatment proved fatal, the researchers reported.

"Stem cell transplantation cannot be considered a cure for MS. However, it can be considered a concrete option for patients showing aggressive MS who have not responded to approved treatments," said study co-author Dr. Riccardo Saccardi. He's from the cell therapy and transfusion medicine unit at Careggi University Hospital in Florence, Italy.

Using patients' own stem cells to reboot the immune system is a way to halt the advance of the disease. But the treatment can be risky because the patient's immune system has to be wiped out before the stem cells are transplanted, the researchers said.

In fact, nearly 3 percent of the patients died shortly after receiving the transplant, and those deaths were directly related to the transplant, the researchers reported.

Those deaths are a major concern, one neurologist said, because MS is not in itself life-threatening.

In effect, those patients gambled with a treatment that could be fatal for a disease that isn't, said Dr. Michael Racke, a professor in the department of neurology at Ohio State University.

Racke pointed out that stem cell transplants were first used to treat deadly diseases, such as leukemia, lymphoma and other cancers.

"There may be a population of MS patients that could be identified that might do well with transplant," he said. "It's important to select patients in such a way that they actually get well with the transplant."

A trial that compares stem cell transplants with other therapies to see whether stem cell transplants can become a treatment for patients who have progressive MS is about to start, added Racke, who co-authored an editorial that accompanied the study.

More than 2 million people in the world suffer from MS, in which the body attacks the central nervous system, according to the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.

MS can cause many symptoms, including blurred vision, loss of balance, poor coordination, slurred speech, tremors, numbness, extreme fatigue, problems with memory and concentration, paralysis and blindness.

These symptoms can come and go, or persist and worsen over time. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 50, although individuals as young as 2 and as old as 75 have developed the disease, the society says.

Medications can slow the progression of MS and help patients manage symptoms, but there's no cure.

To see how patients did over the long term after stem cell transplants, Saccardi and colleagues followed 281 patients from 13 countries who received stem cell transplants between 1995 and 2006.

The researchers found that 46 percent of the patients experienced progression-free survival at five years after transplant.

Within 100 days of transplant, however, eight patients died (nearly 3 percent). Those deaths were related to the transplants, Saccardi said.

The researchers think these deaths were most likely due to the transplant technology used before 2006, which has since improved.

The report was published online Feb. 20 in the journal JAMA Neurology.

Dr. Paul Wright is chair of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., and Long Island Jewish Medical Center, in New Hyde Park, N.Y. He said, "As neurologists battle with current therapies that are limited for progressive MS in younger patients, this study provides a possible new avenue for treatment."

Visit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society for more on MS.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: One benefit here is progression-free survival. This is basically a yes/no question: did the patient’s MS progress? For 46% of the 239 patients who could be analyzed, the answer was yes. The story tells readers that. It also tells readers that a certain subset of patients was more likely to experience these benefits than others: “younger patients with a relapsing form of MS who were not severely disabled and who hadn’t found relief with other treatments fared better than others over five years.”
However, the story didn’t convey important context for this progression-free survival figure. The reason that the 46% figure is interesting is because of this: Conventional wisdom says patients with aggressive disease would still continue to accumulate disability even if their inflammation is stopped, yet among the group studied among which 75% had progressive disease, 46% had not progressed at the 5-year mark. This means that some patients with progressive disease benefited from stem cell treatment–against conventional wisdom.
As we explain below in our evidence quality criterion, the story should have made it clearer that these findings were not obtained via a randomized controlled trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 15, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A newer type of genetic test is better at detecting abnormalities that predispose a child to autism than standard genetic tests, new research has determined.

Researchers offered about 933 people aged 13 months to 22 years who had been diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder three genetic tests: G-banded karyotype testing, fragile X testing or chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), which has been available only for the past few years.

Karyotype tests identified chromosomal aberrations associated with autism in about 2 percent of patients, while the fragile X genetic mutation was found in about 0.5 percent of patients.

CMA detected chromosomal abnormalities in slightly more than 7 percent of patients, making it the best available genetic test for autism spectrum disorders, the study authors said.

"The CMA test alone has triple the detection rate of karyotyping or fragile X," said co-senior author Bai-Lin Wu, director of the Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory at Children's Hospital Boston. "CMA should be added to first-tier genetic testing for autism spectrum disorders."

The study appeared online March 15 and will be published in the April print issue of Pediatrics.

"When parents have a child diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder, one of the first questions they often ask is 'how did this happen?' " said Dr. Robert Marion, a pediatric geneticist at Children's Hospital at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City.

"In the vast majority of cases, we believe there is at least a genetic predisposition to autism, but the ability to identify a specific genetic cause has been very elusive," Marion said. "Part of that is because of the technology that's been available. A larger part is at this point, we just don't fully understand what the genetic mechanism that leads to autism is."

Standard practice is to offer children with autism two tests as a first-line genetic work-up: karyotype and fragile X testing, the researchers said.

In karyotyping, forms of which have been around since the 1960s, geneticists use a microscope to look for chromosomal abnormalities that are associated with autism, explained Dr. David Miller, a clinical geneticist and assistant director of the Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory at Children's Hospital Boston, which conducted the new research along with Boston's Autism Consortium.

Like karyotyping, CMA also looks for chromosomal abnormalities, but does so at 100 times the resolution of the earlier test, Miller said. CMA, a genome-wide test, can identify sub-microscopic deletions of duplications of DNA sequences, called copy-number variants, known to be associated with autism, he said.

"Think of chromosomes as a library full of books and each book as a gene," Miller said. "What we look for are shelves of books that have gone missing, which represent a missing fragment of a chromosome, or extra fragments of chromosome, that could contain genes related to autism."

While both Children's Hospital Boston and Montefiore have offered CMA testing for several years, not all hospitals do, nor does all insurance pay for it, the researchers noted.

The main purpose of genetic testing of children with autism is to help parents determine if they're at a higher risk of having another child with autism, Marion said.

If tests pinpoint an autism-related chromosomal abnormality in the child, the parents are then offered testing. If a parent is also found to have the abnormality, geneticists conclude that the couple is at higher risk of having a child with autism. (The precise risk depends on what the variant is.)

But if the parents don't have the abnormality, geneticists conclude that the deletion or duplication happened by chance, and the parents are probably not at any greater risk of having another child with autism than the general population, Marion said.

Still, there is much geneticists can't tell parents. Between 10 percent and 15 percent of autism cases can be traced to a known genetic cause, the researchers noted. Of that, CMA alone can detect 7 percent of those.

There are a few other genetic tests that can explain another few percentage points of autism cases.

But that leaves 85 percent or more families with little explanation for the disorder, Marion said.

"CMA is better, but it's not great," Marion said. "The vast majority of children who have autism have no identifiable genetic markers that will help in genetic counseling for future pregnancies. That is very frustrating."

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more on autism.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately presents the efficacy of three different genetic tests in identifying abnormalities that may be associated with autism—karyotype: 2%; fragile X: 0.5%; CMA: 7%.  It would have been helpful to let readers know that not all 933 people included in the study were tested with each of the three tests. According to the results, the CMA tests performed best in females with autistic disorder, but this was not reported. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
N-acetylcysteine reduced PTSD symptoms, cravings, and depression in veterans with PTSD and substance use disorder in a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted at the Medical University of South Carolina and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center

N-acetylcysteine, when combined with group cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), reduced symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), cravings, and depression significantly more than CBT alone in veterans with co-occurring PTSD and substance use disorder, a particularly difficult-to-treat population, according to the findings of a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted by researchers at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

This trial is the first to use NAC as a pharmacotherapy for PTSD and a broad range of SUDs. The results were published online ahead of print on October 11, 2016 by the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.

The National Center for PTSD estimates that seven to eight percent of Americans will have PTSD at some point in their life. The numbers are even worse for veterans: it is estimated, for example, that 30 percent of Vietnam veterans will have experienced PTSD at some point in their life. Approximately 40 to 50 percent of veterans with PTSD also have a substance use disorder (SUD).

"Addiction goes along with virtually every psychiatric disorder at a higher percentage than it does in the general population" said Peter W. Kalivas, Ph.D. the senior author on the article and chair of the Department of Neuroscience at MUSC. "People who are prone to psychiatric disorders are also prone to addiction."

Currently, there are no well-explored pharmacological treatments for patients with co-occurring PTSD/SUD. Although selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been approved by the FDA for treatment of PTSD, pharmacological treatments for co-occurring PTSD/SUD have yielded suboptimal results.

Groundbreaking basic science research by Kalivas has shown that levels of glutamate transporters are decreased in SUDs and that administration of the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine can help restore those levels and guard against relapse in animal models of SUD. Because evidence suggests that SUDs and PTSD share overlapping neurobiological pathways, Sudie E. Back, Ph.D., lead author on the article, hypothesized that NAC treatment with CBT would be a novel approach to treat co-occurring PTSD and SUD. Back is a professor in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at MUSC and a staff psychologist at the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

In the eight-week randomized controlled trial led by Back and Kalivas, 35 veterans with PTSD and SUD, all of whom were receiving cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for their SUD, were randomized to either 2400 mg/day of NAC or placebo. The average age of the veterans was 49 years and many were veterans of the Vietnam War. To be included, veterans had to have abstained from substance use for at least seven days. Of the veterans enrolled in the trial, 83% completed it, a very high rate for this difficult-to-treat population.

Veterans in the NAC-treated group showed a 46% reduction in PTSD symptoms, compared with a 25% reduction in the placebo group on the Clinical-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), which assesses trauma history and symptom severity. The threshold CAPS score for diagnosis of PTSD is 50.

"As a group, the NAC-treated veterans were below diagnostic level for PTSD at the end of treatment," said Back. "For PTSD, these are some of the best outcomes we have seen in the literature for a medication."

Craving and depression were also reduced in the NAC-treated group. The amount of craving was reduced by 81% and the frequency of craving by 71% in the NAC group, compared with 32% and 29% in the placebo group. "Craving is a key component of substance use in relapse," said Back. "If you have a medication that can really reduce craving, that will go a long way to helping people stay clean and sober." Depression, gauged using the Beck Depression Inventory, was reduced 48% in the NAC group vs. 15% in the placebo group.

Veterans in the study had low rates of substance use during the trial, and the study found little effect of medication on use, perhaps due to the fact that all participants were receiving SUD treatment and exhibiting low levels of use. This finding could also be due to the relatively limited number of participants or to the chronic nature of the participants' PTSD. "This is a tough patient population with SUD to work with." said Kalivas. "We have Vietnam vets that have had PTSD for 15 to 20 years. This is not an easy-to-turn-around population."

Although these early, promising findings show that NAC reduced PTSD symptoms, craving, and depression, NAC should not be used as a monotherapy or substitute for evidence-based behavioral treatment, but instead be seen as an adjunct therapy that enhances it.

"We would not advocate using it instead of therapy," said Back. "But this could be something to help prevent relapse when used alongside a behavioral treatment."

NAC is available over the counter and does not cause side effects at the doses used in the study, but it degrades quickly when stored, is contraindicated in patients with asthma, and can cause nausea at higher doses and so should always be obtained and administered under a physician's supervision.

The next steps in Back's research are to run a longer-term trial of NAC in veterans with PTSD and SUD and to use MRS magnetic spectroscopy to better explore the effect of NAC on glutamate levels in patients with PTSD and SUD.

Founded in 1824 in Charleston, The Medical University of South Carolina is the oldest medical school in the South. Today, MUSC continues the tradition of excellence in education, research, and patient care. MUSC educates and trains more than 3,000 students and residents in six colleges (Dental Medicine, Graduate Studies, Health Professions, Medicine, Nursing, and Pharmacy), and has nearly 13,000 employees, including approximately 1,500 faculty members. As the largest non-federal employer in Charleston, the university and its affiliates have collective annual budgets in excess of $2.2 billion, with an annual economic impact of more than $3.8 billion and annual research funding in excess of $250 million. MUSC operates a 700-bed medical center, which includes a nationally recognized children's hospital, the Ashley River Tower (cardiovascular, digestive disease, and surgical oncology), Hollings Cancer Center (a National Cancer Institute-designated center), Level I Trauma Center, Institute of Psychiatry, and the state's only transplant center. In 2016, U.S. News & World Report named MUSC Health the number one hospital in South Carolina. For more information on academic programs or clinical services, visit musc.edu. For more information on hospital patient services, visit muschealth.org.

Located in historic downtown Charleston, South Carolina, the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a tertiary care teaching hospital providing the highest level quality care from cardiology to neurology to primary and mental health care for 70,000 Veterans along the South Carolina and Georgia coast. The Ralph H. Johnson VA achieved a 5-Star rating according to VA's Strategic Analytics for Improvement and Learning Value (SAIL) model. The SAIL rating ranks the Charleston VA in the top 10 percent of VA medical centers nationwide for quality of care and efficiency. The Charleston VA is also ranked in the top 10th percentile according to the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). HEDIS is an independent review that measures performance of 90 percent of America's health plans and facilities in both the public and private sector on dimensions of care and service. The Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a center of excellence for robotic surgery and orthopedics, and is the first VA National Tele-Mental Health Hub providing care for Veterans across the U.S. The 149-bed hospital includes six community based outpatient clinics, a 20-bed nursing home, women's health, and the full range of inpatient and outpatient care, including medical and surgical intensive care. The VAMC provides more than 875,000 outpatient visits and approximately 4,400 in-patient stays annually. With more than 2,500 employees, Charleston VA has an annual budget of $458 million, research funding of more than $21 million, and more than 100 principal investigators participating in approximately 300 research studies. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The intent of the pilot study was to determine the effect of N-acetylcysteine on PTSD symptoms, cravings and substance use. All three endpoints are described in the news release albeit in relative terms.
We are told that the 8-week trial randomized 35 veterans with PTSD and substance use disorder. Some received N-acetylcysteine and others a placebo, but all of the participants received cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).
The release reported that “Veterans in the NAC-treated group showed a 46% reduction in PTSD symptoms, compared with a 25% reduction in the placebo group on the Clinical-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), which assesses trauma history and symptom severity. The threshold CAPS score for diagnosis of PTSD is 50.”
The release quotes the lead author: “As a group, the NAC-treated veterans were below diagnostic level for PTSD at the end of treatment.” This establishes that the benefit was clinically meaningful. But we prefer to see absolute rather than relative numbers as used here. For example, the actual before and after scores on the PTSD scale would have better illustrated how large the benefit was.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allos defends the price, saying it made a significant investment to develop the first approved drug for this type of cancer.

“It’s a very aggressive disease, and patients right now have no options,” said James V. Caruso, the chief commercial officer for Allos, a 17-year-old publicly traded company based in Westminster, Colo., that has no other drugs on the market.

Mr. Caruso also said the price of Folotyn was not out of line with that of other drugs for rare cancers. Patients, moreover, are likely to use the drug for only a couple of months because the tumor worsens so quickly, he said. So the total cost of using Folotyn will be less than for many other drugs with lower monthly prices.

“We believe we are fairly priced,” he added, “and we’re benchmarked” against other drugs. In a conference call with analysts last month, Mr. Caruso said Allos had “not had pushback of any type at this point” from insurers.

Some drugs for rare cancers are close to Foltyn’s price. Genzyme’s Clolar for pediatric leukemia costs about $34,000 a week, though the company says that only two weeks of treatment are typically needed. Genzyme’s drug Campath, for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, costs about $5,000 a week for several weeks.

GlaxoSmithKline is charging up to $98,000 for a six-month treatment course of Arzerra, a drug approved in late October for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, which strikes about 15,000 Americans a year. About $60,000 of the cost would be incurred in the first eight weeks, when the drug is given more frequently.

Gloucester Pharmaceuticals, which won approval in November for a drug to treat cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, another rare cancer, declined to discuss what it would charge when that treatment, called Istodax, goes on sale in January.

Despite such comparisons, Dr. Lee N. Newcomer, senior vice president for oncology at the big insurer UnitedHealthcare, called the price of Folotyn “unconscionable.” He said that Folotyn alone would cost as much as UnitedHealthcare now typically spends in total to treat a lymphoma patient from diagnosis until death. That median expenditure now, he said, is $87,000 for a little over a year of treatments.

But Dr. Newcomer said insurers would be obligated to pay for Folotyn because there were no alternatives.

Folotyn has not yet shown an effect on longevity. In the clinical trial that led to approval of the drug, 27 percent of the 109 patients experienced a reduction in tumor size. The reductions lasted a median of 9.4 months.

But considering all the patients in the trial, only 12 percent had a reduction in tumor size that lasted for more than 14 weeks. The trial did not compare Folotyn to another drug or a placebo.

“This drug is not a home run,” Dr. Brad S. Kahl, a lymphoma specialist at the University of Wisconsin, said during a meeting of an advisory committee to the F.D.A. on Sept. 2. “It’s not even a double. It’s a single.”

Saying that even a single was helpful, Dr. Kahl was part of a majority on the panel that recommended approval of the drug, 10 to 4.

But after recently learning what Allos planned to charge for Folotyn, Dr. Kahl said he was “disappointed” by the “excessive” price.

“It dampens my enthusiasm for using that drug,” he said. “It creates these huge ethical quandaries about trying a drug that has a modest benefit for the average patient at enormous expense.”

Folotyn is given by a rapid intravenous procedure once a week for six weeks out of every seven. Even to try the drug for the first seven-week cycle to see if it works would cost over $50,000. In the clinical trial, the median duration of use was 70 days, which would cost roughly $70,000 to $80,000. But some patients used the drug for many months.

In a note to clients in October, Joshua Schimmer, an analyst at Leerink Swann, estimated that a typical treatment would last 3.5 months and cost $126,000, or about $36,000 a month.

For investors, a high price is usually a good thing. Mr. Schimmer’s note was entitled “Folotyn Prices High, Reiterate Outperform.” He estimated annual sales of the drug in the United States reaching about $300 million by 2014.

Patient advocacy groups say that while they wish prices were lower, high prices might be needed to encourage companies to develop new drugs.

“It’s a two-edged sword that we have to live with and deal with,” said Louis J. DeGennaro, chief scientific officer of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, which has received donations from Allos and other companies. “A peripheral T-cell lymphoma patient,” he said, “at first blush will see this therapy as a very good thing.”

Allos, which is still unprofitable, has lost $350 million since its founding in 1992 and failed to win approval of a previous drug.

“Every dime that goes into the company supports Folotyn,” Mr. Caruso said.

At the time Folotyn was approved in September, stock in Allos briefly peaked above $8.50 but has slipped since then, closing up 16 cents at $6.62, or an increase of nearly 2.5 percent, on Friday.

After the approval, Allos raised $93 million in a secondary stock offering. In the prospectus for that offering, the company said that one of the risks for investors was “the relative price of Folotyn as compared to alternate treatment options.” It said there was a risk it might have to lower the price or offer discounts to successfully market Folotyn.

Like many other companies with high-priced drugs, Allos has established a program to help patients arrange insurance reimbursement. It says it will give the drug free to uninsured patients who cannot pay for it any other way.

And because a patient’s out-of-pocket co-payments alone — Medicare’s is 20 percent — could be thousands of dollars a month for Folotyn, Allos is financing a co-payment assistance program run by the National Organization for Rare Disorders, a patient advocacy group.

While this helps patients, it also helps the company sell more of its drug. If the 20 percent Medicare co-payment is made, then Medicare will pay the other 80 percent of the drug’s price — or about $24,000 a month.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately quantitifes the benefits of Folotyn, which are not that impressive. The story provides the percentage of patients with reductions in tumor size and the median time that the benefits lasted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alzheimer's Redefined, But Changes Mean Little For Patients

The definition of Alzheimer's disease just got wider and deeper, but the expansion won't change how the vast majority of people are diagnosed. It also doesn't change the very limited treatment choices.

But the new criteria, which were developed by the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association, are almost guaranteed to prompt confusion, even in people who are thinking quite clearly.

The guidelines say, for instance, that newly developed "biomarker" tests, such as assays for proteins in spinal fluid, and some specialized brain scans can be used for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's. But, the guidelines say, the tests are to be used only for research, and not for diagnosing Alzheimer's in the general public.

The distinction is nothing to worry about for patients and their families. "You don't need a biomarker test" for everyday clinical practice, says David Knopman, a professor of neurology at the Mayo Clinic, who was co-chairman of the group that revised the dementia diagnosis. The existing tests for Alzheimer's are adequate, he says. And those biomarkers? "It's in the fine print, but it definitely says in multiple places that the biomarkers are for research purposes."

Why? Well, the biomarker tests and PET scans aren't yet accurate enough to reliably diagnose Alzheimer's, and haven't been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. And it's also because there are no treatments that can prevent, slow or stop early signs of Alzheimer's.

"For research, there's a lot of value," Knopman says. "For everyday clinical use, very very little."

About 5 million Americans have Alzheimer's. The hallmark signs are problems with thinking, learning, and memory. The current definition, created in 1984, describes Alzheimer's that way. But over the past few years there's been solid evidence that Alzheimer's starts damaging the brain years before a person starts having noticeable problems thinking. Scientists have been putting a lot of effort into trying to identify what starts the disease process, but have so far come up empty.

The new definitions, which were just published online by the journal Alzheimer's & Dementia, acknowledge this dimly understood early phase of Alzheimer's. Now there are two new pre-dementia phases: mild cognitive impairment and "preclinical Alzheimer's."

In mild cognitive impairment, a person's changes in thinking are noticeable to himself, friends, or family. They would show up on tests of memory and recall, but don't interfere with everyday activities. Alzheimer's is just one possible cause. Because there are no treatments to prevent or stop Alzheimer's, many people may not consider this diagnosis a blessing.

The second new phase, preclinical Alzheimer's, is much squishier. There's no list of symptoms that a doctor can whip out to say you've got it. Rather, the goal in creating this category is to see if scientists can define when the disease starts, and track it through biomarker tests, brain imaging, or other yet-to-be-invented tests. If that happens, it might someday lead to ways to prevent Alzheimer's. But for now this category is useful only to researchers.

The goal in all this, according to the Alzheimer's Association, is to increase opportunities for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The problem is that there aren't yet any reliable tools for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The new criteria are really a call for more research — and the money to fund it. That would be good for the Alzheimer's Association and the National Institute on Aging, which sponsored the work on the new criteria.

And it does leave one wondering if a lot more worry will be generated by the notion of "preclinical Alzheimer's," when science and medicine can't offer anything to ease those fears.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 


As mentioned in the section on harms, this story tells readers that it is too soon to use lab tests or brain scans to diagnose Alzheimer’s disease in routine clinical practice, so it is reasonable to defer consideration of potential benefits. This story is appropriately cautious about what benefits early diagnosis might offer, pointing out that receiving a diagnosis when there is no known treatment can cause worry and concern without offering an effective response..
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Why Doctors Are Trying A Skin Cancer Drug To Treat A Brain Tumor

MaryAnn Anselmo feared for the worst when she was diagnosed with a brain tumor called a glioblastoma in late 2013.

"You start doing research on that type of tumor, and you're saying, 'Oh my God, you're history.' It's like a death sentence," says, Anselmo, now 59.

Only for her it wasn't.

Anselmo's successful treatment shows how precision medicine — tailoring therapy to each patient's genetic needs — is beginning to transform cancer care.

At first, the outlook seemed grim. Although Anselmo's surgeon was able to surgically remove most of her tumor, she couldn't tolerate traditional chemotherapy that was the planned second step, and had to discontinue it.

The chemo failure was the latest in a string of personal setbacks.

The year before she was diagnosed with brain cancer, she'd lost her son to suicide. Weeks after that she was almost killed in a car crash outside a local mall. Her cancer was discovered after she had a dizzy spell, and her husband, Joseph, insisted she return to the hospital to have it checked out.

After all that, Anselmo and her husband weren't ready to give up on her cancer fight. He'd read about advances in targeted therapies — drugs that go after cancer cells at the molecular level.

The family sent samples of her tumor samples for genetic testing to several leading cancer hospitals. Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, where she was being treated, also did its own sequencing. They all found the same thing. Anselmo's tumor had a BRAF mutation common in skin cancer, but very unusual for a brain tumor.

Her oncologist, David Hyman at Memorial Sloan Kettering, enrolled Anselmo into a new kind of drug trial. Called a basket trial, the study is designed to include people whose tumors have the same kind of genetic fingerprint regardless of where in the body the tumors are found.

Knowing more about the genetic mutations of a tumor enables doctors to find a potentially effective drug much more quickly and accurately. "It's like you're in a parking lot," Hyman says. "And you have a key to one of the cars in the parking lot. And so one option is just to go to each car and try to open the lock. The other is to know that it's the third car on the right. What we're doing now is we're saying, OK, this key fits that lock. And we're only going straight to that car."

Today, Anselmo is doing well. She's been in the clinical trial for a year now, and continues to take Zelboraf (or vemurafenib generically) daily. The pills have kept her cancer from growing.

There are side effects, of course. She's lost some peripheral vision, though she's been able to compensate. And Zelboraf is expensive, though it's free to Anselmo because she's taking it as part of a study.

Now she can focus again on the things she loves, like singing. Anselmo, a jazz singer who performed under the stage name Mariel Larsen before her illness, is planning a comeback. She's back in training with her longtime vocal coach.

As this kind of genetic sequencing of tumors has become faster and cheaper, more patients have access to this technology. More doctors are taking advantage of the information to treat patients with a targeted approach.

"We took a disease where nothing really works for any length of time and we've given her a year of life, and hopefully much more, where she's been much better," Hyman, her oncologist, says.

Still, he cautions that the targeted treatments can't be considered cures. At some point the drug that is keeping Anselmo's cancer at bay could stop working. "Every patient is different in how long it works," he says. "We all have patients that have been on these drugs for years. But I don't know, I mean, I think if I was being honest eventually our expectation would be that it would stop working."

There's no way to predict when. But in the meantime, patients like Anselmo are grateful to have time they wouldn't have had otherwise.

After all the misfortunes she's been through, it would be easy to think Anselmo has been incredibly unlucky. But she doesn't see it that way. No, she says after rehearsing for her comeback show, "I'm the luckiest."

Our series is produced with member station WNYC, and with Ken Burns Presents: Cancer: The Emperor of All Maladies, which will air on PBS starting March 30. Check your local listings for broadcast times.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefits are described as extending a person’s survival while increasing her quality of life, and a number–1 year, so far–is attached to the treatment. The story also includes this quote from a researcher, which clarifies that the treatment is not expected to work indefinitely: “We all have patients that have been on these drugs for years. But I don’t know, I mean, I think if I was being honest eventually our expectation would be that it would stop working.”
We’ll call this good enough for a Satisfactory rating, but it would help to have more context here. For example, the article could have stated the median survival for the typical adult diagnosed today with glioblastoma, which is about 15 months. It would also be useful to know if there are studies of patients similar to the one profiled here, and what their experience has been. That’s a deficiency we’ll address below in the Evidence section.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The authors acknowledged certain weaknesses in their study. For example, they did not examine the safety of the herbal remedy, only its effectiveness.

Dr. Bruce P. Barrett, an associate professor of family medicine at the University of Wisconsin who was not involved with the review, said he was not convinced of the value of combining the studies in a single analysis.

“If you’re testing the same intervention on the same population using the same outcome measures, then meta-analysis is a very good technique,” Dr. Barrett said. “But here every one of those things fails.” One of Dr. Barrett’s papers on echinacea was included in the analysis.

Other experts also expressed skepticism. J. David Gangemi, director of the Institute for Neutraceutical Research at Clemson University, said he found the study interesting, but added, “I think that many of the people who have dedicated their careers to clinical trials in studying these effects are not at all convinced from this analysis that there is this large reduction in incidence and duration of disease.”

Dr. Gangemi is the senior author of a 2005 study, published in The New England Journal of Medicine and included in the review, that found no benefit in the herb.

There are several possible reasons that even a carefully devised single study might fail to show an effect that actually exists. There are more than 200 species of virus that cause colds, Dr. Coleman said, and a study could test one species against which echinacea proves ineffective, while leaving open the question of whether it works for others.

In addition, some studies might not use large enough doses of the herb; others might use a species of echinacea that is less effective. Some might not have a large enough sample to find a small but statistically significant effect.

Dr. Barrett said there was probably little harm in using echinacea, and he was cautiously optimistic that the herb does have a very small positive effect.

“There’s some danger of kids getting a rash, and it would be inadvisable to give it to women in the early stages of pregnancy,” he said. “But if adults believe in echinacea, they’re going to get benefits — maybe from placebo — but they’ll get benefits.”

Dr. Coleman, who described himself as “not much of a pill taker,” hedged a bit when asked if he planned to use echinacea himself. “I’ll probably consider taking it if I feel a cold coming on,” he said. “These results have pushed me toward the idea. Whether I’m actually going to take it, well, we’ll see.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The reporter says the study showed a 58 percent reduction in cold risk, and some unspecified ability to shorten duration. It would be useful to know how likely an average adult or child is to get a cold each year, and how long it lasts. This would also help people understand the possible payoff of taking echinacea–and compare it to the costs.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Lori Warren is a surgeon who has a startling diagnosis for women. She thinks hundreds of thousands of them are getting the wrong operation every year.

"I'm outraged that doctors are still, in my mind, doing these archaic surgeries on people; we're opening them up unnecessarily," Warren said.

The surgery she's upset about may be archaic - but it's very common.

Hysterectomy is the surgical removal of the uterus. About 600,000 of them are done every year in this country. Most are recommended because of pain and bleeding from fibroids.

"If patients really know that they have options when it comes to hysterectomy, we will start seeing some of the changes that I feel need to happen," Warren said.

What's happening now is that the vast majority, about 70 percent, are done the old-fashioned way, with a large surgical incision, lots of pain, and a six-to-eight-week recovery.

"I just think we need to open less people up," Warren said.

Warren is one of relatively few surgeons who perform hysterectomy with a minimally invasive, laparoscopic technique.

Like all laparoscopic procedures, a camera is inserted through a tiny incision to see into the abdomen; two other small incisions are made so that tools can be inserted to perform the surgery.

It's all over in about an hour, and patients are usually home within a day and back to normal within a week or two.

"Does it still amaze you after all these years," LaPook asked.

"Oh yeah, I'm amazed by what we can do and what's most amazing to me is how well the patient does," she said.

Read more from our partner in investigating this topic, Business Week, by clicking here Becky Ruppert had a hysterectomy just beforetalked with her - literally. And right away, she wanted to go home.

LaPook said: "So about five hours ago, you had your uterus out, and how do feel now?"

"I feel great," Ruppert said. "I have no pain. Literally, no pain."

What frustrates Warren is that only about 15 percent of hysterectomies are done this way.

"You would think in today's age and the way that we've improved in so many areas of medicine, women would begin questioning this, but we're finding that they're not," said Beth Cahill of the National Womens Health Resource Center.

About 90 percent of all gall bladder surgeries are done laparoscopically, so why not hysterectomy?

"Women are not seeking second opinions; they are going to the gynecologist that delivered their babies because they have that trust in them," she said.

"It makes my blood boil," she says. "It does. I'm outraged about it and that's what fires my passion to get the word out."

And to get the word out she invites doctors to come to Baptist Hospital East in Louisville and learn the procedure.

"What would you want for your wife, or your mom, or your sister, or your best friend?" Warren said. "You would want them to have the least invasive procedure possible."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does quantify the main benefit of laparoscopic surgery – reduced recovery time – relative to abdominal hysterectomy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 15, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A prescription medication originally developed to treat epilepsy may help obese adults shed weight when combined with routine nutritional counseling, researchers say.

Patients who took 400 milligrams of the anti-seizure drug zonisamide daily for a year lost nearly 7.5 pounds more on average than those assigned to dietaryand lifestyle changes alone, the new study found. But they also suffered more side effects than patients not taking the medication.

"The question was to see if more weight loss could be achieved if we provided decent quality lifestyle intervention, mostly dietary counseling, along with this medication," said study lead author Dr. Kishore Gadde, director of the Obesity Clinical Trials Program at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C.

"And the answer was yes," Gadde said.

The research, funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health, appears online Oct. 15 in the journal Archives of Internal Medicine.

For obese men and women who can't control their weight through diet and lifestyle changes, nonsurgical options are limited, the study authors noted. Just a few prescription medications are approved in the United States for long-term treatment of obesity, including orlistat (brand name Xenical) and lorcaserin hydrochloride (Belviq).

Gadde and colleagues set out to follow up on a 16-week investigation they conducted in 2003 that had indicated that zonisamide (Zonegran) at a dosage of 400 milligrams a day might offer an alternative.

Between 2006 and 2011 the study team randomly assigned more than 200 obese men and women to one of three groups. One group took 200 milligrams of zonisamide daily, another got 400 mg of zonisamide daily and one received a dummy pill. The participants' average age was 43, and their average body-mass index (BMI) was nearly 38. BMI is a calculation of body fat based on height and weight, and a BMI of more than 30 is considered obese. None had diabetes.

All study participants followed their treatment plan for one year. During this time, they all also received monthly individualized nutritional counseling, which Gadde described as "not intensive," to help them reduce their overall caloric intake.

Those on the higher-dose zonisamide protocol fared the best in terms of overall weight loss, while the lower-dose regimen was not much more effective than the placebo.

Although nearly 55 percent of those on the higher-dose medication shed 5 percent or more of their pre-study weight, that figure was 34 percent among the lower-dose group and 31 percent among the non-medication participants.

But patients in both drug groups faced a higher risk for side effects, including diarrhea, headache, fatigue, nausea/vomiting, concentration and memory difficulties, anxiety, and depression-related symptoms.

The authors said such side effects were typically "mild." They concluded that the higher-dose zonisamide showed promise as a weight-loss aid, but advised clinicians to carefully weigh the pros and cons on a patient-by-patient basis.

"There's no medicine that is a panacea for obesity," cautioned Gadde. "The important thing to keep in mind is that although we diagnose obesity on the basis of a mathematical formula -- a BMI of 30 and up -- the basis for obesity may differ from one individual to another."

Psychological factors or lifestyle factors may play a role, he said. "But for about a third [of patients], biological issues are at play, such as not easily experiencing satiety signals from the gut to the brain, which senses what your energy intake has been," he said. "And for those people, medication can help."

Lona Sandon, a registered dietitian and assistant professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, agreed.

Caution is vital when using any drug that has been approved for one condition for another, Sandon said.

"But for many people, this kind of drug might absolutely be of great help, by doing something that helps the regulation of these appetite hormones and the regulatory pathway," she said.

For more on obesity, visit the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We weren’t very happy with the headline and lead of this story, because they make the benefits sound more spectacular than they really were. The story goes on to explain, though, that a larger percentage of the study participants who took the highest does of the drug managed to lose 5 percent of their weight. The story says, “Although nearly 55 percent of those on the higher-dose medication shed 5 percent or more of their pre-study weight, that figure was 34 percent among the lower-dose group and 31 percent among the non-medication participants.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The investigators found that the less salt people ate, the more likely they were to die of heart disease — 50 people in the lowest third of salt consumption (2.5 grams of sodium per day) died during the study as compared with 24 in the medium group (3.9 grams of sodium per day) and 10 in the highest salt consumption group (6.0 grams of sodium per day). And while those eating the most salt had, on average, a slight increase in systolic blood pressure — a 1.71-millimeter increase in pressure for each 2.5-gram increase in sodium per day — they were no more likely to develop hypertension.

“If the goal is to prevent hypertension” with lower sodium consumption, said the lead author, Dr. Jan A. Staessen, a professor of medicine at the University of Leuven, in Belgium, “this study shows it does not work.”

But among the study’s other problems, Dr. Briss said, its subjects who seemed to consume the smallest amount of sodium also provided less urine than those consuming more, an indication that they might not have collected all of their urine in an 24-hour period.

Dr. Frank Sacks of the Harvard School of Public Health agreed and also said the study was flawed.

“It’s a problematic study,” Dr. Sacks said. “We shouldn’t be guiding any kind of public health decisions on it.”

Dr. Michael Alderman, a blood pressure researcher at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and editor of the American Journal of Hypertension, said medical literature on salt and health effects was inconsistent. But, Dr. Alderman said, the new study is not the only one to find adverse effects of low-sodium diets. His own study, with people who had high blood pressure, found that those who ate the least salt were most likely to die.

Dr. Alderman said that he once was an unpaid consultant for the Salt Institute but that he now did no consulting for it or for the food industry and did not receive any support or take any money from industry groups.

Lowering salt consumption, Dr. Alderman said, has consequences beyond blood pressure. It also, for example, increases insulin resistance, which can increase the risk of heart disease.

“Diet is a complicated business,” he said. “There are going to be unintended consequences.”

One problem with the salt debates, Dr. Alderman said, is that all the studies are inadequate. Either they are short-term intervention studies in which people are given huge amounts of salt and then deprived of salt to see effects on blood pressure or they are studies, like this one, that observe populations and ask if those who happen to consume less salt are healthier.

“Observational studies tell you what people will experience if they select a diet,” Dr. Alderman said. “They do not tell you what will happen if you change peoples’ sodium intake.”

What is needed, Dr. Alderman said, is a large study in which people are randomly assigned to follow a low-sodium diet or not and followed for years to see if eating less salt improves health and reduces the death rate from cardiovascular disease.

But that study, others say, will never happen.

“This is one of those really interesting situations,” said Dr. Lawrence Appel, a professor of medicine, epidemiology and international health at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. “You can say, ‘O.K., let’s dismiss the observational studies because they have all these problems.’ ” But, he said, despite the virtues of a randomized controlled clinical trial, such a study “will never ever be done.” It would be impossible to keep people on a low-sodium diet for years with so much sodium added to prepared foods.

Dr. Briss adds that it would not be prudent to defer public health actions while researchers wait for results of a clinical trial that might not even be feasible.

“The low-salt advocates suggest that all 300 million Americans be subjected to a low-salt diet. But if they can’t get people on a low-salt diet for a clinical trial, what are they talking about?”

He added: “It will cost money, but that’s why we do science. It will also cost money to change the composition of food.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Lightly shocking a person’s brain just before they learned a new task appeared to strengthen memory in a handful of patients with epilepsy, a tantalizing result that could have implications for Alzheimer’s disease, U.S. researchers said on Wednesday.

Pacemaker devices known as deep brain stimulators made by Medtronic and St. Jude Medical are already used to calm muscle tremors in patients with Parkinson’s disease and other movement disorders, and are being tested for a host of other conditions such as treatment-resistant depression.

The devices are implanted under the skin in the chest with wires leading up the neck connected to tiny electrodes implanted deep in the brain, which produce electrical impulses.

The current study was done at the University of California at Los Angeles in seven epileptic patients awaiting surgery who had electrodes implanted deep in their brains to help pinpoint the source of their seizures. The team used this opportunity to see how stimulating the brain affects memory.

They focused on an area of the brain called the entorhinal cortex, which helps form and store memories.

“The entorhinal cortex is the golden gate to the brain’s memory mainframe,” Dr. Itzhak Fried, professor of neurosurgery at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, who worked on the study, said in a telephone interview. The research was published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Fried said sensory experiences that eventually become memories pass through this hub before they are stored in the hippocampus, the brain’s chief memory center.

For the study, patients played a video game in which they had to shuttle people around in taxis to different shops in a virtual city. The team tested whether stimulating the entorhinal cortex or the hippocampus while they were learning their way around the city improved their recall.

“When we stimulated the hippocampus itself, there was not an effect. It was really stimulation in the gateway to the hippocampus - the entorhinal cortex - where we got the beneficial effect in terms of memory,” Fried said.

Compared to testing before stimulation, zapping this part of the brain helped people recognize landmarks and navigate the virtual city more quickly. Fried said the findings suggest stimulating the brain just as memories are forming is key.

In Alzheimer’s disease, this area of the brain is affected early on, when signs of dementia begin to appear.

Fried said the study might have implications for treatments for patients with early Alzheimer’s disease, but he cautioned that the results are very preliminary.

“The question would be whether this can help memory in patients with memory impairments,” he said. Scientists are increasingly focused on ways to treat the memory-robbing disease, which affects more than 5 million Americans.

Despite costly efforts, no drug has been found that can keep Alzheimer’s from progressing, and policymakers are growing increasingly worried about the swelling ranks of dementia patients as the population ages.

Suzanne Haber, a neuroscientist at the University of Rochester Medical Center in New York who was not involved in the study, said she was “very excited about the finding,” but she cautioned that the treatment is very invasive, very expensive and unproven in Alzheimer’s patients.

The Obama administration said on Wednesday it plans to spend an additional $156 million over the next two years to help find an effective treatment for Alzheimer’s.

One team has already tried deep brain stimulation in Alzheimer’s patients. In a study published in the Annals of Neurology in 2010 researchers tested deep brain stimulation in six patients over the course of a year and found the treatment to be relatively safe. They also saw signs the treatment might have an effect on memory.

Dr. Sandra Black, a brain researcher at the University of Toronto who wrote an editorial on the current study, said the findings could have implications for early stage Alzheimer’s disease if tests were developed to identify this process early through imaging or genomics.

“Although the current evidence is preliminary, is based on small samples and requires replication, the potential application of deep-brain stimulation in amnestic disorders is enticing,” Black wrote.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story is clear that this test was just a preliminary experiment to see if brain stimulation can have any memory effects in people. It notes that while researchers say it is worth exploring as a potential treatment for Alzheimer’s disease, there is no evidence yet that it provides such benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two personalized cancer vaccines have been found to be safe and effective at treating people with melanoma, scientists have announced.

Cancer vaccines that are personalized to the patient—designed to help the immune system identify tumors as foreign bodies and destroy them—have been considered as a potential treatment for a number of years. But working out the unique mutations of each person’s cancer, a time-consuming and complicated process, must first be identified before a vaccine can be developed for them.

In two studies published in the journal Nature, researchers have shown promising results from Phase I clinical trials. While they are very small scale—one was on six participants, the other 13—the findings mean researchers can move ahead with the vaccines, which could potentially lead to new, more effective cancer treatments.

In the first study, scientists led by Catherine Wu developed a vaccine for people who had been treated for melanoma with surgery, but who had received no other treatment. They sequenced the DNA from the tumors then created a personalized vaccine that contained neoantigens (targets for the immune response) for predicted mutations.

Six patients were given a full series of vaccinations, including five priming injections and two booster vaccinations. Four of the six had no recurrence of the disease after 25 months.

In the other study, by Ugur Sahin and colleagues, tested a personalized vaccine based on RNA (an essential link in the production of proteins encoded by DNA). They used a similar approach to Wu and her team to identify the mutations, then tested the vaccine on 13 people who were being treated for melanoma. All participants were found to have a boosted immunity against the antigens specific to their tumors. Eight were still tumor free after 23 months.

Both vaccines were deemed safe and are expected to be taken forward for further research.

These vaccines are not necessarily the future of personalized cancer treatment. Cornelius Melief, from the Leiden University Medical Center, Netherlands, said in an accompanying News & Views article that controlled, randomized Phase II clinical trials will be needed to work out if the vaccines are effective. He added, however, that the studies confirm the potential of cancer vaccines.

Elizabeth Williams, from the School of Biomedical Sciences at Queensland University of Technology, tells Newsweek the two studies “describe tantalizing complementary and consistent results in Phase 1 trials in melanoma patients using vaccines."

"The vaccines are personalized for each individual’s tumours by harnessing technologies that enable the comprehensive analysis of the molecular fingerprint of the tumour,” she says. “The data shows that it is a safe and well tolerated strategy that stimulates relevant anti-tumor immune responses.”

However, the treatment has its downsides: “As the vaccine therapies are designed and generated specifically for each individual there is a lag time from enrollment to commencement of treatment—approximately four months—which may be too long from some patients with advanced cancer. As technologies and processes continue improve this is likely to be reduced," she continues.

“It is still unknown whether these vaccines will extend the survival of cancer patients, or whether they are more effective than other recently developed immunotherapies. Additional clinical trials will be required to determine the utility of these individualised neoepitope vaccines.”

Catherine Pickworth, science communication officer at Cancer Research UK said: “The promising results from these two small, early-stage studies show that personalized cancer vaccines designed to treat skin cancer are safe to use, and that for some patients, they can successfully harness the power of the body’s own immune system to kill cancer cells. The next step will be to test these personalized vaccines in larger clinical trials to see if they are better than existing treatments, if they improve survival, and what their long-term side effects could be.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story says that four of the six patients had no cancer recurrence after 25 months in the first study, and in the second study, eight of the 13 patients remained tumor free after 23 months.
But the studies cited are both phase I clinical trials designed to address safety, not efficacy. Any claims regarding the latter, especially given the limited number of subjects, would be highly speculative. Therefore, the headline is misleading. As noted in the final sentence of the article:
“… The next step will be to test these personalized vaccines in larger clinical trials to see if they are better than existing treatments, if they improve survival, and what their long-term side effects could be.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - When a migraine strikes, patients might one day be able to make the experience less painful by using a smartphone-controlled device to deliver mild electric shocks to their arm, a company-funded experiment suggests.

The experimental gadget, Nerivio Migra, is a patch with a battery, electrodes and a computer chip that can wirelessly communicate with mobile devices. It’s designed to stimulate nerves under the skin in the arm and block pain signals from reaching the brain.

“All stimulation treatments given so far have been in the head,” said lead study author Dr. David Yarnitsky, an advisory board member for Theranica, the company developing the device.

“We worked on stimulation at a far away location, which makes the treatment more convenient and more discrete so people can use it even during working hours without anyone noticing,” Yarnitsky added by email.

The study involved 71 people with episodic migraines who had two to eight attacks a month and had not taken drugs to prevent the episodes for at least two months.

Participants were typically in their mid-to-late 40s and had been experiencing about five migraines a month. Most of them were female, and more than half of them reported experiencing what’s known as aura

Overall, participants had a total of 299 migraines during the study period.

Researchers asked participants to put the device on their upper arm as soon as possible after the start of a migraine and use it for 20 minutes. They were also asked not to take any medicines for migraines for two hours after the start of the episode.

For the experiment, researchers randomly programed the devices to give either placebo stimulation at a very low frequency or deliver one of four levels of active electrical stimulation treatment.

The four active treatment programs were set at a pulse rate of 80 to 120 Hertz (Hz) with pulse widths of 200, 150, 100 and 50. People feel less stimulation at lower pulse widths. At higher pulse widths than this device used, people might feel their muscles contract.

When researchers excluded the lowest pulse width, they found 64 percent of people in the other active treatment groups had at least a 50 percent pain reduction two hours after treatment, compared with 26 percent of people in the placebo group.

At the highest level of stimulation, 58 percent of the people who started out with moderate to severe pain reported little or no pain after treatment. So did 24 percent of people in the placebo group.

The timing of treatment also mattered.

People who started using the device within 20 minutes of the start of a migraine reported average pain reductions of 47 percent, compared to a 25 percent reduction in pain for people starting the device later.

Even though the study’s participants were not told whether they were assigned active or placebo treatment, one limitation of the experiment is that participants often stopped placebo treatments before the recommended 20-minute course of stimulation was done, the authors note in Neurology.

The technology known as transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation (TENS) that was tested in the current study has been examined in other devices for migraine pain for decades, said Dr. Jean Schoenen, a neurology researcher at the University of Liege in Belgium who wasn’t involved in the current experiment.

One shortcoming of the current study is that researchers didn’t examine how long the pain relief lasts beyond two hours, Schoenen said by email.

“Rapid and sustained relief is what patients want,” Schoenen added.

If the device works in larger trials and becomes widely available for migraine patients, it might offer an alternative for people who can’t tolerate migraine drugs or an option patients could try in addition to medication when they don’t get enough pain relief from drugs alone, Schoenen said.

“The percentage of attacks for which TENS is sufficient as sole treatment and allows sustained pain relief remains to be determined,” Schoenen cautioned.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a nice job laying out the results. Readers are not only told how effective the treatment was measured to be at certain shock frequencies, but also how the placebo arms of the study fared, too.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Standard guidelines for stroke treatment currently recommend clot removal only within six hours of stroke onset. But a milestone study with results published today in the New England Journal of Medicine shows that clot removal up to 24 hours after stroke led to significantly reduced disability for properly selected patients.

The international multi-center clinical study, known as the DAWN trial, randomly assigned 206 stroke victims who arrived at the hospital within six to 24 hours to either endovascular clot removal therapy, known as thrombectomy, or to standard medical therapy.

Thrombectomy involves a catheter placed in the femoral artery and snaked up the aorta and into the cerebral arteries where the clot that is blocking the artery, and causing the neurological symptoms, is retrieved.

Almost half of the patients (48.6 percent) who had clot removal showed a considerable decrease in disability, meaning they were independent in activities of daily living 90 days after treatment. Only 13.1 percent of the medication group had a similar decrease. There was no difference in mortality or other safety end-points between the two groups.

"These findings could impact countless stroke patients all over the world who often arrive at the hospital after the current six-hour treatment window has closed," says co-principal investigator Raul Nogueira, MD, professor of neurology, neurosurgery and radiology at Emory University School of Medicine and director of neuroendovascular service at the Marcus Stroke & Neuroscience Center at Grady Memorial Hospital.

"When the irreversibly damaged brain area affected by the stroke is small, we see that clot removal can make a significant positive difference, even if performed outside the six-hour window," says co-principal investigator Tudor Jovin, MD, director of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Stroke Institute. "However, this does not diminish urgency with which patients must be rushed to the ER in the event of a stroke. The mantra 'time is brain' still holds true."

To select patients for the trial, the researchers used a new approach which used brain imaging and clinical criteria as opposed to just time alone.

"Looking at the physiological state of the brain and evaluating the extent of tissue damage and other clinical factors seems to be a better way to decide if thrombectomy will benefit patients as opposed to adhering to a rigid time window," says Nogueira.

The researchers planned to enroll a maximum of 500 patients over the course of the study period. However, a pre-planned interim review of the treatment effectiveness after 200 patients were enrolled in the trial led the independent Data Safety Monitoring Board overseeing the study to recommend early termination of the trial, based on pre-defined criteria demonstrating that clot removal provided significant clinical benefit in the studied patients.

"Our research and clinical teams are immensely proud of these breakthrough findings, which are so profound they will likely result in a paradigm shift that will not be seen again for many years in the field of stroke therapeutics," says Michael Frankel, MD, professor of neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, chief of neurology and director of the Marcus Stroke and Neuroscience Center for the Grady Health System.

According to Frankel, the Emory neuroscience team was a major contributor to the DAWN trial, working at Grady Memorial Hospital, the second leading site of the trial's enrollment.

The DAWN trial included trial locations in the United States, Spain, France, Australia and Canada. The trial was sponsored by Stryker Corporation, a medical technology company that manufactures the clot removal devices used in the study.

The DAWN trial results were presented at the European Stroke Organization Conference in May.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does an adequate job of comparing the randomized groups (late clot retrieval versus medication), although it could have offered much more information about how the study defined patients whose damaged brain area was considered “small” enough to qualify for late clot removal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - When the results of a test wouldn’t change how doctors manage a patient’s care, most say it’s not worth doing. But new tests for breast cancer risk mutations beyond the well-known BRCA genes would offer actionable information for many women and their doctors, a new study finds.

The BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations put women at high risk for breast, ovarian and other cancers, but mutations of other genes are believed to confer extra risk as well.

Earlier this year, 17 genetic experts argued against testing for a wider panel of breast cancer-related gene mutations until they are proven to be valid and useful in clinical practice (see Reuters story of May 27, 2015 here: reut.rs/1TvOoDf).

“There’s a lot of controversy even among experts,” said the senior author of the new study, Dr. Leif W. Ellisen of Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center in Boston.

For 15 years, at-risk women have only been tested for BRCA1 and 2, but many companies now offer multi-gene panels for 20, 25 or 30 other genes, Ellisen told Reuters Health.

“Are patients better off getting these much broader tests?” he said. “Does it actually change what you would tell them to do in terms of screening, prevention, or risk management?”

According to the new results, at least for some women, it would change their clinical management, he said.

Several of the authors of the new paper disclosed that they receive research funding, consult for or are employed by genetic testing companies like Myriad Genetics and Invitae Corporation.

Between 2001 and 2014, the study team did panel tests for 25 or 29 genes on 1,046 women who were referred for hereditary breast or ovarian cancer gene testing, but had tested negative for BRCA mutations. Most of the women had a personal history of breast or ovarian cancer already.

The researchers found that 40 women, or 4 percent of the total group, did have potentially harmful mutations in other genes. Of those 40 women, 26 had mutations carrying low to moderate risk of breast or ovarian cancer, eight had mutations associated with Lynch syndrome, which increases colon and ovarian cancer risk, and three had high-risk breast cancer genes.

Including another 23 patients who were referred into the study at a late stage, there were 63 women positive for non-BRCA mutations. Of those, the researchers decided that 33 would have been considered for additional screening or prevention measures based on their results. And for many, family testing would be recommended for first-degree relatives, according to the report in JAMA Oncology.

Even among all appropriate candidates who are sent for genetic testing, only nine percent will test positive for the BRCA mutations, so an additional four percent who have non-BRCA mutations is a significant number, Ellisen said.

Often these additional women do not have a high risk of breast or ovarian cancer, but some do have a high risk of colon or uterine cancer, and would be referred for additional screening, he said.

Multigene testing is not more expensive than testing for the BRCA mutations alone, he said.

Though these results indicate that additional genetic screening is clinically useful, some genetic test results will be uncertain, and it can be psychologically difficult for patients to deal with this uncertainty, Ellisen said.

“We do not advocate for broad population-based screening,” he said. “The interpretation of these tests is not a simple color-by-numbers thing.” The vast majority of uncertain genes will be benign, but a misinterpretation could lead a patient to a drastic, unnecessary surgical procedure, he said.

“Many cancer genetics experts have again urged caution, characterizing the use of multigene testing in the clinical setting as premature,” Dr. Elizabeth M. Swisher of the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle writes in a commentary accompanying the new paper.

“Yet thousands of women and their physicians are ignoring this advice, ordering a wide selection of multiplex tests daily,” Swisher writes. “The train has left the station and is unlikely to return,” so it is important to assess how useful this additional testing can be, she concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story relays the benefits described in the study for the study population. It notes that 63 (about 4%) out of more than 1,000 women who test negative for BRCA mutations tested positive for non-BRCA mutations. “Of those, the researchers decided that 33 would have been considered for additional screening or prevention measures based on their results.” That description earns to the story a Satisfactory rating. Additional details on what screening and prevention measures might be recommended for which women — and some statement about whether those results are likely to apply to people outside of the study — would have been welcome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A less common form of obesity surgery may spur more weight loss than its far more popular cousin, gastric bypass — but at the price of greater long-term risks, researchers reported Tuesday.

The study, published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, followed 60 severely obese patients who were randomly assigned to either gastric bypass surgery or a more extensive procedure known as duodenal switch.

Two years after surgery, duodenal switch patients had lost more weight: about 50 pounds more, on average.

People shed a substantial amount of weight with either type of surgery. Gastric bypass patients cut an average of 111 pounds, while duodenal switch patients dropped about 162.

But those extra pounds came with nearly double the complication rate.

Of the 29 duodenal switch patients, 62 percent had problems like abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea and intestinal obstruction. And several suffered long-term malnutrition — something not seen in the gastric bypass group.

Duodenal switch is not a popular procedure. In a 2008 study, it accounted for just 1 percent of weight-loss, or bariatric, surgeries done in the U.S., and 5 percent in Europe.

The technique is often reserved for “superobese” patients with a body mass index (BMI) of 50 or higher — though some surgeons perform it with less severely obese patients too, explained Dr. Torgeir T. Sovik of Oslo University in Norway, the lead researcher on the new study.

“As duodenal switch can be associated with more adverse events, this procedure should only be performed in carefully selected patients by a dedicated bariatric team,” Sovik told Reuters Health in an email. “And a closer follow-up after surgery is required after such procedures.”

But an expert not involved in the study went further.

“This is an operation that should probably go away,” said Dr. Edward H. Livingston, a professor and surgeon at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

The average weight loss seen with either gastric bypass or duodenal switch will improve or reverse obesity-related ills like diabetes, sleep apnea and knee arthritis, according to Livingston, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

So for those medical conditions, it probably wouldn’t matter if a person lost 100 pounds or 150 pounds over two years.

BMI is a measure of weight relative to height. A BMI between 18.5 and 24.9 is considered normal weight, and above 30 is obese.

The patients in the current study were a fairly healthy group despite having a BMI of 50 or more.

After two years, those who’d had a duodenal switch showed a greater improvement in their cholesterol levels. But those levels were near-normal (in both groups) to begin with, Livingston noted.

That begs the question, he said, of whether the extra weight loss “actually accomplished anything.”

In the U.S., where about 220,000 people underwent weight-loss surgery in 2009, gastric bypass is the most common form chosen.

During gastric bypass, the upper portion of the stomach is stapled off to create a smaller pouch that restricts the amount of food a person can eat at one time. The surgeon also creates a bypass around the rest of the stomach and a portion of the small intestine, which limits the body’s absorption of food.

Duodenal switch is more extensive. The surgeon removes part of the stomach, and the remaining “sleeve”-like stomach is attached to the final section of the small intestine; that puts even greater limits on the body’s absorption of calories and nutrients.

Both surgeries carry the long-term risk of nutritional deficiencies, and people need to take supplements and carefully monitor their diets for a lifetime afterward.

But the risks of nutrient deficiencies are greater with duodenal switch, and include some not seen with gastric bypass, Livingston pointed out.

Some people, for instance, may have severe calcium and vitamin D loss leading to weak and fragile bones. Other problems include severe protein deficiency and night blindness caused by vitamin A deficiency (which is also reversible with extra vitamin A treatment).

In this study, three of the 29 duodenal switch patients developed protein malnutrition, two developed night blindness, and one had a severe iron deficiency that needed to be treated with iron infusions.

Livingston said his advice to people considering weight-loss surgery is to avoid duodenal switch. “It’s just not a good operation,” he asserted.

But he also questioned the value of weight-loss surgery, in general, for severely obese people who do not have medical conditions that stand to improve or resolve after surgery.

In general, experts say that surgery could be an option for anyone with a BMI of 40 or higher; that translates, roughly, to a man who is at least 100 pounds overweight or a woman who is 80 pounds overweight.

Livingston said he thinks more caution is in order when a very obese person is otherwise healthy.

Along with the risks of surgery, he said, there is still uncertainty about whether it actually lengthens people’s lives. Some studies have suggested it might, but not all.

In a study recently published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, Livingston and his colleagues found no survival advantage among severely obese patients who’d undergone weight-loss surgery versus those who hadn’t.

The study involved 850 U.S. veterans who underwent some form of weight-loss surgery, at an average age of about 50, and more than 41,000 vets who had only non-surgical care. There was no evidence that surgery improved longevity over the next seven years.

“We really don’t even know if there’s a survival benefit,” Livingston said.

That, he added, makes the risks of duodenal switch seem even less worthwhile.

But according to Sovik, duodenal switch might be appropriate for some superobese patients.

In the U.S., he said, about one in three weight-loss surgery candidates have a BMI of 50 or higher. And studies suggest that a sizable percentage of those people will still have a BMI higher than 40 after gastric bypass.

In this study, one-quarter of gastric bypass patients still had a BMI that high two years after surgery — versus none of the duodenal switch patients.

More extensive monitoring after duodenal switch, Sovik noted, can help detect and manage side effects.

He pointed out, though, that larger, longer-term studies are still needed to show whether the extra weight loss with duodenal switch ultimately improves severely obese patients’ health and extends their lives.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear that the duodenal switch surgery, in comparison with the bariatric surgery, may give patients greater weight loss in pounds but the value of that reduction is not clear. The additional information from the paper published by Livingston demonstrating no advantage to surgery over medical management was very useful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A rare malignancy known as squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal (SCCA) is on the increase, and now researchers have reported results of the first-ever phase II clinical trial results for treatment with the immunotherapy drug nivolumab.

The phase II study, for which findings are being presented at this week's American Association for Cancer Research's annual meeting in New Orleans, was designed and led by researchers at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center's Human Papillomavirus-Related (HPV) Cancers Moon Shot Program. MD Anderson enrolled 18 patients who volunteered to provide both pre- and post-treatment tissue samples. The study revealed encouraging correlations between immunologic biomarkers and responses to treatment.

"There have been no standardized treatment options for metastatic SCCA patients," said Van Morris, M.D., assistant professor of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology. "This study demonstrated responses in five of 18 patients treated at MD Anderson, and many of the patients had significant reductions in their tumor size."

"In this first prospective phase II trial for refractory metastatic SCCA, our exploratory analysis of pre- and on-treatment tissues samples revealed potential correlations between immunologic biomarkers and clinical outcomes to nivolumab," said Cathy Eng, M.D., professor of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology and national study principal investigator.

Metastatic SCCA, a cancer often associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, is normally treated with chemotherapy, although no trials have established a standard of care.

The study employed the monoclonal antibody nivolumab, one of the drugs represented among the growing arsenal of immunotherapy therapies. The drug frees the immune system to attack cancer by disrupting a brake that halts immune response.

"This the first formal clinical trial completed with patients with previously treated metastatic SCCA," said Morris. "In this trial, patients received a biopsy just before being treated with nivolumab and then a second paired biopsy after two doses."

Study results showed a decrease in frequency of CD8 T-cells in post-treatment tumor samples among responder-patients. Immune monitoring of pre-treatment samples showed a significantly higher percentage of CD3 and CD8 T-cells as well as other indicators, all which point to correlations between immunologic biomarkers and responses to treatment. Five other markers did not demonstrate significant differences.

Of note, patients who scored as responders had higher frequency of CD8 T-cells and PD-L1 CD45 immune cells in pre-treatment samples.

The study was funded by MD Anderson's HPV Moon Shots Program and the HPV Anal Cancer Foundation, the E.B. Anal Cancer Fund, and a philanthropic donation. The Moon Shots Program aims to accelerate the conversion of scientific discoveries into clinical advances and significantly reduce cancer deaths.

Study team members for the correlative analysis included Armeen Mahvash, M.D., Interventional Radiology; Luis Vence, Ph.D., Jorge Blando, D.V.M., and James Allison, Ph.D., all of Immunology; Robert Wolff, Cancer Medicine; Aki Ohinata, GI Medical Oncology; Chimela Ohaji, Investigational Cancer Therapeutics; and Padmanee Sharma, M.D., Ph.D., Genitourinary Medical Oncology.

Final clinical results for the study will be reported at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's 2016 annual meeting in Chicago by Eng on behalf of the National Cancer Institute's Experimental Therapeutics Clinical Trials Network (ETCTN) and its collaborators.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The patients’ response was modest and the news release reflects that. The release quotes a researcher saying, “This study demonstrated responses in five of 18 patients treated at MD Anderson, and many of the patients had significant reductions in their tumor size.” It also gives details of some of those treatment responses.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - A stem cell therapy developed by Vericel Corp helped reduce deaths and hospitalizations in advanced heart failure patients, according to data from a midstage study, potentially providing a treatment that could delay the need for heart transplants.

However, the treatment failed to improve secondary goals of the trial, such as heart-pumping efficiency and six-minute walking distance, and Vericel shares fell more than 31 percent by afternoon trading on Monday.

“It’s a little baffling that you’re keeping patients alive, but not having any effect on those secondary endpoints,” said Needham & Co analyst Chad Messer. “People were looking for downside and they had one.”

The data compared Vericel’s bone marrow-derived ixmyelocel-T stem cells with placebo in 109 well-treated patients with advanced heart failure who had exhausted medical and device therapies.

After one year, the Vericel treatment led to a 37 percent reduction versus placebo in a composite of adverse events, including death, heart-related hospitalizations and unplanned clinic visits related to heart failure.

Vericel last month reported that the study succeeded. Detailed results were unveiled on Monday at an American College of Cardiology meeting in Chicago and in the Lancet medical journal.

The result was primarily driven by the difference in deaths of 13.7 percent in the placebo group, or 7 deaths, compared with 3.4 percent, or 2 deaths, for the ixmyelocel-T group. In addition, 38 percent of stem cell patients required hospitalization, versus 47 percent for placebo.

“This is strong evidence in a well-designed trial that we can decrease events,” said Dr. Timothy Henry, the study’s lead investigator and chief of cardiology at Cedars Sinai Heart Institute in Los Angeles. “For patients, this is a really hopeful thing.”

Henry, who presented the data at the ACC meeting, stressed the need for larger trials to prove the benefit of ixmyelocel-T

For the treatment, bone marrow is taken from the patient and enhanced over two weeks to increase two types of cells associated with healing. They are then injected directly into the patient’s heart.

With advanced heart failure, a leading cause of hospitalizations, blood-pumping ability is diminished as the heart’s left ventricle becomes enlarged and weakened.

If the disease worsens despite all available medicinal and interventional therapies, the only options are heart transplant or a pumping assist device.

“The idea is to find a treatment for this group of people before they get to that stage,” Henry said.

Vericel shares were down $2.01, or 33 percent, at $4.02 on Nasdaq.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This article outlined the 37 percent reduction in adverse events due to the stem cell therapy, and explained that the outcome was mainly due to difference in deaths and hospitalizations between the therapy and placebo groups. And, we were very pleased to see the inclusion of absolute numbers related to this–i.e., 7 deaths versus 2 deaths. The story also let us know that the study didn’t show a benefit in secondary endpoints, like heart pumping efficiency and a walk test.
However, we’d have liked to have seen more discussion–ideally from an independent medical experts–on what investors already seem to know, but the reader is left to deduce: Were these results as meaningful as the lead investigator is making them out to be?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Johns Hopkins Medicine specialists report they have developed a urine test for the likely emergence of cervical cancer that is highly accurate compared to other tests based on genetic markers derived directly from cervical tissue.

The new urine test, they say, is different because it analyzes not only multiple sources of human cellular DNA altered by precancerous changes, but also DNA from HPV that is sexually transmitted and causes virtually all cases of the disease.

In a proof-of-concept study, described online in Cancer Prevention Research on November 8, the investigators say their genetic markers test showed a "sensitivity" or accuracy rate of 90.9 percent in identifying so-called CIN2 lesions -- cervical lesions with abnormal cells likely to not only develop into cancer, but also to develop into cancers likely to spread. Additionally, they demonstrated that the DNA for all three human genes and one viral gene could be successfully extracted from urine, and they could identify such lesions with 75 percent sensitivity.

Two commercial tests based on markers of DNA chemical changes called methylation, released in Europe last summer, require Pap smears or swabs of cervical tissue, and show 64 percent sensitivity in identifying similar lesions, according to senior investigator Rafael Guerrero-Preston, Dr.P.H., M.P.H., assistant professor of otolaryngology-head and neck surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and member of the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center.

"If further studies confirm these findings, we see a significant use of urine screening as a way to quickly and inexpensively determine if a biopsy is warranted, or if physicians can use a 'watch and wait' approach before intervening," says Guerrero-Preston. Typically, he says, a woman who tests positive for HPV and has an abnormal Pap smear undergoes a biopsy to rule out cervical cancer using cells taken directly from cervical tissue. But previous studies suggest more than 50 percent of these biopsies are unnecessary and can result in pain, worry, infertility and higher health care costs.

"Our urine test would serve as a molecular triage," he says, "at times supplementing Pap test information. In developing countries that don't have the money, medical infrastructure or cultural approval for Pap test, our test could be used instead."

The new study builds on the Johns Hopkins team's previously published work, in which investigators identified three genes associated with cervical cancer or abnormal-looking cells known to become cancerous: FKBP6, INTS1 and ZNF516. As abnormalities progress, these genes were more likely to have a chemical methyl group attached to their DNA in certain spots.

The researchers tested the value of these genes as markers using 214 cervical cell samples collected from women undergoing Pap smears at Hospital Dr. Hernan Henriquez Aravena in Chile. The women ranged in age from 18 to 86. Among the test samples, 34 showed no abnormalities in their cervix; 87 showed one of three types of precancerous, abnormal tissue; and 90 showed clear evidence of cervical cancer.

Next, Guerrero-Preston's team isolated DNA from each cervical tissue sample and used advanced genetic sequencing methods to spell out the DNA makeup of cells in the cervical tissue samples. The researchers then compared the number of methyl groups attached to each gene in samples from the 34 healthy women to 53 samples with a specific subset of precancerous markers.

Using methylation as a value to diagnose malignancy, the three genes together showed a 90 percent sensitivity, meaning that their presence was able to predict a true positive cancer sample this percentage of the time. The test had an 88.9 percent specificity, meaning the percent of time the test correctly identified someone without the disease.

To further improve the accuracy of the test, the investigators added a new gene marker to the test. This time, rather than using a human gene, they used one from the virus, HPV16-L1, which also becomes methylated in human cells as cancer develops. They did the test again with the four-gene combination on a new population of women from the University of Puerto Rico. The 115 women ranged in age from 21 to 49; 41 participants had healthy cervical tissue, and 74 had one of three types of precancerous cells. Using all four genes, the test now had a sensitivity of 90.9 percent and a specificity of 60.9 percent.

"When developing a new cancer screening test, we want something in the range of 90 to 95 percent sensitivity, which is competitive with the effectiveness of tests developed and now marketed in Europe," says Guerrero-Preston.

The next step, the researchers report, was to verify that the four-gene test worked using freely circulating DNA from blood and urine, rather than DNA taken directly from cervical tissue.

For this experiment, they tested 40 samples of paired cervical tissue, blood and urine from a subset of the patients from Puerto Rico. Using the DNA from blood, they found the test had an 85.7 percent sensitivity and a 60.9 percent specificity. Using urine, they found a 75 percent sensitivity and an 83.3 percent specificity.

During the course of the study, the time to process cervical samples, blood or urine and get a test result took four days. They plan to continue modifying the test to improve the urine sensitivity to that of the cervical tissue samples.

According to World Cancer Research Fund International, 84 percent of cervical cancers occur in less developed countries, with the highest rates in Africa, Latin American and the Caribbean. In the United States, cervical cancer used to be the highest cause of cancer deaths among women, but that soon changed when the yearly Pap smear was introduced over 40 years ago. Countries without the infrastructure or cultural acceptance for regular Pap tests have not seen declining cancer rates.

Guerrero-Preston and his colleagues have a research agreement with Cepheid to develop a way to reduce the waiting time for a test result from a maximum of four days in the lab to under three hours in a Cepheid instrument using sealed cartridges to minimize sample handling and contamination.

Additional authors on the study include Blanca Valle, Anne Jedlicka, Nitesh Turaga, Oluwasina Folawiyo, Francesca Pirini, Fahcina Lawson, Angelo Vergura, Maartje Noorhuis, Amanda Dziedzic, Gabriela Perez, Marisa Renehan, Carolina Guerrero-Diaz, Bruce Trock Liliana Florea and David Sidransky of The Johns Hopkins University; Edgar De Jesus Rodriguez, Jose Rodriguez Orengo, Keimari Mendez and Josefina Romaguera of the University of Puerto Rico; and Teresa Diaz-Montes of the Institute for Cancer Care at Mercy.

The research was funded by National Cancer Institute grants (U01 CA084986, K01 CA164092 and U01 CA084986).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We rate this a borderline satisfactory.  On the one hand, the release offers numerical summaries of the test’s abilities to both correctly detect cancer (sensitivity) and correctly identify someone who does not have the disease (specificity).  But the text does a relatively dense job of explaining how the investigators reached the urine-test stage, creating a narrative that will require a determined reader and could thwart someone giving the text a more cursory view.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
June 2, 2010 (San Francisco) -- A quick spray of a new drug may help men who suffer from premature ejaculation last nearly six times longer, new research suggests.

The numbers aren't huge. Men who sprayed the head of their penis with PSD502 five minutes before sex lasted an average of just over three minutes after three months of treatment, compared with just over 30 seconds before.

Nonetheless, doctors like Irwin Goldstein, MD, director of San Diego Sexual Medicine at Alvarado Hospital in San Diego, tell WebMD they're excited because this is the first time a drug is being rigorously tested for men with really serious premature ejaculation problems.

Up to 30% of men suffer some degree of premature ejaculation, defined as ejaculation that occurs within one minute of vaginal penetration. It's the No. 1 sexual health problem in men.

Premature ejaculation can be devastating for both a man and his partner, triggering anxiety, depression, and relationship problems, says Goldstein, who heard the results presented at the annual meeting of the American Urological Association.

Not all men with premature ejaculation suffer to the same degree as the men in the study, says researcher Ira Sharlip, MD, clinical professor of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. He consults for Shionogi Pharma Inc., which makes the spray and funded the work.

"Yet I think a substantial number of [men with premature ejaculation] would use it," he tells WebMD, alternatives being unproven products with names like "Stay Erect" and "Play Longer."

At the meeting, Sharlip presented the pooled results of two pivotal studies of PSD502 involving 530 men with premature ejaculation.

A total of 358 of the men gave themselves three quick sprays of PSD502 to the head of the penis five minutes before sex and then wiped it off right before penetration.

PSD502, which contains two common topical painkillers, lidocaine and prilocaine, is "slightly oily, but not objectionably so," Sharlip says.

The rest of the men used a placebo spray. All used the product for three months, for a total of 23,000 doses.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The "ejaculatory control scale" wasn’t explained very well.  But the numbers were there.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (Embargoed Until Oct. 18, 2018 @ 10:05AM ET) -- A surgical technique called EDAS (encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis) significantly decreases the rate of stroke recurrence and death for patients with severe atherosclerosis of the brain arteries, according to findings of a Phase IIa clinical trial presented today at the World Stroke Congress in Montreal. Atherosclerotic disease, in which plaque buildup narrows the brain arteries, is one of the most common causes of strokes.

Neurosurgeons performing EDAS reroute arteries from the scalp and the membranes that cover the brain and place these arteries under the skull near areas of the brain at risk of stroke. Over time, new blood vessels form, creating fresh pathways for blood and oxygen to reach the brain.

The trial, led by Nestor R. Gonzalez, MD, professor of Neurosurgery and director of the Neurovascular Laboratory at Cedars-Sinai, enrolled 52 patients with severe brain atherosclerosis, also known as intracranial atherosclerotic disease, or ICAD, who showed symptoms of either a recent stroke or a mini-stroke, called a transient ischemic attack. These patients received EDAS surgery, along with intensive medical management, which included diet and lifestyle changes, blood thinners and other medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar levels.

After one year, 9.6 percent of the patients treated with the surgery experienced another ischemic stroke or died, compared with 21.2 percent of patients in a matched control group who received only intensive medical management. Two of the EDAS patients had small wound openings that required additional surgical interventions, but there were no intracranial hemorrhages or other serious adverse events, the researchers reported.

"Our findings in this intermediate-stage trial are promising for applying EDAS surgery to intracranial atherosclerotic disease," said Gonzalez said. Previously, EDAS has been used for moyamoya disease, a rare cerebrovascular disorder that affects younger patients.

Gonzalez said the new trial addressed a serious medical need. "Even under the best current treatments, ICAD carries high rates of recurrent stroke and death, compared with other causes of stroke," he said. "Developing new therapeutic strategies is crucial for ICAD patients."

Current ICAD therapies--in addition to intensive medical management--include bypass surgery to connect a blood vessel from outside the brain to a vessel inside the brain, as well as angioplasty with stenting, which involves inflating a tiny balloon inside a cerebral artery to open it up and placing a stent device inside the artery. Despite advances in medical care, annual rates of recurrent stroke and death are remain high, at 15 percent or more for ICAD patients, according to published research.

Gonzalez said his team is working with the stroke prevention working group of the National Institutes of Health to develop a proposal for a Phase III randomized clinical trial across multiple institutions to further test the effectiveness of EDAS as compared with intensive medical management. While this Phase IIa trial selected patients from previous studies as the control group, the Phase III study would enroll new ICAD patients for both the control and experimental groups, he explained.

"This clinical trial moves us significantly closer to preventing strokes and death in high-risk populations," said Keith Black, MD, professor and chair of the Department of Neurosurgery. "As a nationally renowned physician-investigator, Dr. Gonzalez personifies the dedication of Cedars-Sinai to translating the most advanced research into new cures."

Besides Gonzalez, the trial involved other investigators from the stroke centers of Cedars-Sinai and UCLA.

Funding: Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Strokes of the National Institutes of Health under award number K23NS079477-01A1.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release provides readers with a numerical comparison of the study’s results, in this case, the prevention of subsequent strokes or death among these patients.  According to the release, in those receiving the EDAS procedure, after one year, 9.6% of patients had a later stroke or died, compared to more than twice that number (21.2%) from a matched control group who didn’t receive this surgery.
(We discuss the limitations of these results under the Evidence criteria, below.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The race to develop a safe and effective vaccine against the Zika virus got one step closer Thursday, when a team of researchers reported positive results in the latest round of testing in monkeys.

Three experimental vaccines being developed by researchers at Harvard’s Beth Israel Hospital and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research had already shown promise in mice — but monkeys are a much better model of how the medicines will work in humans.

All three of the vaccines were found to be safe and protected the monkeys against infection with the virus, according to the report published in Science.

The urgency for a vaccine to protect against Zika infection has intensified as the virus spreads rapidly across Latin America and the Caribbean. This week an unprecedented travel advisory was given for southern Florida after more than a dozen people were diagnosed with Zika after being bitten by "homegrown" mosquitoes.

Zika virus is most dangerous to pregnant women, because it can cause severe birth defects in babies if they are infected in the womb.

Related: Could We Nave New Zika Vaccine Soon?

Right now, just one of those three vaccines will be progressing to clinical trials. That vaccine — dubbed ZPIV for purified inactivated Zika virus — uses a more traditional vaccine approach and depends on dead virus particles.

To develop the vaccine, researchers kill the virus with chemicals, leaving behind harmless proteins that the body can learn to recognize as foreign invaders. Using those proteins as targets, the immune system can then produce antibodies to latch onto live virus particles and destroy them. This kind of vaccine is much safer than ones that depend on live virus particles to foster immunity.

Related: Company Gets OK to Test New Zika Vaccine

The researchers gave 16 monkeys an initial dose of ZPIV and then a booster four weeks later. Then the monkeys were exposed to active forms of the virus. In tests afterwards, the monkeys showed antibodies against Zika and no detectable virus in their blood or urine, meaning that the protection from the vaccine was complete. Monkeys that got a sham vaccine developed no antibodies.

The results were “striking,” said study coauthor Dr. Dan Barouch, a professor of medicine at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School. “The findings published today substantially increase our optimism for the potential for the development of a Zika vaccine for humans.”

Beyond that, “this is a promising [vaccine] candidate that can be easily produced in large quantities,” said coauthor, Col. Nelson Michael, an Army doctor who specializes in flaviviruses, such as Zika and dengue.

To continue the development of the vaccine, the researchers will be partnering up with the largest pharmaceutical company solely devoted to vaccines, Sanofi Pasteur.

The researchers hope to test the vaccine in people by October, Barouch said.

Related: New Study Shows Just How Tricky the Zika Virus Is

The two other experimental vaccines described in the new report also sparked an immune response in monkeys. Both of these vaccines depend on new technology in which scientists learn the exact DNA of proteins on the surface of the virus and then create copies to be put in a vaccine. One vaccine had just the man-made proteins in it, the other wrapped a common cold virus around the proteins. The protein/cold virus vaccine was especially effective, sparking a significant immune response after just one dose.

Another experimental vaccine, developed by researchers at the National Institutes of Health, is a bit further along.

Trials of that vaccine in people, which is also based on man-made copies of virus proteins, began on August 2, when the first study volunteer was given a vaccination through a needle free injector, said Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

Results are expected by December and if they are promising, a bigger phase II trial will be launched in Zika endemic countries

That puts the project ahead of schedule, since the original launch of the phase I trials was expected to start in September, Fauci said.

Still, with many years of experience in vaccine development behind him, Fauci said, “you’re never overconfident of the clinical results."

"But we are optimistic that this new DNA Zika is a viable platform," Fauci said. "So we’re cautiously optimistic.”

And if problems turn up, there are the three potential vaccine described in the new study.

“It’s always good to have multiple different vaccine candidates in both clinical and pre-clinical testing,” Barouch said. “That increases the chance that we will have at least one, if not more than one, that works in the end.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag.  We could have gone either way with this grade but give the story the benefit of the doubt. The story does detail the findings of one of the four vaccines being tested: That 16 monkeys appeared to become immune to Zika. More information about the three other vaccine trials should have been given, though.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy may work slightly better than soy at reducing menopausal hot flashes, a new study says.

Women who took such hormones had fewer hot flashes, on average, than women who took soy - and both had fewer than those who took a placebo, or “dummy pill.”

“The bottom line for someone who is very disturbed by hot flashes, the best treatment is hormones, and the next tier would be soy,” said Dr. Gloria Bachmann, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Jersey.

However, a 2002 landmark study by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) found that such treatments can increase the risk of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke. That means that if women do take hormones, Bachmann told Reuters Health, it should be the lowest dose and for the shortest possible period of time.

And not every woman needs treatment, notes Bachmann, who was not involved in the study. Women with severe or frequent hot flashes or whose hot flashes keep them up at night, should consider treatment, she said.

Women typically suffer between 30 and 150 hot flashes a month, said Dr. Rafael Bolanos-Diaz, professor of health economics at San Marcos University in Lima, Peru, who co-authored the study.

Women who took hormones had an average of 24 fewer hot flashes per month, while those who took soy had 12 per month fewer. The study did not look at whether eating soy in food has the same effect on hot flashes as supplements, Bolanos-Diaz said.

The researchers looked at 19 studies on how a treatment, either hormones or soy, compared to a placebo. They compared the average number of hot flashes in 760 women who had treatment with 770 who did not.

The study was published in Menopause: The Journal of the North American Menopause Society.

Soy hasn’t been studied as much as hormone replacement to treat hot flashes, and doctors don’t know exactly how it works. It’s thought to have similar effects to estrogen on the brain, bones, and blood vessels, Bolanos-Diaz told Reuters Health by email.

Soy supplements also have side effects: Nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the NIH. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

“For some women, hormone therapy is the best option, for some soy is best, and for some, it’s just watchful waiting until the hot flashes subside,” Bachmann said.

SOURCE: bit.ly/hBua85 Menopause: The Journal of The North American Menopause Society, online March 3, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that “women who took hormones had an average of 24 fewer hot flashes per month, while those who took soy had 12 per month.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - National guidelines help doctors decide how to treat high blood pressure. But tailoring those guidelines to better fit individuals could prevent many more heart attacks and strokes, say developers of a computer model that makes those calculations.

Their study, published Monday in the Annals of Internal Medicine, estimated the effects of using “individualized guidelines” to make decisions on treating high blood pressure.

It found that the tailored approach could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than the simpler, general recommendations used now.

Currently, U.S. guidelines recommend treatment if blood pressure rises above 140/90 mm Hg, or above 130/80 mm Hg if a person has diabetes or chronic kidney disease.

Doctors generally add their own judgment to that decision as well. If, for instance, a person has slightly elevated blood pressure but is otherwise at low risk for heart problems, then lifestyle changes might be enough.

But the new study looked at a more sophisticated way of estimating individual patients’ needs. Researchers used a computer-based “risk calculator” that took into account a person’s age, cholesterol levels, family history of heart disease and any diabetes diagnosis.

It also factored in what’s known about different types of patients’ responses to various blood pressure medications.

The researchers then used data from a long-term study of 15,800 Americans to estimate the effects of applying the individualized guidelines.

Overall, they found, the tailored method could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than national guidelines, if healthcare costs were kept the same.

If, on the other hand, the number of heart attacks and strokes prevented were kept the same, the individualized guidelines would accomplish that result at a 67 percent cost savings versus the national guidelines.

The goal of using the risk calculator “is the same as the physician’s desire to take into account the ‘whole patient’ when discussing treatment options with patients,” said lead researcher Dr. David M. Eddy.

The problem with the old-fashioned way, he told Reuters Health in an email, is that there are many pieces of information about a patient to consider.

“It is impossible for the human brain to digest it all and estimate accurately the patient’s risks or how they would benefit from treatments,” he said.

According to Eddy, risk calculators like the one in the study could, eventually, help doctors give patients real numbers. A doctor might tell you, for example, what your risk is of developing diabetes in the next 20 years, and how much you could cut that risk if you lose a certain amount of weight (and keep it off).

Eddy is a founder of Archimedes, Inc., a San Francisco-based company that has developed a computer-based mathematical model to aid in healthcare decisions. The calculator used in this study is a simplified version of that model.

Eddy said that the calculator, or others like it, could be integrated into electronic health records. A patient’s information could be automatically fed to the calculator, and the results would then be displayed on a computer for the doctor and patient to discuss.

A researcher not involved in the work said it was a “nice study” that is a first step toward showing that tailored guidelines could have benefits.

“This shows that there might be better ways for physicians to choose who gets treated and who does not,” said Dr. Douglas K. Owens of the VA Palo Alto Health Care System in California, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

General guidelines, like those for treating high blood pressure, are kept fairly simple so they are easy to remember, Owens told Reuters Health in an interview. Doctors, ideally, then adapt those guidelines to individual patients’ situations.

However, Owens said, “it’s hard to do all of that in your head. This gives them a tool.”

Now the looming questions are how to implement risk calculators in doctors’ practices — and, Owens said, whether that benefits patients’ health in the real world.

“The general theme is that we can do better, and we may have an opportunity to improve patients’ health outcomes,” Owens said. “That’s the hope.”

He said he thinks electronic health records will be key to putting individualized guidelines into practice.

And right now, there is a way to go before most doctors will have those systems in place.

A recent government survey found that the percentage of U.S. doctors using electronic health records is on the rise, but still fairly low.

About one-quarter of surveyed doctors said they had “basic” electronic medical record systems in their offices. Only about 10 percent had a “fully functional” system that included extensive information on patients’ medical history.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag here, but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
The benefits from the use of models to better fit treatment recommendations were described as relative improvements rather than absolute benefits.  That’s how the data were described in the abstract of the paper reported on; the predicted numbers were contained within the body of the article. Given the size of the population in question, we can look the other way on the use of relative risk reduction figures.
And, as already noted, the story injected some caution about real world benefits by quoting an independent expert:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When it comes to preventing blood clots after a knee replacement, good old aspirin may be just as effective as newer, more expensive drugs.

That swap could help reduce the cost of caring for the nearly 1 million Americans who have a knee fixed each year, Michigan Medicine researchers say.

After knee surgery, there's a risk of blood clots in the legs or lungs. So it's routine for patients to take clot-preventing drugs for some time afterward.

Some doctors choose powerful anti-clotting drugs like heparin (Lovenox) and rivaroxaban (Xarelto), but it hasn't been clear whether these expensive prescription drugs work any better than cheap, readily available aspirin.

"Aspirin alone may provide similar protection compared to anticoagulation treatments," says Brian R. Hallstrom, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon and associate chair for quality and safety at the University of Michigan Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Hallstrom is the lead author of a new study published in JAMA Surgery that found few patients developed a blood clot after surgery, and those patients on aspirin fared just as well as those on anticoagulants.

During the two-year study period from 2013 to 2015, aspirin use rose from 10 percent to 50 percent among the patients cared for by orthopaedic surgeons in the Michigan Arthroplasty Registry Collaborative Quality Initiative, a statewide effort to give patients the best possible recovery and outcomes after hip and knee replacements.

Since then, the shift has become even more distinct: Aspirin prescribing has risen to 70 percent among Michigan surgeons, says Hallstrom, who is co-director of the initiative and a health services researcher at U-M's Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation.

Based on the experience of 41,537 Michigan patients undergoing knee replacement, the study may further the debate about the routine use of aspirin for clot prevention.

A recent Canadian study looked at the issue, but the analysis had a caveat: Each of the more than 3,400 clinical trial patients received rivaroxaban the first five days after surgery. After that, they continued with the drug or switched to aspirin.

The new U-M study suggests patients may be adequately protected if they take aspirin alone from day one.

"This study is truly a real-world experience of what happened in Michigan when the majority of surgeons switched to aspirin," Hallstrom says. "The incidence of blood clots, pulmonary embolus and death did not increase despite this dramatic change in practice."

Over the past decade, surgeons have turned away from powerful anticoagulants and toward aspirin used in addition to nondrug improvements such as compression devices for thwarting clots.

These days, most patients have a generally low risk of blood clots after knee replacement for a number of reasons. Those reasons include shorter surgical times, less invasive procedures and use of regional anesthesia that allows early mobilization after surgery, Hallstrom says. Some patients are even going home the same day.

"The most important way to prevent blood clots is getting moving," says Hallstrom, noting that people are at risk for blood clots when they sit or lie in one position for too long, such as on an airplane or a hospital bed.

The critical care specialists who make up the American College of Chest Physicians favor heparin to reduce the risk of blood clots, while the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons guidelines state that no one drug is better than another for preventing clots.

The U-M study involved patients undergoing knee replacement surgery at any of the 29 Michigan hospitals in the surgical quality group. One-third of the patients took aspirin alone; 54 percent took only an anticoagulant; and 13 percent took an aspirin/anticoagulant combination.

Over three months, just 1.16 percent of aspirin patients developed a serious blood clot. That was true for 1.42 percent of anticoagulant patients, according to the Michigan study. This was not statistically different.

So, neither drug appeared better than the other -- but aspirin has some obvious advantages.

"Aspirin is easy to take and much less expensive," Hallstrom says. "Patients can get it over the counter for pennies, while the other anticoagulants require monitoring, injections, frequent dose adjustments and are extremely expensive."

The reported cost for a 30-day supply of rivaroxaban is approximately $379 to $450; heparin is estimated at $450 to $890. Although warfarin costs a few dollars for a 30-day supply, its cost approaches that of the other anticoagulants when doctor visits for monitoring are factored in, Hallstrom says.

The study suggests most patients can have just aspirin without increasing the risk for venous thromboembolism, but doctors need to consider factors such as a patient's history of clots, obesity and ability to mobilize after surgery when determining the best measure for clot prevention, Hallstrom adds.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release lists the percentages of patients who had a blood clot within three months of their knee replacement and emphasized that there was no statistical difference between those who took only aspirin and those who took anticoagulants.  However, the release is remiss in not pointing out that the majority of patients were also treated with pneumatic compression boots.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New York, NY, September 22, 2015 - The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation against regular prostate specific antigen (PSA) screening for prostate cancer is controversial. While it may reduce the risk of over diagnosis and overtreatment, the reduction in intermediate and high risk cancer diagnoses raises concern because of the potential for delayed diagnoses of important cancers in men who may benefit from treatment, according to investigators reporting in The Journal of Urology®.

Prostate cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer death among men in the U.S., with nearly 30,000 deaths annually. Deaths from prostate cancer have declined by about 40% since the advent of PSA screening in the late 1980s, and 40-70% of that decline may be attributable to screening. However, radiation therapy and surgery have a negative impact on quality of life. The uncertain benefit of PSA based screening, combined with the complications associated with treatment, led the USPSTF to conclude in October 2011 that the harms of PSA based screening outweighed the benefits, leading it to recommend against regular screening.

"Our study was designed to assess the impact of the USPSTF recommendation on screening practices among urologists and primary care providers and the incidence of prostate cancer," explained lead investigator Daniel A. Barocas, MD, MPH, of the Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. "We know there is decreased utilization of PSA testing in some institutions and health systems, but has the number of incident cases per month changed substantially since the draft guideline was issued?"

Investigators evaluated the effect of the USPSTF guideline on the number and distribution of new prostate cancer diagnoses in the U.S. They identified incident cancers diagnosed between January 2010 and December 2012 in the National Cancer Database and assessed the trend of new prostate cancers diagnosed each month before and after the draft guideline was issued, comparing their findings with colon cancer.

This study helped quantify the potential benefits (reduced harms of over diagnosis and overtreatment of low risk disease and disease found in elderly men) and potential harms (missed opportunities to diagnose important cancers in men who may benefit from treatment).

The number of prostate cancer diagnoses dropped by more than 12% (1363 cases) in the month after the USPSTF draft guideline was issued and the number continued to drop, resulting in an overall decline of 28% in incident prostate cancer diagnoses in the year after the draft guideline was issued. By contrast, the number of monthly colon cancer diagnoses remained stable. Diagnoses of low, intermediate, and high risk prostate cancers all decreased significantly, but new diagnoses of non-localized disease did not change. The decreases were similar across all subgroups of age, comorbidity, race, income, and insurance.

The study showed that 12 months after the draft guidelines were published diagnoses of new low risk cancers had fallen by 37.9%, and continued to fall more rapidly than other disease risk strata, suggesting that, in this regard, the USPSTF recommendation had its intended effect,. Similarly, new diagnoses had fallen by 23.0-29.3% among men over age 70 and by 26.0% among infirm men, populations at risk for harms of treatment but unlikely to live long enough to benefit from early detection.

However, the study also identified a drop of 28.1% in diagnoses of intermediate risk disease and 23.1% in high risk prostate cancer one year after the draft guideline, which could result in missing important opportunities to spare men with higher risk cancers from progressive disease and cancer death.

"While some of the effects of this guideline may be beneficial in terms of reducing harms of over diagnosis and overtreatment, the reduction in intermediate and high risk cancer diagnoses raises concern for delayed diagnoses of important cancers associated with inferior cancer outcomes," noted Dr. Barocas. "Future research should focus on prostate cancer screening paradigms that both minimize harms and maximize the potential benefits of screening, as well as accounting for individual patient risk factors and preferences."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The apparent benefit of the USPSTF guidelines is the 37.9% reduction in the incidence of low-risk cancers–the over-diagnosed cancers that lead to over-treatment. While this benefit takes second billing to the potential risks of finding fewer higher-risk cancers in the release, there is at lease some discussion of this benefit. The fact that the rate of non-localized cancer did not increase in the study is reassuring–though the follow-up time is actually way too short to know whether trend will be durable.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Dec. 9, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The bone drug zoledronic acid (Zometa), considered a potentially promising weapon against breast cancer recurrence, has flopped in a new study involving more than 3,360 patients.

Zometa did not appear to prevent breast cancer from returning or to boost disease-free survival overall. British researchers presented the disappointing findings Thursday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas.

"As a whole, the study is negative," study author Dr. Robert Coleman, a professor of medical oncology at the University of Sheffield in England, said during a Thursday news conference on the findings. "There is no overall difference in recurrence rates or survival rates [between patients who got the bone drug and those who did not], except in older patients, defined as more than five years after menopause."

That was a possible bright spot in the results.

"In that population, there is a benefit," Coleman said. The older women had a 27 percent improvement in recurrence and a 29 percent improvement in overall survival over the five-year follow-up, compared to those who didn't get the drug.

"There was tremendous hope that this [drug] approach would be a major leap forward," Coleman noted. "There have been other trials that suggest this is the case." In one previous study, the use of the drug was linked with a 32 percent improvement in survival and lowered recurrence in younger women with breast cancer.

Other research has found that healthy women on bone drugs were less prone to develop breast cancer, so experts were hoping the drugs had an anti-tumor effect.

Zometa, marketed by Novartis AG, is used to relieve pain when cancers have spread to the bone -- in part, by slowing bone erosion caused by the disease. It is given intravenously, while other bisphosphonates such as Actonel, Fosamax or Boniva can be taken orally.

In the trial, known as AZURE (Adjuvant Treatment with Zoledronic Acid in State II/III Breast Cancer), Coleman and his colleagues evaluated 3,360 breast cancer patients from 174 participating centers, all with stage II or III cancers but no evidence of metastases (cancer that has spread beyond the original site). About half received the bone drugs plus standard therapy; half just got standard therapy.

The focus was on disease-free survival. After five years, about 400 women in each group either died or had recurrences.

When Coleman's team looked at subgroups, however, they found the benefit among older women, a finding they say warrants more study.

"The younger patients are getting no benefit," Coleman said. "If anything, they are doing a little bit worse."

In addition, there were some troubling side effects among women taking Zometa, including 17 cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (a severe bone disease that can result in death of the jawbone).

Dr. Sharon Giordano, an associate professor of breast medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, was not involved in the study but put it in perspective. Bisphosphonates have been used to treat osteoporosis as well as bone complications of breast cancer treatment, she said.

"The role of bisphosphonates in preventing cancer recurrence has been less clear," she said, noting that multiple studies have had conflicting findings.

As for the benefit found in postmenopausal women, she said, "I would consider this hypothesis-generating and not practice-changing."

Other studies underway may provide a clearer answer, she said.

Since the current study was presented at a meeting, its findings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Said Coleman: "Zoledronic acid cannot be routinely recommended for prevention of cancer returning, but it remains a very good drug for patients where the cancer has already spread to the bone."

Coleman disclosed receiving speaker fees from Novartis; the researchers also received academic grant funding from the drug maker.

For more information on bisphosphonates, visit U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article accurately framed the only potential benefit documented by the AZURE study: that it might provide a recurrence and survival advantage among a subgroup of post-menopausal women… and that this results is something to be studied further. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Of the many embarrassing health statistics in this country, the huge number of unwanted pregnancies is perhaps the easiest to rectify. Nearly half the pregnancies among American women are unintended — unwanted now or within the next two years. And among sexually active teenagers and young adults, the rate of unplanned pregnancy is even higher.

Fully 43 percent of these pregnancies follow incorrect or inconsistent uses of contraception. Of course, some couples fail to use any contraception, but others rely on contraceptive methods that have significant failure rates even when properly used.

These facts prompted a committee of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists this month to urge its members to introduce women of all ages to the most effective and underused methods of reversible contraception: IUDs and hormonal implants. Once inserted, these long-acting methods remove the risk of patient error when a sexually active woman wishes to avoid pregnancy. Their effectiveness rivals that of sterilization.

In a 2012 study of 7,486 women aged 14 to 45, long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARCs, were shown to be 20 times as effective in preventing pregnancy than the pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring. The risk of an unwanted pregnancy with these other methods was especially high among women under 21, whose rate of unintended pregnancy was nearly double that among older women.

Yet fewer than 10 percent of sexually active women currently rely on long-acting reversible contraception, and a major reason is doctors’ reluctance to recommend them. Only about half of obstetrician-gynecologists offer the implant, the committee said, and many physicians use “overly restrictive criteria” when deciding whether to recommend an IUD, especially for adolescents and women who have not yet been pregnant.

Greater LARC use can reduce birthrates among adolescents and, for women of all ages, a reliance upon abortion to prevent unwanted births, the experts wrote in the October issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

Furthermore, the higher upfront costs of LARC methods are no longer an impediment for women with insurance obtained through the Affordable Care Act. Megan L. Kavanaugh, a senior research scientist at the Guttmacher Institute, which studies reproductive health, said in an interview that “all new insurance plans obtained through the act’s exchanges fully cover all contraceptive methods without any co-payments or other out-of-pocket costs.” Title X family planning clinics and Planned Parenthood clinics are more likely than other sources to offer LARC methods, she said.

In a paper published two years ago, European experts predicted that “after decades of dominance by ‘the Pill,’ it is likely that in the future, long-acting reversible contraceptives will become the first-line contraceptive option, owing to their superior contraceptive effectiveness in real-life use, cost effectiveness as well as their established safety profile.”

Here is a summary of the advantages of LARCs, listed by the committee:

■ They are independent of the sex act and do not depend on the user’s motivation and reliability.

■ Compared with other reversible methods, they are more effective and have higher rates of continued use and user satisfaction.

■ There is no need to get frequent supplies and no additional costs once they are inserted, making them highly cost effective.

■ There are few contraindications for their use, and fertility returns quickly after removal.

Furthermore, the committee stated, “almost all women are appropriate candidates” for the LARC methods currently available. They are an implant that slowly releases the hormone etonogestrel over a period of three years, and four IUDs: the copper T that can be used for up to 10 years, and three IUDs containing the hormone levonorgestrel (two approved for use up to three years, and one approved for up to five years).

In real-world use, these methods are associated with a one-year pregnancy rate of less than one per 100 women. In contrast, women using the pill, patch or vaginal ring face an annual pregnancy risk of 9 percent; the diaphragm is associated with a 12 percent pregnancy rate, and with condoms, cervical caps and sponges, the rate is 18 percent.

“While there is no one best contraceptive method for every woman or every couple, women should have access to all methods and should know how effective the LARCs are,” Dr. Kavanaugh said.

The etonogestrel implant is a small plastic rod resembling a matchstick that is inserted under the skin in the upper arm. The hormone, a form of progesterone, prevents ovulation and thickens the cervical mucus, making it harder for sperm to reach and fertilize an egg. Though the implant can remain in place and effective for three years, it can also be removed sooner if, for example, a woman decides she wants to become pregnant. Typically with the implant, menstrual bleeding diminishes, and after a year, one woman in three stops having periods. However, some women develop longer, heavier periods, and some have increased spotting between periods.

Likewise with the hormonal IUDs. Levonorgestrel, also a progesterone, changes the cervical mucus, blocking the transport of sperm and fertilization of an egg. It also suppresses growth of the uterine lining and thus reduces cramping and heavy menstrual bleeding. Women using it report a significant reduction in menstrual blood loss.

The copper IUD does not contain hormones. Rather, the copper is toxic to sperm, preventing them from fertilizing an egg. Because it also prevents a fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus, the copper IUD can serve as emergency contraception for up to five days following unprotected intercourse.

Both the implant and IUD can be used by women who are breast-feeding, as well as those who cannot take estrogen. There are few contraindications; nearly all women are eligible for an implant or IUD, according to guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Unlike early IUDs no longer in use, “modern IUDs do not carry an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease after the first 20 days following insertion,” Dr. Brooke Winner and her colleagues wrote in The New England Journal of Medicine. With both implants and IUDs, fertility returns quickly as soon as the devices are removed.

Common side effects include irregular bleeding during the first few months following the insertion of an implant or IUD. The latter is also associated with some cramping at the time of insertion.
• The More We Learn on Nutrition, the More We Ignore
• Ask Well: Catching Up on Lost Sleep

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story gives figures on the effectiveness of a variety of contraception methods.
Here is an excerpt:
In a 2012 study of 7,486 women aged 14 to 45, long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARCs, were shown to be 20 times as effective in preventing pregnancy than the pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring. The risk of an unwanted pregnancy with these other methods was especially high among women under 21, whose rate of unintended pregnancy was nearly double that among older women.
Absolute risks are also cited in the report on one-year pregnancy rate with real-world use, which is another strength of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- Acupuncture gets a thumbs-up for helping relieve pain from chronic headaches, backaches and arthritis in a review of more than two dozen studies -- the latest analysis of an often-studied therapy that has as many fans as critics.

Some believe its only powers are a psychological, placebo effect. But some doctors believe even if that's the explanation for acupuncture's effectiveness, there's no reason not to offer it if it makes people feel better.

The new analysis examined 29 studies involving almost 18,000 adults. The researchers concluded that the needle remedy worked better than usual pain treatment and slightly better than fake acupuncture. That kind of analysis is not the strongest type of research, but the authors took extra steps including examining raw data from the original studies.

The results "provide the most robust evidence to date that acupuncture is a reasonable referral option," wrote the authors, who include researchers with Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and several universities in England and Germany.

Their study isn't proof, but it adds to evidence that acupuncture may benefit a range of conditions.

The new analysis was published online Monday in Archives of Internal Medicine. The federal government's National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine paid for most of the study, along with a small grant from the Samueli Institute, a non-profit group that supports research on alternative healing.

Acupuncture's use has become more mainstream. The military has used it to help treat pain from war wounds, and California recently passed legislation that would include acupuncture among treatments recommended for coverage under provisions of the nation's new health care law. That law requires insurance plans to cover certain categories of benefits starting in 2014. Deciding specifics is being left up to the states.

Some private insurance plans already cover acupuncture; Medicare does not.

In traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture involves inserting long, very thin needles just beneath the skin's surface at specific points on the body to control pain or stress. Several weekly sessions are usually involved, typically costing about $60 to $100 per session. Fake acupuncture studied in research sometimes also uses needles, but on different areas of the body.

Scientists aren't sure what biological mechanism could explain how acupuncture might relieve pain, but the authors of the new study say the results suggest there's more involved than just a placebo effect.

Acupuncture skeptic Dr. Stephen Barrett said the study results are dubious. The retired psychiatrist runs Quackwatch, a Web site on medical scams, and says studies of acupuncture often involve strict research conditions that don't mirror how the procedure is used in the real world.

The new analysis combined results from studies of patients with common types of chronic pain -- recurring headaches, arthritis or back, neck and shoulder. The studies had randomly assigned patients to acupuncture and either fake acupuncture or standard pain treatment including medication or physical therapy.

The authors explained their statistical findings by using a pain scale of 0 to 100: The patients' average baseline pain measured 60; it dropped to 30 on average in those who got acupuncture, 35 in those who got fake acupuncture, and 43 in the usual treatment group.

While the difference in results for real versus fake acupuncture was small, it suggests acupuncture could have more than a psychological effect, said lead author Andrew Vickers, a cancer researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. The center offers acupuncture and other alternative therapies for cancer patients with hard-to-treat pain.

The analysis was more rigorous than most research based on pooling previous studies' results, because the authors obtained original data from each study. That makes the conclusion more robust, said Dr. Andrew Avins, author of an Archives commentary and a physician and researcher with the University of California at San Francisco and Kaiser-Permanente.

Acupuncture is relatively safe and uncertainty over how it works shouldn't stop doctors from offering it as an option for patients struggling with pain, Avins said.

"Perhaps a more productive strategy at this point would be to provide whatever benefits we can for our patients, while we continue to explore more carefully all mechanisms of healing," he wrote.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefits are clearly explained by the story: “The patients’ average baseline pain measured 60; it dropped to 30 on average in those who got acupuncture, 35 in those who got fake acupuncture, and 43 in the usual treatment group.” It would have been helpful to include some comparison here.  For example, how well do NSAID’s work for these conditions?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AMHERST, Mass. - Results of a new study from epidemiologists at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health suggest that long-term, high intake of vegetable protein from such foods as whole grains, soy and tofu, may protect women from early menopause and could prolong reproductive function.

Consuming enriched pasta, dark bread and cold cereal were especially associated with lower risk, while they observed no similar relation to eating animal sources of protein.

"A better understanding of how dietary vegetable protein intake is associated with ovarian aging may identify ways for women to modify their risk of early onset menopause and associated health conditions," write first author and then-graduate student Maegan Boutot, with her advisor, professor Elizabeth Bertone-Johnson. Details appear in the current early online edition of the American Journal of Epidemiology.

Early menopause, the cessation of ovarian function before age 45, affects about 10 percent of women and is associated with higher risk of cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis and early cognitive decline, the authors note. Few studies have evaluated how protein intake is associated with menopause timing, they add, and to their knowledge this is the first to look specifically at early menopause.

Boutot, Bertone-Johnson and colleagues in the School of Public Health and Health Sciences at UMass Amherst, with others, evaluated the relationship between diet and risk of early menopause among members of the Nurses' Health Study II (NHS2), an ongoing prospective study of 116,000 women aged 25-42 when they entered it in 1989.

Participants were asked to report how often they ate a single serving of 131 foods, beverages and supplements over the previous year, from "never or less than once a month" to "6+ per day." They observed that women consuming approximately 6.5 percent of their daily calories as vegetable protein had a significant 16 percent lower risk of early menopause compared to women whose intake was approximately 4 percent of calories.

For a woman with a 2,000 calorie per day diet, the authors explain, this is equal to three to four servings of such foods as enriched pasta, breakfast cereal, tofu and nuts, or about 32.5 grams a day. They adjusted for age, smoking, body mass index and other possible confounding factors.

Boutot and Bertone-Johnson add, "Though relatively few women in our study consumed very high levels of vegetable protein and our power for analyses of more extreme intake levels was limited, women consuming 9 or more percent of their calories from vegetable protein had a hazard ratio of 0.41 (95 percent confidence interval = 0.19-0.88)" compared to those eating less than 4 percent.

Others on the study team were from Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. The study was supported by a grant from NIH's Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

For the NHS2, follow-up questionnaires have assessed nurses' lifestyle behaviors and medical conditions every two years. Nearly 90 percent have continued to participate in followup. Diet was assessed five times over the 20-year study, allowing the researchers to capture within-person variation in changes in food and nutrient intake over times, Boutot explains. Participants in the study contributed more than 1 million person-years of follow-up, during which 2,041 women experienced early menopause.

Boutot and Bertone-Johnson suggest that more prospective studies of their findings are warranted, including studies that compare soy-based and non-soy vegetable proteins.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release does the minimum in conveying the size of the link between diet and early menopause risk, saying women who consumed about 6.5 percent of their daily calories as vegetable protein had a 16 percent lower risk compared with women whose vegetable protein intake was approximately 4 percent of calories.
It further states: “For a woman with a 2,000 calorie per day diet, the authors explain, this is equal to three to four servings of such foods as enriched pasta, breakfast cereal, tofu and nuts, or about 32.5 grams a day.”
The release could have provided better perspective by giving some absolute numbers. With a 10 percent overall risk, a 16 percent reduction would amount to one or two women in every hundred.
It also could have helped readers interpret this quote from researchers: “Though relatively few women in our study consumed very high levels of vegetable protein and our power for analyses of more extreme intake levels was limited, women consuming 9 or more percent of their calories from vegetable protein had a hazard ratio of 0.41 (95 percent confidence interval = 0.19-0.88)” compared to those eating less than 4 percent.
In more understandable terms, women consuming 9 percent or more of the calories from vegetable protein developed early menopause at slightly less than half the rate of those getting less than 4 percent of their calories from vegetable protein.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When teens want to sleep in on a school day, they’re not being lazy. For one, teens need more sleep than adults: about eight or nine hours a night, compared with about the six or seven their parents require. Teens, biologically, really do crave sleep.

Which is a problem when it comes to education. Most high schools start before 8 am to help parents get to work by 9 am. Early school start times also give kids more time for after-school activities like sports or theater.

But that has consequences: Around 69 percent of high school students get less than eight hours of sleep on a school night, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which puts these teens at risk of negative impacts on health.

There may be a simple fix: Start schools at a later time.

This is a solution supported by both the America Medical Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics. The AMA urges schools to start no earlier than 8:30 am. In 2014, the Academy of Pediatrics wrote that “the urgency and the magnitude of the problem of sleep loss in adolescents” warranted big changes in school start times.

But it’s not a foregone conclusion that later start times will ensure teens sleep more. Later start times could lead teens to go to bed even later. Or parents might still wake them up early. When it made its recommendation, the Academy of Pediatrics admitted “it is clear that additional research is needed to further document the effects of changes in school start times over time.”

Well, there’s some new (but still incomplete) evidence that later start times do help teens get more sleep.

A new meta-analysis in the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine analyzed 18 studies on start times. It finds that when school starts up to an hour later, students typically do get around 19 minutes more sleep, on average. When start times are delayed more than an hour, that average increases to 53 minutes of extra sleep.

The study also found some preliminary evidence that later school start times were associated with better mental health outcomes. Only five of the 18 studies included these measures, but in two of them, later start time was associated with better (self-reported) feelings of depression and irritability.

More work needs to be done to confirm these findings. But even if later school start times only improve sleep time, that’s a positive step for public health. Because if later school start times can truly help students sleep better, the research suggests that better sleep would lead to major improvements to their health and well-being.

Teens tend to be night owls, and forcing them to be early birds can mess with their health

Teens tend to go to sleep a bit later and wake up a bit later than the average adult — something called a “delayed” sleep phase. For most teens, it means their whole biological clock is shifted, and if they wake up too early, their body will be out of sync with the rest of the world. “Every neurotransmitter, hormone, and chemical in the body cycles with the daily rhythm," Philip Gehrman, a sleep researcher and clinician at the University of Pennsylvania, told me earlier in the year.

When your body clock is off from society’s, scientists call it “social jet lag.” And like the jet lag from a long journey, it messes with your body.

Studies of adults find that social jet lag is associated with higher BMI, insulin resistance, depression, and a higher likelihood to engage in dangerous behaviors like smoking. And the group of people most at risk for social jet lag? Teens.

In a tightly controlled lab study, 24 healthy adult participants* who had their sleep shifted by one hour each day (simulating jet lag) started to look prediabetic after a three-week trial. Their resting metabolic rates dropped 8 percent. "Assuming no changes in activity or food intake," that "would translate into ~12.5 pounds increase in weight over a single year," the study, published in Science Translational Medicine in 2012, concluded.

People with a lot of social jet lag also tend to get fewer hours of sleep, which exacerbates these same health problems. On top of that, short sleep reduces powers of perception, concentration, and judgment. There’s some evidence that when students sleep better, they perform better in school as well.

Delaying school start times is easier said than done

As Vox’s Libby Nelson has reported, very few schools have actually adopted this reform. This map, which reflects the most recent CDC data available, shows that across the country, schools still start very early.

There are some understandable reasons why. Nelson writes:

And even though the evidence is mostly in favor of increasing school start times, it isn’t a slam dunk quite yet.

There are some limitations to mention about the new meta-analysis. The studies mostly used self-reported measures of sleep duration. (More objective measures — like those obtained from Fitbit-like wristbands — are more accurate.) And many of the studies were short in duration, comparing sleep duration in snapshots before and after a school made a switch. More data would show whether the impact of school start time on sleep waned or improved over time.

“The aggregated quality of the evidence,” the study reports, “is only moderate.” The researchers also found no effect on academic performance. Furthermore, two of the studies found evidence that earlier start times were associated with increased vehicle accidents involving the teens. Being tired in the morning can be a dangerous distraction while on the road.

In all, the researchers call for more rigorous data on the topic. As schools change their start times, they write, researchers should sweep in to collect information on students’ sleep in a standardized way.

Regardless, it’s a promising area for study. Because if later school start times can truly help students sleep better, the research suggests that better sleep would lead to major improvements to their health and well-being.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story is specific about the average sleep advantages of a later start time among teenage participants in the 18 studies evaluated. For this reason, it rates satisfactory.
However, its discussion of other benefits—including fewer accidents involving teens behind the wheels of cars, mental health indices and actual school performance—is general and, with respect to school performance, more optimistic than the meta-analysis that is the centerpiece of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The blood test that millions of men undergo each year to check for prostate cancer leads to so much unnecessary anxiety, surgery and complications that doctors should stop testing elderly men, and it remains unclear whether the screening is worthwhile for younger men, a federal task force concluded yesterday.

In the first update of its recommendations for prostate cancer screening in five years, the panel that sets government policy on preventive medicine said that the evidence that the test reduces the cancer's death toll is too uncertain to endorse routine use for men at any age, and that the potential harm clearly outweighs any benefits for men age 75 and older.

"The benefit of screening at this time is uncertain, and if there is a benefit, it's likely to be small," said Ned Calonge, who chairs the 16-member U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. It published the new guidelines today in the Annals of Internal Medicine. "And on the other side, the risks are large and dramatic."

The task force and other groups concluded previously that it was unclear whether the benefits of the prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, test outweigh the risks. The new review of the scientific literature found no evidence to alter that assessment for younger men. It did find enough new data to recommend for the first time against screening for older men.

"We felt with sufficient certainty that your risk of being harmed exceeded your potential benefits starting at age 75," Calonge said.

The recommendations come at a time when doctors are increasingly questioning whether many tests, drugs and procedures are being overused, unnecessarily driving up health-care costs and exposing patients to the risks of unneeded treatment.

"There is this idea that more is always better, and if a test is available we should use it," said Howard A. Brody, a professor of family medicine at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. "A lot of times, we're doing more harm than good."

The guidelines address perhaps the most important and contentious issue in men's health, and were praised by officials at several leading medical groups, including the National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society. But they drew strong criticism from others who are convinced that routine screening is necessary.

"I think they're really missing the boat," said William J. Catalona, a professor of urology at Northwestern University. "It's a disservice to patients. A lot of men die from prostate cancer, and there's just an overwhelming amount of evidence that screening saves lives."

Each year, prostate cancer is diagnosed in more than 218,000 U.S. men. About 28,000 die of it, making it the most common cancer and second-leading cancer killer among men.

The PSA test, which measures a protein in the blood produced by prostate tissue, has significantly increased the number of prostate cancer cases being diagnosed at very early stages. But it remains unclear whether that translates into a reduction in the death rate from the disease. Prostate cancer often grows so slowly that many men die from something else without ever knowing they had it.

Because it is not clear precisely what PSA level signals the presence of cancer, many men experience stressful false alarms that lead to unnecessary surgical biopsies to make a definitive diagnosis, which can be painful and in rare cases can cause serious complications.

Even when the test picks up a real cancer, doctors are uncertain what, if anything, men should do about it. Many men simply are monitored closely to see if the tumor shows signs of growing or spreading. Others undergo surgery, radiation and hormone treatments, which often leave them incontinent, impotent and experiencing other complications.

"People say, 'What's the harm in screening?' In fact, there are several ways in which screening can actually be harmful," said Howard L. Parnes of the National Cancer Institute.

Since the task force issued its previous recommendations in 2002, at least eight new studies have been published. Among them was a large Swedish review that found that men age 65 and older who were treated for prostate cancer were no more likely to survive than those who were not.

"If therapy isn't providing meaningful benefit, then how could screening provide benefit?" Calonge said. "And we know that the therapy produces significant harms."

Men younger than 75 should be carefully counseled about the potential risks associated with the test and the lack of evidence about any benefit before getting it, the panel said.

Men at high risk for prostate cancer, such as African Americans and those with a family history of the disease, are the most likely to benefit from PSA screening. But the panel concluded that the evidence remains inconclusive for those men as well.

Several other experts said that the new recommendations strike a careful balance, and that they hope they might discourage large-scale screenings where the risks and benefits are not carefully laid out.

"I think they are right on target," Parnes said.

Others were highly critical, noting that prostate cancer death rates have plummeted in many countries after they instituted widespread PSA screening.

"We have seen a dramatic drop in mortality," said J. Brantley Thrasher, chairman of the urology department at the University of Kansas and a spokesman for the American Urological Association. "They're not paying attention to that."

Others objected to setting an age cutoff, saying men should be evaluated individually.

"Men are living a lot longer and healthier these days. I play golf with 84-year-old guys who beat me all the time," said E. David Crawford, a professor of surgery and radiation at the University of Colorado at Denver. "You have to individualize treatment. If a 75-year-old man is found to have high-grade prostate cancer, it's going to kill him, and we can intervene and do something for him."

Two large studies are underway -- one in the United States and one in Europe -- to answer the question of whether screening reduces mortality.

"If it turns out that PSA screening and aggressive treatment saves lives, maybe all the harm that it has caused is worth it," said Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer at the American Cancer Society. "If PSA screening does not save lives, then it's clearly not worth it. We just don't know yet."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story outlined for readers that the benefits of routine screening for prostate cancer are uncertain.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Using chest scans to screen for lung cancer in people who’ve never smoked and have no symptoms might help catch cancers early and decrease the disease’s death toll, suggests a new study from Japan.

But experts say the findings likely don’t apply in non-Asian countries, where the majority of all lung cancers are found in people who smoke — and where using computed tomography (CT) scans to screen for lung cancer in smokers has recently been a controversial topic.

Moreover, they warn that while regular screening might help doctors catch cancer earlier, it also comes with a high price tag and added risks to patients.

CT scanning uses X-rays and computers to produce a clearer image than traditional X-ray techniques, but CT also uses higher radiation doses to generate those images.

Everybody agrees that CT “does find the early stage lung cancer,” said Dr. Heidi Roberts, a lung cancer researcher from Women’s College Hospital, Toronto who wasn’t involved in the new study. Early-stage cancer is easier to treat and has a higher survival rate.

The new study provides further evidence of that. Researchers led by Dr. Ryoichi Kondo of Shinshu University Hospital in Matsumoto looked back at outcomes for close to 500 non-smoking lung cancer patients whose cancer was caught by CT scan screening, or by standard X-ray screening — another strategy for catching cancer early — or when patients came into the doctor with lung symptoms.

Most of the tumors found via CT scans were small, whereas those found through X-ray screening or in patients with symptoms were more often further advanced, according to the findings published in the journal Lung Cancer.

Five years after their diagnosis, 95 percent of people whose cancers were found through a CT scan were still alive, compared to 73 percent diagnosed with an X-ray and 40 percent of patients who had not been screened and whose symptoms led to discovery their disease.

East Asian countries are more likely to regularly screen non-smokers for lung cancer because biological differences seem to put Asians at a higher risk than other non-smokers, researchers explained.

Non-smokers without symptoms generally are not screened for lung cancer in the U.S.

There and in Canada, the lung cancer debate has centered around how often to screen smokers, and until what age screening should be done, Roberts said.

In another study published by Kondo and colleagues — this one looking at lung cancer screening in smokers — five-year survival rates were also highest in those screened with CT scans.

That’s consistent with the findings of the National Lung Screening Trial in the U.S., which in November released data — published online in the New England Journal of Medicine last week — showing that 20 percent fewer middle-aged heavy smokers died of lung cancer when they were screened annually with a CT scan compared to a standard, less detailed chest X-ray.

Lung cancer kills more people in the U.S. than any other cancer — over 150,000 each year.

The problem with frequent screening is not only its cost — CT scans typically run a few hundred dollars each — but that each scan exposes a person to radiation, which also slightly increases cancer risks over time with repeated scans.

And screening comes with an inherent risk of false-positives — scans which suggest a lung cancer that turns out not to be there.

Dr. Christine Berg, one of the leaders of the U.S. screening studies, said that generally about a quarter of chest CT scans show some kind of abnormality — but 96 percent of those abnormal scans turn out not to be lung cancer. While doctors ruled out cancer, those patients would have undergone further tests, sometimes including biopsies, which can cause complications including infection and bleeding.

And for some patients, “if you really weren’t going to benefit from the screening...that complication is something you may not have faced,” Berg said. “Those are some of the things I worry about.”

Her study showed that 300 middle-aged smokers would need to be screened with CT scans to prevent one death from lung cancer.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally-supported expert panel, has said there isn’t enough evidence for it to recommend screening for lung cancer in symptom-free people using CT scans or other methods.

Berg and Roberts both told Reuters Health that more research is needed to see if there might be hints in the blood or genes of smokers that could tell doctors which had the highest risk for lung cancer — and which would get the most out of routine CT screening.

“We now have a technology that can detect (lung cancer) early enough to make some impact,” Berg said. But, “it’s not a home run, and it clearly has these limitations.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story explained: “Five years after their diagnosis, 95 percent of people whose cancers were found through a CT scan were still alive, compared to 73 percent diagnosed with an X-ray and 40 percent of patients who had not been screened and whose symptoms led to discovery their disease.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 19, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- New research finds that a minimally invasive surgical procedure to treat hernias results in less chronic pain and a faster recovery when compared to a traditional approach.

One expert, however, said the older strategy may still be the best option in some cases.

"It's not one-size-fits-all," said Dr. L. Michael Brunt, a professor at Washington University in St. Louis. "One repair isn't appropriate for all circumstances."

Hernias occur when part of an internal organ, such as the intestines, bulges out through muscle. At issue are the surgical approaches that physicians use when a patient suffers from a hernia in the groin.

The procedures are designed to reduce the bulge of the hernia and make a patch so it doesn't protrude again. "It's as if you had a leak in a tire that's ballooned out," Brunt said. "You'll patch it to prevent it from continuing to protrude."

The study, led by researchers at Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, examined two procedures.

One procedure, known as total extraperitoneal inguinal hernioplasty, is performed under a general anesthetic and uses a laparoscopic approach through a small opening. It was developed in the 1990s, Brunt said.

The other approach is older and is performed through a 2- to 2.5-inch incision in the groin, Brunt said. It can be done under local anesthesia. The study authors didn't examine a third approach, known as "patch and plug," he said.

In the study, researchers randomly assigned 660 hernia patients to one of the two surgical procedures. Almost all the patients were men, and their average age was around 55.

The researchers followed up with 75 percent of the patients after an average period of five years.

Hernias recurred in 5 percent of laparoscopic and 8 percent of the traditional-procedure patients. Recurrences decreased to 0.5 percent and 4 percent, respectively, if the procedures were performed by experienced surgeons.

After five years, 28 percent of those who had the traditional procedure reported chronic pain, compared to 15 percent of the laparoscopic group.

The study "confirms what a lot of surgeons who do both procedures know already," Brunt said. "There's less pain and a bit of a faster recovery from the laparoscopic procedure."

Still, "the vast majority of patients do well, regardless of the approach," he said.

Why use the traditional approach if the laparoscopic technique is better in some ways? The traditional approach may be appropriate when it's too risky to place patients under general anesthesia, Brunt said, such as in elderly patients and those with multiple health problems.

Brunt said the costs of the two procedures are comparable, although the laparoscopic procedure may cost more.

The findings appear in the March issue of the Archives of Surgery.

For more about hernias, try the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantified how often the hernias recurred in each group and how many patients had chronic pain at follow-up. It noted that “the vast majority of patients do well, regardless of the approach.” This is enough for a satisfactory, though the story could have provided data about how quickly patients were able to return to work with each procedure, and how satisfied they were overall with their results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 15, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Adding computer-aided detection to mammograms finds more early, noninvasive cancers and helps detect invasive cancers at earlier stages, according to a large new study. But the jury's still out as to how worthwhile the extra technology is overall.

For one thing, computer-aided detection (CAD) increases the amount of diagnostic testing among women who turn out not to have breast cancer. And the technology makes mammograms more expensive.

CAD is becoming more widespread, said Dr. Joshua Fenton, an associate professor of family and community medicine at the University of California, Davis, and lead study author. "It's an add-on and now is used in probably three-quarters of U.S. mammograms," he said.

Computer-aided detection systems use a digitized mammogram image from either a traditional film mammogram or a digitally acquired mammogram, according to the American College of Radiology. The CAD software looks for areas that may indicate cancer so the radiologist can then look more closely at the mammogram.

Although it has rapidly become part of mammogram screening, Fenton said there is limited and conflicting research on its effect.

Under Medicare payment rates, doctors get an additional $11 for adding computer-aided detection to a mammogram, said Fenton, citing Medicare data. The Medicare rate for a film mammogram is $81 while a digital mammogram is $139.

His team evaluated more than 409,000 mammograms -- with and without computer-aided detection -- from more than 163,000 women aged 67 to 89. The study is published in the April 16 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Fenton took data from a large U.S. epidemiology database from 2001 to 2006. During that time, computer-aided detection use increased from 3.6 percent to 60.5 percent. Now, with about 75 percent of mammograms adding it, it is even more common, Fenton said.

"In our study, we assessed its impact in the Medicare program," he said. The researchers compared the results when mammograms included CAD to when they did not.

When computer-aided detection was used, doctors found a greater number of early cancers known as ductal carcinoma in situ, or DCIS. "But the [overall] rate of invasive breast cancer diagnosis was no different with or without CAD," Fenton said.

However, among the women who did have invasive cancer, computer-aided detection was linked with a greater likelihood of finding the cancer while it was stage 1 or 2 compared to stage 3 or 4, they found.

"CAD was also associated with increased diagnostic testing among women who turned out not to have breast cancer," he said. These women, because breast cancer was suspected, had to be called back for additional tests, such as repeat mammograms or biopsies.

So is the new computer technology worth it? "Our study doesn't answer that question; it raises that question," Fenton said. The findings, he said, are a mix of potential good news and not so good. The additional tests that turn out to be unnecessary, because no cancer is found, are not desirable, he said.

Some of the very early cancers diagnosed in older women, he noted, may not have caused them a problem during their lifetime. But doctors can't say with certainty which ones will progress and which ones will not.

"Women should recognize that CAD comes with some potential risks," Fenton said. "It has the potential risk of a false-positive mammogram. If you are an older woman, [there is] the risk of overtreatment of noninvasive lesions."

Dr. Daniel Kopans, a professor of radiology at Harvard Medical School and senior radiologist in the breast imaging division at Massachusetts General Hospital, said the study provides additional information to doctors and women, but has some limitations. He was not involved with the study.

"The good news is the use of CAD was related to finding invasive cancers at smaller sizes and earlier stages than before the CAD era," said Kopans, also a member of the American College of Radiology's Breast Imaging Commission. "There should be no argument that finding invasive cancers at a smaller size and earlier stage is beneficial," he said, as they are more likely to be cured.

While he calls finding more DCIS with computer-aided detection also ''likely a good thing," he acknowledged the debate about the possibility that a very early cancer in an elderly woman may not cause a problem in her lifetime. Although the treatment of DCIS is debated among experts, Kopans said, "In my mind, it is always worth it to find additional cancers."

One limitation of the study, he said, is that the researchers cannot say for sure it was the computer-aided detection that made the difference. Other factors could have played a role, such as the radiologists becoming more experienced, he said.

To learn more about mammography, visit the American College of Radiology/Radiological Society of North America.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story pointed out that CAD use did increase the likelihood that a woman’s cancer would be diagnosed at an earlier stage.  Readers should also have been told that the study found the increased association between using CAD & an earlier stage of cancer diagnosis may be stronger among women older than 75.
The endorsement of the use of CAD & minimization of its problems by Dr. Daniel Kopans, should have been balanced by comments from another expert not connected with the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings suggest that the antidepressant Lexapro might make hot flashes a little less of a nuisance to women — adding to the mixed bag of results regarding that drug’s effect on menopause symptoms.

The study, of 205 women, found that those randomly assigned to take Lexapro (escitalopram) for eight weeks reported less daily “interference” from their hot flashes.

Compared with women given inactive placebo pills, they said hot flashes were taking less of a toll on their work, daily activities, sleep and general mood. Women on the placebo also improved over time, however.

The findings come from the same clinical trial that, last year, showed Lexapro halved the number of hot flashes women had each day. (See Reuters story of January 18, 2011.)

A separate study a few months later showed no such benefit, however. In two trials of 36 women, researchers found that Lexapro did not cut the number or severity of hot flashes over eight weeks. (See Reuters Health story of May 26, 2011.)

And the lead researcher on that study said these latest findings are “nothing to write home about.”

“The differences between the treatment and placebo groups are very small,” said Robert Freedman, a professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.

In general, studies of hot-flash remedies over the years have “virtually always found a large placebo effect,” Freedman noted in an interview.

That could mean that study participants’ hot flashes are just getting better over time, which they sometimes do.

“But my feeling is that it’s the placebo effect,” Freedman said, referring to the phenomenon of study participants on placebos improving because they believe they are getting a real treatment.

Hot flashes, which mostly affect women transitioning to menopause and already in that phase of life, involve a sudden sensation of heat, sometimes accompanied by sweating or visible reddening of the skin.

Their exact cause is unknown, but hormonal regulation of body temperature is thought to be involved.

Bouts of hot flashes can happen many times a day and past research has found they can continue for anywhere from a few months to up to 10 years.

So far, Freedman noted, the only hot-flash treatment that has consistently worked in studies is hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

And right now, HRT is the only treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for cooling hot flashes.

But women and doctors are wary of HRT these days — since a 2002 clinical trial linked the hormones to increased risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots.

So researchers have been looking for alternatives. And studies have suggested that a few antidepressants, used at low doses, can be helpful for some women — including paroxetine (Paxil), fluoxetine (Prozac) and venlafaxine (Effexor).

This latest study, reported in the journal Fertility & Sterility, focused on hot flash “interference” — the degree to which women feel hot flashes disrupt their lives.

That’s important because it gets at quality of life, according to the researchers, led by Janet S. Carpenter of Indiana University in Indianapolis.

The trial included 205 women who were having at least 28 bouts of hot flashes or “night sweats” a week. Carpenter’s team randomly assigned half to use Lexapro for eight weeks, while the other half were given placebo pills.

The women kept diaries to record their hot flash symptoms. And every four weeks, they filled out a questionnaire on hot-flash interference.

After four weeks, the study found, women on the antidepressant saw their score on the interference scale fall by half, on average. It remained there at week eight.

But women in the placebo group also improved, albeit more slowly and to a somewhat lesser degree.

In a separate analysis of the same study group, Carpenter’s team found that women on Lexapro also reported bigger improvements in sleep problems: half saw their insomnia symptoms drop by at least 50 percent, versus 35 percent of placebo users.

Those findings appear in a separate report in the journal Menopause.

Freedman said that the overall research on antidepressants and hot flashes is still inconsistent. “Overall, the picture is not optimistic.”

In his own study last year, Freedman used a different approach to measuring hot flashes: instead of asking women to record their symptoms in a diary, the researchers had them wear a “detector” to monitor objective measures of hot flashes.

It is possible for women’s hot flashes to remain unchanged objectively, but have their subjective experience of them change. “But that raises the question of why,” Freedman said.

And for now, he noted, it’s also not clear why antidepressants would have effects on hot flashes.

Lexapro, which costs about $125 a month, belongs to the group of antidepressants called selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They increase levels of the brain chemical serotonin, which may have a role in regulating body heat.

But no one knows if altering serotonin levels actually does affect women’s hot flashes. In fact, Freedman said, there’s some evidence that lowering serotonin levels does not worsen hot flashes — which would be expected if the “serotonin theory” is correct.

Antidepressants can also have side effects, like nausea, drowsiness, headache, constipation and dry mouth.

Right now, no antidepressant is specifically approved to treat hot flashes. But in the U.S., doctors are allowed to prescribe drugs “off-label” for conditions other than their approved uses.

Besides antidepressants, doctors sometimes prescribe certain blood pressure medications or the anti-seizure drug gabapentin, which some studies suggest may be helpful.

Hot flashes often need no drug treatment at all, though.

If they are not severe, experts say simple steps can be enough — like avoiding hot and spicy foods, turning down the thermostat, or trying relaxation techniques, such as yoga or meditation.

There are several herbal or “natural” products marketed for easing menopause symptoms, including black cohosh, soy, red clover and dong quai. But there is little evidence that they work, according to the North American Menopause Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Adequate quantitative description of the extent and timing of hot flash reduction for the treatment group.  Describing the response in placebo group as “occurring more slowly and to a lesser degree” provides an adequate sense of the difference.  And story provided quantitative comparison for the outcome of insomnia between placebo and treatment groups.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Colonoscopy may miss as many as one in every 13 colon cancers, suggests a new study.

Canadian researchers note that their finding should be a heads-up to clinicians performing the exam, as well as to patients preparing for it. Both groups could do things to improve the detection rate, they said.

“Several recent studies have raised questions on the effectiveness of colonoscopy as currently performed in everyday clinical practice on reducing risk of subsequent colon cancer,” lead researcher Dr. Harminder Singh, of the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, in Canada, told Reuters Health by e-mail. “Therefore, it is important to study the factors associated with the diagnosis of colon cancer occurring after colonoscopy.”

During a colonoscopy, a flexible camera is passed through the colon in search of abnormal growths known as polyps and other warning signs of early tumors. It is one of a few screening tests for colon cancer, the second-leading cancer killer in the U.S., according the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Another less expensive test is fecal occult blood testing, which involves taking stool specimens at home and mailing them to the doctor’s office or medical lab. The US Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of medical experts appointed by the federal government, recommends screening people aged 50 to 75 for the disease, but does not specify which test is best.

In their study, Singh and his colleagues identified nearly 5,000 individuals aged 50 to 80 who had been diagnosed with the cancer between 1992 and 2008, across the entire Canadian province of Manitoba.

The team found that about eight percent, or one in every 13 cancers, had been missed during colonoscopies conducted six months to three years prior to diagnosis.

Women were a third more likely to have had their cancer missed, report the researchers in The American Journal of Gastroenterology. And general practice physicians missed cancers 60 percent more often than gastroenterologists.

There are three likely reasons for these “misses,” noted Dr. David Lieberman of the Oregon Health and Science University, in Portland. Tumors may simply have gone unidentified on the exam, or were seen but not completely removed. While rare, he also noted that it is possible that an undetected cancer was actually not present at the exam, but rather grew very quickly afterwards.

No improvement in colonoscopy can do anything to avoid the latter. But the first two reasons are potentially avoidable, Lieberman told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

Given the wide variation in colonoscopy training, the researchers call for standardizing it, including credentialing and re-credentialing.

“There is an urgent need to focus on and improve the outcomes of colonoscopy,” Singh said.

However, Lieberman cautioned against the over-interpretation of the results. “These patients were referred for colonoscopy, most commonly due to symptoms,” Lieberman said. “This is very different from a population undergoing screening.”

Colonoscopy would probably miss a smaller percentage of cancers in such a large population, Lieberman said, because the rate would be lower.

Dr. Charles Kahi of the Indiana University School of Medicine, in Indianapolis, noted that the rate found in the new study was a bit higher than previously reported. But he added that the risk factors identified match those in the earlier studies.

“The key to maximizing protection against colorectal cancer after colonoscopy is performance by an operator with excellent examination” and growth-removal technique, “in a well-prepped colon,” Kahi told Reuters Health by e-mail.

And for this, patients should do their part. “To increase their chances of an early diagnosis, it is important that all individuals undergoing colonoscopy strictly follow the instructions for bowel preparation for colonoscopy,” added Singh, speaking of the large amounts of special drinks consumed before the test to clean out the bowel. “It may be a nuisance but it will help maximize the view during (colonoscopy).”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story includes a lot of numbers and, for this reason, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion although we would have liked to have seen more numbers in absolute terms. Saying that women had a 30 percent higher chance of having their cancers missed, for example, sounds like cause for a significant health policy overhaul. But what does that mean in hard numbers? How many women were included in this study, for one. And what was the ratio of missed cancers for them? We’re told 1 in 13 overall, but what was the breakdown for men and for women? It also would have been helpful to see the absolute numbers by gastroenterologist versus primary care physician, as the skill set of the person operating the colonscopy also appears to be a factor.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• Detailed Results of Phase 2 Trial Presented at the American College of Gastroenterology 2016 Annual Scientific Meeting
• 93.3% of Patients Treated Using the Lead Formulation of Novel Prep Achieved a Colonoscopy Rating of Excellent or Good, Compared to 85.7% of Those Using Standard Prep Products in Colonoscopist-blinded Trial
• More 'Patient-friendly,' Palatable Prep Could Help Increase Patient Acceptance of Colonoscopies for Colorectal Cancer Screening

Newton, MA (October 17, 2016) - Detailed results from a Phase 2 study of a novel colonoscopy prep (ECP) under development by ColonaryConcepts, LLC show the investigational treatment to be at least as effective and safe as two currently available colonoscopy prep formulations, while offering a much higher level of patient satisfaction and preference than standard preps. The investigational prep is designed to be good-tasting, with no fasting and lower fluid requirements than standard preps. It consists of nutritionally balanced bars and beverages incorporating the standard purgative active ingredient, PEG 3350, which a patient consumes during the 24 hours prior to colonoscopy.

Results from the randomized, single-blind study will be presented today at the American College of Gastroenterology 2016 Annual Scientific Meeting, being held in Las Vegas, NV, by principal investigator, Douglas K. Rex, M.D., Distinguished Professor of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine.

"Approximately 40% of those who ought to have a colonoscopy avoid the procedure, and the top reason cited for their avoidance is the prep," said Dr. Rex. "Results from this study show that this innovative investigational product performed as well as or better at colon cleansing than two currently available colonoscopy prep formulations. Moreover, the higher levels of patient satisfaction reported by those who used the lead ECP formulation in the trial suggest this new approach to colonoscopy prep may have a positive impact on patient willingness to undergo this potentially life-saving colorectal cancer screening procedure."

The study tested six formulations of ECP, using different doses of the active ingredients integrated within different meal kit menus, randomized against two U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved active comparators. The primary outcome was the proportion of subjects with an endoscopic visibility rating of excellent or good based on the Aronchick scale. Secondary endpoints included segment-by-segment endoscopic visibility based on the Ottawa scale, as well as safety, tolerability and reports of patient experience. Fifty-one patients were treated with ECP and 14 with active comparators.

In the top three most effective formulations of ECP, 90.6% (29 of 32) of patients had a rating of excellent or good. With ColonaryConcepts' lead formulation, 93.3% (14 of 15) of patients had a rating of excellent or good, with 40 of 45 colon segments rated as excellent or good on the Ottawa scale. For the comparator products, 85.7% (12 of 14) had a rating of excellent or good. There were no serious adverse events across any of the treatment groups. The proportion of patients reporting being satisfied or extremely satisfied with the experience of using the lead ECP formulation was nearly double that for those using the standard preps, 64.3% versus 33.3%.

"We are very pleased with the efficacy and safety results of this study, which clearly support advancing this product to a Phase 3 trial," said Corey A. Siegel, M.D., M.S., a co-founder of ColonaryConcepts, and Director of the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center and Associate Professor of Medicine at The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth.

"The ECP approach allows patients to eat solid food bars and drink palatable low-volume beverages, a patient-friendly design that participants in the study clearly favored over conventional preps," comments Dr. Siegel. "Patients participating in the study were nearly four times more likely to recommend ECP to their friends and family as compared to the standard colonoscopy prep."

"Colonoscopy is still recognized as the gold standard - the best way to catch this cancer at an early stage. The medical community has called for an increase in colorectal cancer screening overall, both through the recent recommendations of the Cancer Moonshot Blue Ribbon Panel and the National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable's call for 80% screening by 2018," said Joshua Korzenik, M.D., a co-founder of ColonaryConcepts, and Faculty Member at Harvard Medical School and the Director of the Brigham and Women's Hospital Crohn's and Colitis Center. "By making the preparation for the procedure easier, we believe ECP can lower patient resistance to colonoscopies, and thus can help attain these important public health goals."

ColonaryConcepts, LLC is headquartered in Newton, MA, and is committed to developing patient-centric innovations that improve gastrointestinal health. The company currently has two product candidates in clinical development: ECP, which is expected to enter Phase 3 clinical trials in early 2017, and the "C-bar", a novel product candidate for chronic constipation, which is currently being studied in a Phase 1b clinical trial. ColonaryConcepts' physician-led product development team includes Board-certified gastroenterologists, food scientists, pharmaceutical development experts, culinary research chefs, and product design strategists. For more information about ColonaryConcepts, LLC, please visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release provides a modest amount of information on the results of the study providing both percentages and actual numbers on the success and acceptability of the comparisons. We would have liked to have seen an acknowledgement that the sample size is rather small and while the percentages seem impressive, they may not be clinically or statistically significant.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The defense system that doctors are trying to breach evolved to keep out toxins and microbes. It consists mainly of cells that line the walls of capillaries in the brain and are so tightly packed that many molecules in the bloodstream cannot slip out between cells to reach the brain tissue itself. But certain drugs, like mannitol, will temporarily open the barrier and were first used more than 20 years ago to help other medicines reach the brain.

The new technique refines the art of opening the barrier: it uses microcatheters — fine, highly flexible tubes that are inserted into an artery in the groin and then threaded up into tiny blood vessels nearly anywhere in the brain — to spray chemotherapy directly onto tumors or areas from which they have been removed. The catheters are normally used to deliver clot-dissolving drugs to the brain to treat strokes.

“This will substantially alter the way that chemotherapy is given in the future,” said Dr. John Boockvar, the brain surgeon who devised the trial. “But we have to prove that at certain doses, nobody gets hurt.”

Referring to glioblastoma patients, Dr. Riina said, “Everyone is looking for something to do for these people.”

“Even if you buy someone just a year, that could be a wedding or a graduation,” he continued. “You never know what might happen in the year they hold onto.”

The study, which began in August, is still in its earliest phase, meaning its main goal is to measure safety, not efficacy — to find out if it is safe to spray Avastin directly into brain arteries and at what dose. Nonetheless, the doctors were pleased when M.R.I. scans of the first few patients showed that the treatment seemed to erase any sign of recurring glioblastomas. But how long the effect will last remains to be seen.

Despite a beautiful scan, the first patient who was treated died in October, from pneumonia and the spread of glioblastoma to his brainstem.

Innovations are desperately needed to make headway against glioblastoma, which is “one of the most deadly tumors that exist in humans,” said Dr. Russell Lonser, chairman of surgical neurology at the National Institutes of Health.

“This is a very good start,” Dr. Lonser said. “The early data is very interesting and exciting.”

The complexity of a study like this goes beyond the science. Clinical trials are also a complicated pact, emotionally and ethically, between desperate patients and doctors who must balance their ambition as researchers against their duty as clinicians, and must walk a fine line between offering too much hope and not enough.

“I tell patients, ‘I’m going to try to cure your disease, but so far glioblastoma is an incurable disease,’ ” Dr. Boockvar said.

“I’m optimistic,” Mr. Sugrue said one morning in September, after scheduling a second brain operation. But he had tears in his eyes.

There are about 10,000 new cases of glioblastoma a year in the United States, mostly in people over 45. The tumors are notorious for growing back like weeds even after being cut out and blasted with chemotherapy and radiation, and they are nearly always fatal. With the best treatment, the median survival time is about 15 months.

But in the last five years, the number of patients who survive 2 years has increased to 25 percent, from 8 percent, largely because doctors began using a chemotherapy pill called temozolomide, or Temodar, along with radiation (Temodar is believed to seep through the blood-brain barrier).

Dr. Boockvar said he thought that if he could just keep patients alive for two years, more advances might come along and give them time.

“The glioblastoma population is very studyable, unfortunately, because the prognosis is so grim,” he said.

Patients often wind up on the front lines of research, figuring they have little to lose and hoping they will be lucky enough to test the big breakthrough. More than 500 studies for people with glioblastoma are listed on the government Web site www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Mr. Sugrue, who lives in Stamford, Conn., with his wife, Donna, and their children Molly and Tim, began having headaches in April. He thought he had a sinus problem. But a scan found a brain tumor nearly the size of a golf ball. A local doctor referred him to Dr. Boockvar. He had the standard treatment: surgery, temozolomide pills and six weeks of radiation, which ended on June 25.

By July, an ominous bright spot on his M.R.I. scan suggested that the tumor might already be growing back. He continued chemotherapy, but the spot kept enlarging.

By mid-September, the Sugrues were back in Dr. Boockvar’s office to plan their next step. Stubbly hair was growing in on Mr. Sugrue’s scalp, except for a bare patch, around an arcing scar above his right ear. His eyes, bright blue with thick, dark lashes that gave him a boyish look, searched the doctor’s face.

The headaches had returned. New scans, displayed on a computer screen, showed signs of brain swelling and bright spots that should not have been there. Dr. Boockvar recommended more surgery and then chemotherapy with Avastin, which had recently been approved for recurring glioblastoma.

It was approved for intravenous use — to be dripped into a vein, usually in the arm — but he said Mr. Sugrue would be an ideal candidate for his study, in which the drug would be infused directly into an artery in the brain, producing levels at least 50 times what the intravenous route could achieve. One other patient had been treated that way, and M.R.I. scans showed that recurring tumors seemed to have melted away.

Mr. Sugrue said he was all for it, even though Dr. Boockvar warned him that the drug was no magic bullet. Then Dr. Boockvar ticked off the risks from a second brain operation.

“I have to quote you a 5 percent risk you’ll be visibly weak,” he said. “A 1 percent chance of paralysis on the left side.”

Mr. Sugrue wiped his eyes and began to apologize for losing his composure, but the surgeon cut him off and said, “In neurosurgery they say that if you don’t make your patient cry, you haven’t gotten informed consent.”

The trial grew out of a conversation about a year ago between Dr. Boockvar and Dr. Riina, an expert in using microcatheters to treat strokes.

“I said, ‘Why can’t you infuse chemotherapy for my brain tumor patients?’ ” Dr. Boockvar recalled. “And he said: ‘I can. Just show me what you want to do.’ ”

Dr. Riina said, “Technically, I can go anywhere in your brain.”

He said microcatheter technology had advanced “light-years” in the last decade and was just waiting for a new drug to come along for glioblastoma.

They wrote up a plan to test what they called “superselective intra-arterial cerebral infusion” of Avastin in 30 patients with glioblastomas that had recurred after standard treatment. Each patient would receive just one treatment directed into the brain, followed weeks later by a series of intravenous treatments with Avastin.

Their study involves a technique first developed about 30 years ago, which uses mannitol to open the blood-brain barrier temporarily to get chemotherapy into the brain. Mannitol pulls water out of the tightly packed cells lining the capillaries so that they shrink and pull away from one another, opening up gaps through which drug molecules can pass into the brain.

The technique was developed by Dr. Edward A. Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon at Oregon Health Sciences University and the Veterans Affairs Hospital in Portland. Its best results have been in people with a rare type of brain tumor called a primary central nervous system lymphoma. But it has not been helpful with glioblastoma, because until recently there was no chemotherapy to infuse that would have much effect on those tumors.

Dr. Neuwelt said that Avastin had helped to renew interest in opening the blood-brain barrier but that researchers disagreed about whether the drug would lend itself to that use.

Avastin starves tumors by blocking the growth of new blood vessels, which they need to survive. Dr. Boockvar said microcatheters should increase the odds of success by delivering a high dose of the drug directly to where it was needed most. Earlier research with other drugs used larger catheters inserted into the carotid arteries, which feed the entire brain — meaning that the tumor did not receive the most concentrated dose and that healthy brain tissue was exposed to the toxic drugs.

By mid-November, the researchers had treated five patients, including Mr. Sugrue; they first infused mannitol, waited five minutes and then sprayed in the Avastin. In all the patients’ M.R.I. scans, the telltale bright spots that marked tumor growth faded away after the treatment.

“I can’t tell you what it means,” Dr. Boockvar said. “Nobody knows.”

Indeed, the death of the first patient was a reminder that glioblastoma can invade other parts of the brain and the spinal fluid and that the highly localized spray of Avastin might miss deadly seeds of cancer.

But Dr. Boockvar remained hopeful for the remaining patients, describing the scans as “astronomically far better than I had anticipated.”

Mr. Sugrue was still in the hospital in late September when Dr. Boockvar burst into his room and got him out of bed to look at his own before-and-after scans.

“He took me to this room with all these computers and said, ‘I’ve got to show you this,’ ” Mr. Sugrue recalled. “This M.R.I. was a thing of beauty. I’m excited that he’s excited. That means a lot to me.”

Dr. Boockvar said: “Avastin may not be the best drug for this delivery technique. What’s exciting about our results is that we’ve proven there is a local effect.

“Suppose someone said, ‘I have much better drug.’ Now I can say I at least have a delivery system.”

With patients, Dr. Boockvar tries to walk a fine line, trying to level with them and yet not rob them of all hope. He knows the emotional toll that a cancer diagnosis can take: his own father had leukemia for about eight years and died in September. Mrs. Sugrue said the doctor urged her and her husband to resist doing an Internet search for glioblastoma because they would just read that it was a death sentence.

They said they tried to follow his advice, but when the subject of prognosis came up in an interview, both had tears in their eyes.

“You don’t ask the question if you don’t want the answer,” Mrs. Sugrue said. “What will be, will be. You do what you can.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: With only a Phase I study underway, there is no data to report. The story makes this clear. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, July 20, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A laser treatment can reduce spots in people's vision known as "floaters," a new study finds.

"Floaters often arise as the vitreous -- a gel-like substance that fills the eye -- contracts and pulls away from the back of the eye," explained ophthalmologist Dr. Naomi Goldberg, who reviewed the new research. She works at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital in New York City.

Floaters become more common with age, and although some people simply get used to them, others are bothered by them or their vision is impaired.

The new research was led by Dr. Chirag Shah and Dr. Jeffrey Heier of Ophthalmic Consultants of Boston. They explained that, currently, there are three management options for floaters: patient education and observation; surgery; and a laser procedure known as YAG vitreolysis.

However, Shah and Heier said there are few published studies on the laser treatment's effectiveness in treating floaters.

The new study involved 52 patients with floaters who received one session of either the YAG laser treatment or a "sham" placebo laser treatment.

Six months after treatment, 54 percent of patients in the YAG group reported significantly greater improvement in floater-related visual disturbances, compared with only 9 percent of those in the placebo group.

Nineteen patients (53 percent) in the YAG group reported significantly or completely improved symptoms, compared with none of the patients in the placebo group, the researchers added.

The patients in the YAG group also had improvements in several other measures, including general vision and independence, compared with those in the placebo group, the findings showed.

There were no differences between the two groups in harmful side effects, according to the study, which was published July 20 in JAMA Ophthalmology.

A limitation of the study was its small size and short follow-up period, the researchers said. "Greater confidence in these outcomes may result from larger confirmatory studies of longer duration," the study authors wrote.

For her part, Goldberg said that although "there was significant improvement in patients' symptoms following treatment, and no significant complication was seen," these findings are early and "it is difficult to predict the long-term safety of this laser procedure."

The U.S. National Eye Institute has more on eye floaters.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does quantify the benefits of the procedure in question, saying, “Six months after treatment, 54 percent of patients in the YAG group reported significantly greater improvement in floater-related visual disturbances, compared with only 9 percent of those in the placebo group.”  It goes on saying, “Nineteen patients (53 percent) in the YAG group reported significantly or completely improved symptoms, compared with none of the patients in the placebo group.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Can acupressure achieve a sustained reduction in menstrual pain? Is an app-based self-care program particularly attractive to young women? These questions addressed in a new study by researchers from Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, the results of which have been published in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology*.

Approximately 50 to 90 percent of young women experience pain during their periods. While this pain primarily manifests itself as lower abdominal cramping, other symptoms include headache, backache, nausea and diarrhea. Acupressure is a technique derived from traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In contrast to acupuncture, this technique can be used as a form of self-care and is suitable for use at home. Rather than using needles, this technique involves massage or pressure being applied to specific points on the body.

The researchers wanted to evaluate whether in a group of women suffering from severe menstrual pain, aged between 18 and 34, self-acupressure would be more effective at achieving a sustained reduction in menstrual pain than usual care alone (e.g. pain medication and hormonal contraceptives). A total of 221 participants were randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups, both of which received a study app and short introduction. Acupressure-based features - with instructions on how to administer self-acupressure shortly before and during menstruation - were only made available to the intervention group. One advantage of an app-based intervention is its ability to provide visual descriptions of the pressure points users need to target in order to achieve the desired effect. It can also send regular reminders. Additionally, the app was used to collect all study-related data.

"Initially, we simply wanted to conduct a study on the use of self-care techniques for menstrual pain. However, the women who were involved during the planning stages, all of whom were affected by menstrual pain, wanted an app," reports the study's principal investigator, Prof. Dr. Claudia Witt of the Institute of Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics. The app helped participants to apply simple self-acupressure techniques to three different acupressure points.

After three months, 37 percent of participants in the acupressure group reported a 50 percent reduction in pain intensity. After six months, this proportion had increased to more than half of the women in this group (58 percent). Only 25 percent of women in the control group reported a similar reduction in pain intensity at both the 3-month and 6-month marks. Women in the acupressure group also used less pain medication than women in the control group and reported lower levels of pain overall.

"We were surprised to see that, after six months, two thirds of participants continued to use self-acupressure. So far, research into the clinical effectiveness of apps has been limited, and only a few have been tested using randomized controlled trials," says Dr. Daniel Pach of the Institute of Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics. He adds: "We were able to show that apps can be evaluated in a clinical trial setting. However, despite our experience with conventional clinical trials, there was a lot for us to learn - something we found both exciting and eye-opening." The app Luna has recently been updated and optimized for use with iOS.

*Susanne Blödt, Daniel Pach, Sanna von Eisenhart-Rothe, Fabian Lotz, Stephanie Roll, Katja Icke, Claudia M. Witt: Effectiveness of app-based self-acupressure for women with menstrual pain compared to usual care: a randomized pragmatic trial. In: American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Volume 218, Issue 2, February 2018, Pages 227.e1-227.e9. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.11.570.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release put the benefits experienced by the treatment and control groups in numerical context:
“After three months, 37 percent of participants in the acupressure group reported a 50 percent reduction in pain intensity. After six months, this proportion had increased to more than half of the women in this group (58 percent). Only 25 percent of women in the control group reported a similar reduction in pain intensity at both the 3-month and 6-month marks. Women in the acupressure group also used less pain medication than women in the control group and reported lower levels of pain overall.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lung ultrasound has been shown to be highly effective and safe for diagnosing pneumonia in children and a potential substitute for chest X-ray, according to a study conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Results are currently published in the medical journal Chest.

To watch study author discuss this research, click this link: https:/

Pneumonia is the leading cause of death in children worldwide, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Symptoms include fever, cough, and rapid breathing. Chest X-ray is considered the test of choice for diagnosing pneumonia in children, but the WHO estimates three-quarters of the world's population does not have access to radiography.

Investigators conducted a randomized controlled trial in the pediatric Emergency Department at The Mount Sinai Hospital comparing lung ultrasound to chest X-ray in 191 children from birth to 21 years of age. The patients were randomly assigned into an investigational arm (received a lung ultrasound and if the physician needed additional verification, a chest X-ray) and a control arm (received a chest X-ray followed by a lung ultrasound). Researchers found a 38.8 percent reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm compared to no reduction in the control arm, with no missed pneumonia cases and no increase in any other adverse events.

The research team was led by James Tsung, MD, MPH, Associate Professor in the Department of Emergency Medicine and Department of Pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and former clinical fellow Brittany Pardue Jones, MD, who's currently Assistant Professor in the Department of Pediatrics at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.

"Ultrasound is portable, cost-saving and safer for children than an X-ray because it does not expose them to radiation," says Dr. Tsung. "Our study could have a profound impact in the developing world where access to radiography is limited."

Furthermore, the reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm resulted in an overall cost savings of $9,200, and length of stay in the Emergency Department was decreased by 26 minutes.

"In the era of precision medicine, lung ultrasound may also be an ideal imaging option in children who are at higher risk for radiation-induced cancers or have received multiple radiographic or CT imaging studies," says Dr. Tsung.

As more and more handheld ultrasound machines come to market, these results suggest that lung ultrasound has the potential to become the preferred choice for the diagnosis of pneumonia in children. Further research is needed to investigate the impact of lung ultrasound on antibiotic use and stewardship.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an integrated health system committed to providing distinguished care, conducting transformative research, and advancing biomedical education. Structured around seven hospital campuses and a single medical school, the Health System has an extensive ambulatory network and a range of inpatient and outpatient services--from community-based facilities to tertiary and quaternary care.

The System includes approximately 6,100 primary and specialty care physicians; 12 joint-venture ambulatory surgery centers; more than 140 ambulatory practices throughout the five boroughs of New York City, Westchester, Long Island, and Florida; and 31 affiliated community health centers. Physicians are affiliated with the renowned Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, which is ranked among the highest in the nation in National Institutes of Health funding per investigator. The Mount Sinai Hospital is ranked as one of the nation's top 10 hospitals in Geriatrics, Cardiology/Heart Surgery, and Gastroenterology, and is in the top 25 in five other specialties in the 2014-2015 "Best Hospitals" issue of U.S. News & World Report. Mount Sinai's Kravis Children's Hospital also is ranked in seven out of ten pediatric specialties by U.S. News & World Report. The New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai is ranked 11th nationally for Ophthalmology, while Mount Sinai Beth Israel is ranked regionally.

For more information, visit http://www. , or find Mount Sinai on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly stated that chest ultrasounds effectively diagnosed study patients who had pneumonia as well as chest X-rays.  There were 38.8 percent fewer chest X-rays required for a pneumonia diagnosis in the investigational arm of the study compared to the control group of the study. The study also showed that stays in the emergency department by ultrasound-only patients were almost a half-hour shorter than those of the control group.
We offer a word of caution, however. The release didn’t explain how the pneumonia cases were actually diagnosed so we cannot determine if the ultrasound really was accurate and effectively diagnosed study patients who had pneumonia.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eylea outperforms Avastin for diabetic macular edema with moderate or worse vision loss

NIH-funded clinical trial shows Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis perform similarly when vision loss is mild.

A two-year clinical trial that compared three drugs for diabetic macular edema (DME) found that gains in vision were greater for participants receiving the drug Eylea (aflibercept) than for those receiving Avastin (bevacizumab), but only among participants starting treatment with 20/50 or worse vision. Gains after two years were about the same for Eylea and Lucentis (ranibizumab), contrary to year-one results from the study, which showed Eylea with a clear advantage. The three drugs yielded similar gains in vision for patients with 20/32 or 20/40 vision at the start of treatment. The clinical trial was conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), which is funded by the National Eye Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health.

“This rigorous trial confirms that Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all effective treatments for diabetic macular edema,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D. “Eye care providers and patients can have confidence in all three drugs.”

Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all widely used to treat DME, a consequence of diabetes that can cause blurring of central vision due to the leakage of fluid from abnormal blood vessels in the retina. The macula is the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The drugs are injected into the eye and work by inhibiting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a substance that can promote abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage. Although the drugs have a similar mode of action, they differ significantly in cost. Based on Medicare allowable charges, the per-injection costs of each drug at the doses used in this study were about $1850 for Eylea, about $60 for Avastin, and about $1200 for Lucentis.

DRCR.net investigators enrolled 660 people with DME at 89 clinical trial sites across the United States. When the study began, participants on average were 61 years old with 17 years of type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Only people with a visual acuity of 20/32 or worse were eligible to participate (to see clearly, a person with 20/32 vision would have to be 20 feet away from an object that a person with normal vision could see clearly at 32 feet). At enrollment, about half the participants had 20/32 to 20/40 vision. The other half had 20/50 or worse vision. In many states, a corrected visual acuity of 20/40 or better in at least one eye is required for a driver’s license that allows both day- and nighttime driving.

Each participant was assigned randomly to receive Eylea (2.0 milligrams/0.05 milliliter), Avastin (1.25 mg/0.05 mL), or Lucentis (0.3 mg/0.05 mL). Participants were evaluated monthly during the first year and every 4-16 weeks during the second year. Most participants received monthly injections during the first six months. Thereafter, participants received additional injections of assigned study drug until DME resolved or stabilized with no further vision improvement. Subsequently, injections were resumed if DME worsened. Additionally, laser treatment was given if DME persisted without continual improvement after six months of injections. Laser treatment alone was the standard treatment for DME until widespread adoption of anti-VEGF drugs a few years ago.

Among participants with 20/40 or better vision at the trial’s start, all three drugs improved vision similarly on an eye chart. On average, participants’ vision improved from 20/40 vision to 20/25.

Among participants with 20/50 or worse vision at the trial’s start, visual acuity on average improved substantially in all three groups. At two years, Eylea participants were able to read about 3.5 additional lines on an eye chart; Lucentis participants were able to read about three additional lines, and Avastin participants improved about 2.5 lines, compared with visual acuity before treatment. Eylea outperformed Avastin at the one- and two-year time points. While Eylea outperformed Lucentis at the one-year time point, by the two-year time point gains in visual acuity were statistically no different. At the end of the trial, average visual acuity was 20/32 to 20/40 among participants in all three groups.

“The results of the DRCR Network’s comparison of Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis will help doctors and their patients with diabetic macular edema choose the most appropriate therapy,” said John A. Wells, M.D., the lead author of the study and a retinal specialist at the Palmetto Retina Center, Columbia, South Carolina. “The study suggests there is little advantage of choosing Eylea or Lucentis over Avastin when a patient’s loss of visual acuity from macular edema is mild, meaning a visual acuity of 20/40 or better. However, patients with 20/50 or worse vision loss may benefit from Eylea, which over the course of the two-year study outperformed Lucentis and Avastin.”

The number of injections participants needed was about the same for all three treatment groups. Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis participants on average required nine injections in the first year of the study and five in the second year.

The need for laser treatment varied among the three treatment groups. By two years, 41 percent of participants in the Eylea group received laser treatment to treat their macular edema, compared with 64 percent of participants in the Avastin group and 52 percent in the Lucentis group.

The risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from a cardiovascular condition or an unknown cause by end of the trial was higher among participants in the Lucentis group. Twelve percent of Lucentis participants had at least one event, compared with five percent of participants in the Eylea group and eight percent of participants in the Avastin group. This difference in cardiovascular rates has not been seen across all other studies, and therefore may be due to chance. Continued assessment of these serious cardiovascular events and their association with these drugs is important in future studies. Cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke are common complications of diabetes. The occurrence of eye complications, such as eye infections and inflammation, was similar for all three drugs.

Results of the study were published online today in Ophthalmology, the journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology. Eylea and Lucentis were provided by drug manufacturers Regeneron and Genentech, respectively. Additional research funding for this study was provided by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, also a part of NIH.

“This important study would not have happened without funding from the National Institutes of Health and the cooperation of two competing companies,” said Adam R. Glassman, M.S., principal investigator of the DRCR.Net Coordinating Center at the Jaeb Center for Health Research.

The DRCR.net is dedicated to facilitating multicenter clinical research of diabetic eye disease. The Network formed in 2002 and comprises more than 350 physicians practicing at more than 140 clinical sites across the country. For more information, visit the DRCR.net website at http://drcrnet.jaeb.org/.

The study was funded by grants EY14231, EY14229, and EY18817.

The study is registered as NCT01627249 at ClinicalTrials.gov.

Macular edema can arise during any stage of diabetic retinopathy and is the most common cause of diabetes-related vision loss. About 7.7 million Americans have diabetic retinopathy. Of these, about 750,000 have DME. The NEI provides information about diabetic eye disease at http://www.nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic. View an NEI video about how diabetic retinopathy can be detected through a comprehensive dilated eye exam at http://youtu.be/sQ-0RkPu35o.

NEI leads the federal government's research on the visual system and eye diseases. NEI supports basic and clinical science programs that result in the development of sight-saving treatments. For more information, visit http://www.nei.nih.gov.

The NIDDK, a component of the NIH, conducts and supports research on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, nutrition and obesity; and kidney, urologic and hematologic diseases. Spanning the full spectrum of medicine and afflicting people of all ages and ethnic groups, these diseases encompass some of the most common, severe and disabling conditions affecting Americans. For more information about the NIDDK and its programs, visit http://www.niddk.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release states the general benefits over time for each group assigned to one of three drugs and gives some specifics about the improvements seen.
Among participants with 20/50 or worse vision at the trial’s start, visual acuity on average improved substantially in all three groups. At two years, Eylea participants were able to read about 3.5 additional lines on an eye chart; Lucentis participants were able to read about three additional lines, and Avastin participants improved about 2.5 lines.
The release also does a pretty good job of quantifying how many people in each group needed laser surgery.
By two years, 41 percent of participants in the Eylea group received laser treatment to treat their macular edema, compared with 64 percent of participants in the Avastin group and 52 percent in the Lucentis group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study looked at the effects of weight-loss surgery on obese women most at risk for cancer. It found that bariatric surgery:
• produced a mean weight loss of more than 100 pounds

CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., Oct. 1, 2015 - A study evaluating the effects of bariatric surgery on obese women most at risk for cancer has found that the weight-loss surgery slashed participants' weight by a third and eliminated precancerous uterine growths in those that had them. Other effects included improving patients' physical quality of life, improving their insulin levels and ability to use glucose - which may reduce their risk for diabetes - and even altering the composition of their gut bacteria.

The study speaks both to the benefits of bariatric surgery and to the tremendous toll obesity takes on health. "If you look at cancers in women, about a fifth of all cancer deaths would be prevented if we had women at normal body weight in the U.S.," said Susan C. Modesitt, MD, of the University of Virginia Cancer Center. "When you're looking at obesity-related cancers, the biggest one is endometrial cancer, but also colon cancer, breast cancer, renal cancer and gall bladder cancer. We think about 40 [percent] to 50 percent of all endometrial cancer, which is in the lining of the uterus, is caused by obesity."

The study looked at 71 women with a mean age of 44.2 years and a mean body mass index (BMI) of 50.9. Women are considered obese at a BMI of 30 and morbidly obese at 40 (which is typically about 100 pounds over a woman's ideal body weight), yet almost a third of women presenting for bariatric surgery did not identify themselves as obese.

The study looked at the effects of bariatric surgery in a relatively short timeframe, one to three years after surgery. A total of 68 participants underwent the procedure; two opted out of the surgery, and another died of a heart condition prior to surgery. The effects of surgery on body weight were dramatic: Mean weight loss was more than 100 pounds.

Ten percent of study participants who had not had a hysterectomy showed precancerous changes in the lining of the uterus, and all of those resolved with weight loss. "We're talking about small numbers, really tiny numbers" of study participants, Modesitt said, noting one limitation of the study. "So I could never say that effect is definitive, but it is suggestive, given that we know already the incredibly strong link between endometrial cancer and obesity."

Modesitt, of the UVA's Division of Gynecologic Oncology in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, was most surprised by the dramatic changes seen in the patients' metabolic profiles derived from the gut microbiome, the population of microorganisms living inside us. "The study results demonstrate that there is a huge alteration, but I don't even know what to say about that, except it is really new and intriguing area to look at in the link between obesity and cancer. For example, before groundbreaking work by Dr. John Marshall at UVA in the past, no one knew that ulcers were from bacteria. Who knows what role the gut bacteria play in promoting obesity, but metabolic parameter/markers of the bacteria definitely changed after [study participants] lost weight."

While the study speaks to the transformative effect bariatric surgery can have, Modesitt urged people to avoid gaining weight in the first place and for those seeking to lose weight to exercise and eat more healthily before turning to surgery. "We really should be working on diet and exercise from the get-go in our entire society, starting with our children. And exercise does seem to be protective -- even if you don't lose all the weight, it absolutely has beneficial effects," she said. "There are lots of studies showing if you exercise, it improves your insulin, your glucose, all of those sorts of things that go along with the cancer-causing effect. Almost everybody agrees adding exercise would be wonderful and improve health on many levels. But losing excess weight would also be good."

The findings have been published as a lead article in the scientific journal Gynecologic Oncology. The article was written by Modesitt, Peter T. Hallowell, Jill K. Slack-Davis, Ryan D. Michalek, Kristen A. Atkins, Sarah L. Kelley, Sanja Arapovic, Margaret A. Shupnik and Kyle Hoehn.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This release does something wonderful. It sums up the main findings from the study – including a quantification of some benefits – at the very top of the release. What would have made the quantification even better would have been breaking down the raw numbers. How many women lost how much weight? Not just the averages. And when the release talks about improvements in other outcomes such as physical quality of life and insulin levels, what sort of changes are we talking about? Were they just statistically significant or would they really be meaningful to these patients in their daily lives?
Another area of concern is the headline, which suggests that bariatric surgery offers “dramatic benefits” for “preventing cancer.” This seems to be referring to a reduction in precancerous changes in a small number of women and some changes in these women’s gut bacteria. We would be hard-pressed to characterize those changes as a “dramatic” cancer-prevention benefit. In fact, the study offered no proof that the surgery prevented any cancers at all. We’ll address this issue down below under “Unjustifiable Language.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cognitive behavioural therapy could help many people with a dental phobia overcome their fear of visiting the dentist and enable them to receive dental treatment without the need to be sedated, according to a new study by King's College London.

Anxiety about visiting the dentist is common and becomes a phobia when it has a marked impact on someone's well-being; people with dental phobias typically avoid going to the dentist and end up experiencing more dental pain, poorer oral health and a detrimental effect on their quality of life. Estimates from the most recent Adult Dental Health Survey in the UK suggest around one in ten people suffers from dental phobia.

Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a short-term therapy, typically lasting 6-10 sessions. CBT has been shown to help with a range of psychological problems, most notably for depression and anxiety-related disorders. Both cognitive and behavioural interventions have been shown to be successful in reducing dental anxiety and increasing dental attendance.

The latest study, published in the British Dental Journal, looked at the characteristics of 130 patients (99 women and 31 men) attending a psychologist-led CBT service and the outcomes of their treatment. Patients attending a clinic run by the King's College London Dental Institute Health Psychology Service at Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust were surveyed for their levels of dental anxiety, general anxiety, depression, suicidal thoughts, alcohol use and oral health-related quality of life.

Three-quarters of those assessed scored 19 or higher on the Modified Dental Anxiety Scale (MDAS), indicating dental phobia. The remainder all scored high on one or more items of the MDAS, suggesting a specific fear of some aspect of dentistry. Fear of dental injections and the dental drill were the most common high scoring items on the MDAS. Nearly all patients (94%) reported a knock-on effect from problems with their teeth, mouth or gums on their daily living and quality of life.

A proportion of the patients surveyed were found to have other psychological conditions - 37% had high levels of general anxiety and 12% had clinically significant levels of depression. Suicidal thoughts were reported by 12% of patients and four (3%) reported a recent intent to commit suicide. Individuals were referred to support services via the care of their GP and for suicide risk, immediate action was taken based on local service guidelines.

Of all patients referred, four-fifths (79%) went on to have dental treatment without the need for sedation and 6% had their dental treatment under sedation. The average number of CBT appointments required before a patient received dental treatment without sedation was five.

Professor Tim Newton from the Dental Institute at King's College London and lead author of the study said: "People with dental phobia are most commonly given sedation to allow them to become relaxed enough for a short period of time to have their dental treatment performed. However this does not help them to overcome their fear in the long term. The primary goal of our CBT service is to enable patients to receive dental treatment without the need for sedation, by working with each individual patient to set goals according to their priorities. Our study shows that after on average five CBT sessions, most people can go on to be treated by the dentist without the need to be sedated."

"However, there is a need for people with dental phobia to be carefully assessed by trained CBT practitioners working with dental health professionals. Some of the patients referred to us were found to be experiencing additional psychological difficulties, and needed further referral and management. CBT provides a way of reducing the need for sedation in people with a phobia, but there will still be those who need sedation because they require urgent dental treatment or they are having particularly invasive treatments. Our service should be viewed as complementing sedation services rather than as an alternative, the two together providing a comprehensive care pathway for the ultimate benefit of patients."

A recent study published in the same journal, co-authored by Professor Tim Newton, showed that more women than men reported dental phobia in the 2009 Adult Dental Health Survey. Those with dental phobia were more likely to come from a lower income background, have more caries in their teeth and suffer from poorer oral health overall.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The benefit here is the ability of a patient to receive dental care without sedation — which carries its own costs and health risks. The release states that 79% of patients who participated in the study “went on to have dental treatment without the need for sedation.” Only 6% of patients had treatment under sedation. The remaining 15% either dropped out of CBT or were removed from the study because they were identified as having other psychological problems that required treatment. Of the patients who completed the CBT (i.e., didn’t drop out and weren’t removed from the study), 93% went on to have dental treatment without sedation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Also missing, Nelson said, are randomized studies that would indicate how often patients should be screened. One of the best studies the panel found focused on healthy women over age 65 and concluded that screenings spaced eight years or less apart did not make much of a difference in identifying which women would be more at risk for fractures.

The report identified possible benefits of screening, but noted that there is no solid evidence — in the form of randomized trials, medicine’s gold standard — comparing fracture rates of patients who have been screened with those who have not been screened.

But the panel is in the process of updating its recommendations, which were issued in 2002. A preliminary report in July packed a surprise: No direct evidence was found that testing patients for low bone density helped avoid broken bones. “It’s still amazing to me,’’ said the report’s lead author, Dr. Heidi Nelson, a professor at Oregon Health & Science University.

The task force offers no advice for women younger than 60 or for men of any age, though men account for at least 20 percent of US patients with osteoporosis.

The US Preventive Services Task Force, which sets standards on disease prevention and primary care, suggests that all women get a bone density screening by age 65, or by 60 if a patient might be at high risk for fractures. Risk factors include being female, having a family history of osteoporosis or broken bones, being small and thin, and having low levels of sex hormones, in addition to older age.

One of the first dilemmas patients typically encounter is when to get screened for osteoporosis, and then how often to repeat the test — a painless body scan that measures bone density.

“What is right in 2010,’’ she said, “might not be right in 2011 in a rapidly evolving medical science.’’

Dr. Felicia Cosman, clinical director of the National Osteoporosis Foundation and a professor at Columbia University, said the swirl of new information makes it critical for patients to review with their physicians their treatment decisions.

Even the issues of how much vitamin D adults should take and whether calcium supplements help keep bones strong have been matters of debate.

The safety of one of the most popular types of medication used to lessen the risk of fractures — bisphosphonates, such as Fosamax and Boniva — has also been questioned.

Over the past several months, studies have raised questions about the effectiveness of screening for osteoporosis, a silent disease that weakens the bones of an estimated 10 million Americans, most over age 50.

Sorting through all the recent news about osteoporosis, or low bone density, can be dizzying.

A task force of specialists appointed by the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research reported last month that long-term use of bisphosphonates, typically beyond five years, may increase a patient’s risk of an unusual but serious type of thigh fracture. The panel reviewed 310 such cases and concluded that they represent less than one-half of 1 percent of all American patients taking bisphosphonates. However the panel also said it believed the number of such fractures is under-reported.

There is little dispute over the conclusion of several studies that bisphosphonates can be effective in lowering patients’ risk of fractures, some by as much as 50 percent. But in recent months, questions have grown about their safety.

Bisphosphonates — the class of drugs that includes Fosamax, Boniva, and others — were approved by federal regulators in 1995 and have since been prescribed for millions of patients. Taken orally or by injection, the drugs work by slowing the growth of cells that break down bones, giving the edge to other cells that rebuild them.

When it comes to the most popular type of osteoporosis treatment, bisphosphonates, the question is not so much about how much to take, but whether there are harmful consequences from long-term use.

An updated report on recommended levels for both nutrients is due next month from the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academy of Sciences, which advises the federal government.

There are fewer differences of opinion among health professionals about calcium levels, with most recommending about 1,200 daily milligrams for adults over 50. However, the most extensive study on the calcium question, done by the Women’s Health Initiative as a randomized controlled trial, was inconclusive. It found no significant reduction in fractures in the study population, which received supplements of 1,000 milligrams of calcium and 400 international units of vitamin D daily.

Beyond the screening question, many physicians routinely ask patients about their calcium and vitamin D intake. The federal government recommends just 400 international units daily of vitamin D for adults over age 50, while the National Osteoporosis Foundation recommends 800 to 1,000 units. Some doctors suggest doubling those higher amounts for post-menopausal women.

Waiting until women are in their 60s to scan will result in missing many who could be diagnosed and treated, she said. “The reason you want to find people at the time of menopause is because there is acceleration [of bone loss] at this time,’’ Cosman said. This is when estrogen plummets, and estrogen helps protect bone health.

“I believe all women should have a bone screening test approximately at the time of menopause,’’ said Cosman, emphasizing that “this is my personal opinion as a specialist who treats women,’’ and not representative of her position with the National Osteoporosis Foundation.

In the absence of clear guidelines, many physicians make their own judgment calls.

“The thigh is one of the strongest bones in the body and it’s unusual for it to break,’’ said Columbia University professor Dr. Elizabeth Shane, the task force cochair and a specialist who has prescribed the medications to many of her osteoporosis patients.

Her task force recommended that an international registry be created for tracking such cases to help researchers better pinpoint which patients might be at risk. It also called on the US Food and Drug Administration to change medication labeling to alert physicians and patients to the possibility of these unusual fractures, and to urge awareness of possible warning signs: prolonged groin or thigh pain.

In a statement, the FDA said it is reviewing the data and is considering changing the labeling on bisphosphonates. It also recommended that patients report groin or thigh pain to their physicians, but did not suggest they stop taking the medications unless ordered to do so by their doctors.

In August, a team of researchers reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association that bisphosphonate use was not linked to an increased risk of stomach or esophageal cancer. The scientists reviewed about 80,000 patient records from a 6 million-person database in Britain.

But in September, a different group of scientists used the same database and concluded in an article in the British Medical Journal that bisphosphonates appeared to double the risk of esophageal cancer after about 5 years of use. Still, this group stressed the risk was very small, resulting in 2 cases of throat cancer in 1,000 people ages 60 to 79, compared with the normal rate of 1 per 1,000.

Some doctors are giving their patients “drug holidays’’ in which they take them off the prescriptions for a while.

Physicians face a tough choice when it comes to frail patients who have brittle bones. If they pull them off the medications because of the possible risk of serious side effects with longer-term use, there is little else to prescribe.

For Dr. Douglas C. Bauer, a professor at the University of California-San Francisco and a researcher who also treats many osteoporosis patients, the hardest decision is when to stop the drugs in patients who still have low bone density after five years of treatment but are not especially frail.

“It was appropriate to treat them to begin with, but you are not clear on added benefit for prolonged use beyond five years,’’ he said. “So I ask them, ‘What would you like to do?’ And I explain the data and say it’s a gray area, and I say we can decide together.’’
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article provided adequate discussion of the relative benefits of the treatments and screening methods under discussion. 
 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 13, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- For black Americans suffering from heart disease, meditation might help prevent heart attacks, strokes and early death, a small new study suggests.

These benefits appear to be the results of meditation's ability to lower blood pressure, stress and anger, all of which have been linked to increased cardiovascular risk, researchers say.

"This is a whole new physiological effect on top of conventional treatment," said lead researcher Dr. Robert Schneider, director of the Institute for Natural Medicine and Prevention in Fairfield, Iowa. "People can prevent heart disease reoccurrence using their own mind-body connection. People have this internal self-healing ability."

An outside expert, however, said the study is too limited in size and scope to allow conclusions as to whether meditation really reduces risk of death or disease.

The new study focused on Transcendental Meditation. Originally from India, it is not associated with any particular religion or philosophy. It is thought to produce alpha brain waves that occur in deep relaxation. According to the Maharishi Foundation, more than 5 million people worldwide practice this type of meditation.

The research focused on blacks because they are at a higher risk than whites of having heart attacks and strokes and dying from heart disease, Schneider said. He added, however, that meditation would work as well among whites and other populations.

"Other studies have been done among whites and the results are similar," he said.

The report was published in the Nov. 13 issue of the journal Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. The study was sponsored by the Maharishi University of Management and funded by the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

For the study, Schneider's team randomly assigned 201 black Americans with heart disease either to a Transcendental Meditation stress-reducing program or health education class about lifestyle modification in diet and exercise.

Almost 60 percent of the participants were taking cholesterol-lowering drugs. Forty-one percent of the meditation group took aspirin, as did 31 percent of the health education group; 38 percent of the meditation group and 43 percent of the health education group smoked, the researchers noted.

Participants' average body-mass index -- a measurement of body fat based on height and weight -- was 32, which is considered obese.

Meditation consisted of sitting with eyes closed for about 20 minutes twice a day. The goal was to rest while remaining alert.

After more than five years of follow-up, the researchers found those who meditated saw significant reductions in blood pressure and anger compared to those receiving health education. In addition, 20 people in the medication group had a heart attack or stroke or died, compared with 32 in the health education group.

Both groups increased exercise and drank less. For those who meditated, there was a trend toward reduced smoking; however, this was not statistically significant.

Learning how to do Transcendental Meditation isn't inexpensive. An initial 10-hour course runs about $1,500 when taught by nonprofit groups, and there is continued lifetime follow-up, Schneider said.

And it's not something you can learn by yourself. "You've got to have a teacher right there in front of you teaching according to experience," he said. "So it's only learned live."

Transcendental Meditation is not generally covered by health insurance, he said. "One of the reasons we did the study is because insurance and Medicare calls for citing evidence for what's to be reimbursed," Schneider said. "This study will lead toward reimbursement. That's the whole idea."

But a cardiology expert said that although the study adds to evidence supporting meditation, it doesn't prove a cause-and-effect relationship between the practice and better health outcomes.

"Transcendental Meditation has been reported to have health benefits and has been evaluated in a number of studies," said Dr. Gregg Fonarow, professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles.

Some studies have suggested favorable effects on cardiovascular risk factors whereas others studies have been inconclusive, he said.

Even though the findings in this study were statistically significant, the new study was too small to be conclusive, Fonarow said.

"In addition, since this study was conducted at a single center and the primary [change in heart attack, stroke and death] was not statistically significant without adjustment for other factors, more studies and replication of these findings are needed," he said.

For more information on heart disease, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story tells us that 20 people in the medication group had a heart attack or stroke or died, compared with 32 in the health education group. It also provides the number of subjects who participated in the study (201).  We would have liked to have seen both the numerator and denominator provided for completeness (20/99 in the TM  group vs. 32/102 in the HE group for example). This is still preferable to simply telling readers that there was a “48% reduction” in risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Imagine feeling horribly sick, day after day, yet doctors repeatedly tell you they can't find anything wrong. That typically happens to people with the mysterious illness commonly known as chronic fatigue syndrome. Research findings from Stanford University released Monday could point the way to a long-sought diagnostic laboratory test for the condition, and possibly a first-ever treatment.

Believed to affect at least a million people in the U.S., the condition is now increasingly termed myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome, or ME/CFS for short.

Many patients see the name "chronic fatigue syndrome" as trivializing and misleading, giving the impression that they're simply tired or depressed. In fact, they're experiencing profound exhaustion that isn't relieved with sleep, flu-like symptoms, muscle pain, "brain fog" and various other physical symptoms, all of which characteristically worsen with even minor exertion. (A 2015 Institute of Medicine report proposed the name "systemic exertion intolerance disease," but it hasn't really stuck.)

The symptoms can range from mild to extremely severe, with about a quarter of patients so ill they're mostly or completely confined to bed. Now, the Stanford researchers have linked ME/CFS to variations in certain cytokines, immune-signaling proteins, that track with illness severity. The study results were published online Monday in the the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

The link to gradation in severity, rather than simply seeking a positive versus negative result, represents a new approach to the search for biological markers for the illness. The study involved 192 ME/CFS patients and 392 healthy controls matched for age and sex. Out of 51 cytokines investigated via sophisticated fluorescence-based testing, only two of the cytokines differed, in their total concentrations, between the ME/CFS and control groups.

But, levels of 17 of the cytokines varied dramatically between the patients with mild versus severe ME/CFS symptoms. Of those 17 cytokines, 13 were types that promote inflammation. This is significant because symptoms in these patients and findings from other studies also suggest that chronic inflammation plays a major role in the illness.

"This is a field that has been full of skepticism and misconception, where patients have been viewed to have invented their disease. These data clearly show the contrary, and demonstrate what can be achieved when we couple good research design with new technology," lead author Dr. Jose Montoya, professor of infectious diseases at Stanford, tells Shots.

According to Dr. Anthony L. Komaroff, a Harvard internist and epidemiologist who has written a commentary to accompany the study, "For many years medical scientists have speculated that the symptoms of ME/CFS might be caused by cytokines, molecules that the immune system use to wage war against foreign invaders of the body. Past studies have shown high levels of many cytokines but it was not clear that these high levels were causing symptoms."

What the latest research shows, Komaroff tells Shots, is that "levels of many cytokines do correlate with symptoms: The higher the blood level, the worse the symptoms. That supports the theory that the cytokines are a cause of the symptoms."

So why do routine lab tests that doctors order often come back negative or not informative in ME/CFS patients? Simply put, Montoya says, those tests aren't measuring the right things.

Two classic laboratory measures of inflammation are sedimentation rate — the ability of red blood cells to clump together, which isn't a factor in ME/CFS — and C-reactive protein, which reflects levels of a single cytokine that wasn't one of those linked to severity in this study.

"Inflammation is much more complicated than two imperfect old measures," Montoya says. "We're showing an inflammation that has not been seen before."

The multidisciplinary Stanford team is now working on developing a panel that could be used commercially, that would test for around five of the 17 cytokines and would likely involve the doctor first classifying patients by severity in order to interpret the results. Such a test could both establish the diagnosis and serve to monitor patients' responses to treatment.

What's more, the findings also point to possible treatment with immune-modifying or anti-inflammatory therapy. Montoya hopes that by publishing these findings "a team of researchers somewhere in the world will see these cytokines and say they have the drug for that inflammation. We hope drug companies will pursue it."

Indeed, a major drug trial is now being conducted in Norway investigating whether the immune-modifying drug rituximab alleviates ME/CFS symptoms, after preliminary studies suggested that it did in some patients. Interestingly, the drug is approved to treat certain autoimmune diseases and also non-Hodgkin lymphoma, a cancer that one study found uniquely occurs at a higher rate among older people with ME/CFS.

Komaroff also notes a recent increase in research funding by the National Institutes of Health, which has included a comprehensive in-house study aimed at unraveling the underlying causes of the condition.

And in an ongoing privately funded study, Stanford geneticist Ron Davis and a team including three Nobel laureates is taking a similar "big data" approach to investigate a group of ME/CFS patients who are all severely ill, including Davis' own adult son.

"There is much to learn," Komaroff writes, in the journal. "Hopefully, a decade from now, "doctors will know better what to measure and, more importantly, what to do to ease the suffering caused by this illness."

Miriam E. Tucker is a freelance journalist specializing in medicine and health. You can follow her on Twitter @MiriamETucker.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The most relevant text here is: “Out of 51 cytokines investigated via sophisticated fluorescence-based testing, only two of the cytokines differed, in their total concentrations, between the ME/CFS and control groups. But, levels of 17 of the cytokines varied dramatically between the patients with mild versus severe ME/CFS symptoms. Of those 17 cytokines, 13 were types that promote inflammation.”
The issue is, though, what does this actually mean in terms of diagnosing a patient as having ME-CFS and treating them with a potentially risky drug such as rituximab that is mentioned in this piece. While the story could have done a better job on that point, we think the discussion here is sufficient for a satisfactory grade. We’ll address the broader implications and the story’s shortcomings below under the evidence quality criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Minimally invasive surgery for a burst appendix appears to be more successful and less costly in the long run than the traditional operation, a new study hints.

Using the gentler technique, called laparoscopy, a surgeon makes small cuts in the abdomen before inserting a tiny camera inside, then performing the operation by watching a television monitor.

Doctors say this type of operation hurts patients less afterward than the conventional “open” method, which involves one long incision in the abdomen of up to 12 inches.

But experiments comparing the two kinds of procedure have yielded mixed outcomes, and some experts remain unconvinced that laparoscopy is worth its higher upfront cost.

The new study, in the Annals of Surgery, doesn’t settle that question. But it does suggest that laparoscopy could actually save thousands of dollars for some patients, when all costs — including physician fees, hospital fees and readmissions — are considered.

“You really want to look at the total cost, because that’s what society has to pay,” said Dr. Dmitry Oleynikov, who heads the Center for Advanced Surgical Technology at Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha and led the new study.

“Overall, this study shows benefit from laparoscopy on every aspect, including cost,” he told Reuters Health.

Appendix removals are one of the most common surgeries in the U.S., with some 750,000 procedures done every year, Oleynikov added.

With his colleagues, he looked back at some 40,000 such surgeries done at dozens of academic medical centers in the U.S. — roughly 14,000 open procedures and 26,000 laparoscopic ones.

For uncomplicated cases of appendicitis, in which the appendix is still intact, the tabs for the two surgeries came out about the same, at just over $7,800.

People who had the laparoscopic procedures also had lower death rates, at 0.07 percent versus 0.17 percent, fewer readmissions and a slightly shorter stay at the hospital.

When the appendix had burst, however, the open surgery racked up a considerably higher bill. On average, it cost $17,594, compared to $12,125 for the laparoscopic surgery.

Yet again, the patients who had laparoscopy fared much better than those who had conventional surgery.

“In healthy individuals, the death rate is very (small) for all groups of patients. But when you become sicker, laparoscopy is better,” said Oleynikov. “Substantial savings could be seen if open surgery is done in a laparoscopic fashion.”

But he acknowledged that the study has major limitations. First, it looks only at academic medical centers. And second, it’s not a randomized controlled trial, which means the patients being compared could be different in important ways, explaining at least part of the outcomes of the two types of surgery.

Indeed, those who had laparoscopy were younger and usually had less severe disease, which could have biased the results in favor of the minimally invasive procedure.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: As already noted, the story did a good job comparing death rate, readmission rate and hospital stays between the two procedures.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 20, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have developed a blood test that they say could help physicians predict whether pregnant women will deliver their babies prematurely.

The test isn't ready for prime time, however, and it's not foolproof: a study found that it misses some premature births and incorrectly predicts others.

Still, the test "should be an important tool for an obstetrician who currently has no clue" if premature birth is a possibility until it happens, said Brigham Young University (BYU) chemistry professor Steven W. Graves.

Physicians will "be able to use a simple blood test and then know that this woman is at increased risk or reduced risk of a preterm birth," said Graves, whose laboratory performed the research in the study.

About 10 percent of births are premature, and the rate rises to 30 percent among women who have already had a baby prematurely, Graves said. Premature birth can lead to a long list of medical problems and puts babies at risk of dying.

In the new study, the researchers examined blood samples from 80 women who went on to have normal births and 80 who had premature births. They tried to find signs in the blood that indicate what kind of birth the women would have.

The researchers developed a screening method that looked for so-called peptide biomarkers in the blood that -- in tandem with several other proteins -- predicted 80 percent to 90 percent of the premature births at 28 weeks of gestation. The false positive rate -- referring to tests that wrongly indicated premature birth -- was 20 percent.

The test wasn't as effective at 24 weeks of gestation.

"This may simply indicate that some of the causes for preterm birth may not pre-exist before the pregnancy," Graves said. "Most probably don't, but develop or become apparent as the pregnancy progresses. The closer to the preterm birth, the more likely you are to have significant changes in the physiology of the woman that is observed in the blood."

The test may cost $150 to $250, Graves said. It would require several years to go through the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval process. BYU and the University of Utah have a patent on the test and have licensed it.

Even if the test is found to indicate that a birth will be premature, physicians would have limited options. One option is to provide drugs that dampen the immune system so the baby's lungs develop faster, said Dr. Jennifer Wu, an obstetrician-gynecologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Wu said the study results are promising, but more research is needed to confirm that the test is reliable. "If you are going to be alarming a patient by saying that she may have premature delivery, you want to make sure that's truly the case."

The study appears in the May issue of the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

For more about premature birth, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag here.  We’ll give it a somewhat satisfactory grade. Here’s why.
The story stated that the test “predicted 80 percent to 90 percent of the premature births at 28 weeks of gestation. The false positive rate — referring to tests that wrongly indicated premature birth — was 20 percent. The test wasn’t as effective at 24 weeks of gestation.”  It didn’t give any numbers to back up the experience at 24 weeks.
But we would have appreciated somewhere a note that it is the very early preterm births that are the most crucial to predict. The story fixates on 28 week testing. What’s really needed are means to identify and study the 23 to 28 weekers. The story also doesn’t acknowledge that we have no effective interventions to stop preterm birth and somewhat incorrectly explains how betamethasone for lung maturity works.
It also had an independent expert’s quote: “If you are going to be alarming a patient by saying that she may have premature delivery, you want to make sure that’s truly the case.”  That’s a very important contribution to the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SEATTLE, June 24 -- For the first time, researchers at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center have found that weight loss, in combination with vitamin D supplementation, has a greater effect on reducing chronic inflammation than weight loss alone. Chronic inflammation is known to contribute to the development and progression of several diseases, including some cancers.

Results of the randomized, controlled clinical trial -- which involved more than 200 overweight, postmenopausal women who had insufficient levels of vitamin D at the beginning of the study -- are published online ahead of the July print issue of Cancer Prevention Research, a journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.

"We know from our previous studies that by losing weight, people can reduce their overall levels of inflammation, and there is some evidence suggesting that taking vitamin D supplements can have a similar effect if one has insufficient levels of the nutrient," said lead and corresponding author Catherine Duggan, Ph.D., a principal staff scientist in the Public Health Sciences Division at Fred Hutch. However, it has not been known whether combining the two -- weight loss and vitamin D -- would further boost this effect. "It's the first study to test whether adding vitamin D augments the considerable effect of weight loss on inflammatory biomarkers," she said.

To explore this question, Duggan and colleagues recruited 218 healthy, overweight older women who had lower-than-recommended levels of vitamin D (less than 32 ng/mL). The women then took part in a 12-month diet and exercise program (including 45 minutes of moderate-to-vigorous exercise five days a week). Half of the study participants were randomly selected to receive 2,000 IU of vitamin D daily for the duration of the year-long trial, and the other half received an identical-appearing placebo, or dummy vitamin. Biomarkers of inflammation were measured at the beginning and end of the study. The researchers then compared changes in these levels between the two groups.

At the end of the study, all of the participants had reduced levels of inflammation, regardless of whether they took vitamin D, "which highlights the importance of weight loss in reducing inflammation," Duggan said. However, those who saw the most significant decline in markers of inflammation were those who took vitamin D and lost 5 to 10 percent of their baseline weight. These study participants had a 37 percent reduction in a pro-inflammatory cytokine called interleukin-6, or IL-6, as compared to those in the placebo group, who saw a 17.2 percent reduction in IL-6. The researchers found similar results among women in the vitamin D group who lost more than 10 percent of their starting weight. While IL-6 has normal functions in the body, elevated levels are associated with an increased risk of developing certain cancers and diabetes and may be implicated as a cause of depression, Duggan said.

"We were quite surprised to see that vitamin D had an effect on an inflammation biomarker only among women who lost at least 5 percent of their baseline weight," Duggan said. "That suggests vitamin D can augment the effect of weight loss on inflammation."

Vitamin D is a steroid hormone that has multiple functions beyond its widely recognized role in regulating calcium levels and bone metabolism. Vitamin D receptors are found in more than 30 cell types and the research focus around this nutrient recently has shifted from bone health to vitamin D's effect on cancer, cardiovascular health and weight loss, among other health issues.

Inflammation occurs when the body is exposed to pathogens, such as bacteria or viruses, which puts the immune system in overdrive until the "attack" ceases and the inflammatory response abates. Overweight or obese people, however, exist in a state of chronic inflammation. This sustained upregulation of the inflammatory response occurs because fat tissue continually produces cytokines, molecules that are usually only present for a short time, while the body is fighting infection, for example.

"It is thought that this state of chronic inflammation is pro-tumorigenic, that is, it encourages the growth of cancer cells," she said. There is also some evidence that increased body mass "dilutes" vitamin D, possibly by sequestering it in fat tissue.

"Weight loss reduces inflammation, and thus represents another mechanism for reducing cancer risk," Duggan said. "If ensuring that vitamin D levels are replete, or at an optimum level, can decrease inflammation over and above that of weight loss alone, that can be an important addition to the tools people can use to reduce their cancer risk."

Duggan encourages women to speak to their health care providers about measuring their levels of vitamin D to determine the most appropriate dosage.

The Breast Cancer Research Foundation, Susan G. Komen for the Cure, National Institutes of Health, Seattle Cancer Consortium Breast Cancer Specialized Program in Research Excellence, Fred Hutchinson/University of Washington Cancer Consortium and Safeway Foundation funded the research.

Editor's note: To obtain a copy of the Cancer Prevention Research paper, "Effect of vitamin D3 supplementation in combination with weight loss on inflammatory biomarkers in postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial," or to arrange an interview with corresponding author Catherine Duggan, please contact: Kristen Woodward in Fred Hutch media relations, kwoodwar@fredhutch.org or 206-667-5095.

At Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, home to three Nobel laureates, interdisciplinary teams of world-renowned scientists seek new and innovative ways to prevent, diagnose and treat cancer, HIV/AIDS and other life-threatening diseases. Fred Hutch's pioneering work in bone marrow transplantation led to the development of immunotherapy, which harnesses the power of the immune system to treat cancer with minimal side effects. An independent, nonprofit research institute based in Seattle, Fred Hutch houses the nation's first and largest cancer prevention research program, as well as the clinical coordinating center of the Women's Health Initiative and the international headquarters of the HIV Vaccine Trials Network. Private contributions are essential for enabling Fred Hutch scientists to explore novel research opportunities that lead to important medical breakthroughs. For more information visit fredhutch.org or follow Fred Hutch on Facebook, Twitter or YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of comparing data and providing explanations for the measurements used. We’ll award a Satisfactory for that precision, but as noted below under “Evidence,” there was no explicit caution regarding the fact that measurements of interleukin-6 (IL-6) are only surrogates for the effects of weight loss and vitamin D on clinical outcomes related to inflammation (e.g. cancer diagnoses). IL-6 levels dropped in both the placebo and vitamin D arms, and it’s not clear whether the statistically significant additional decline in IL-6 observed in the vitamin D group is clinically important.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A vaccine against the Zika virus could one day be used to fight the deadly brain cancer that claimed the life of Senator John McCain, according to a study in mice.

Researchers used a vaccine against the mosquito-borne virus to kill human glioblastoma brain cells which had been implanted into rodents.

Glioblastoma is the most common and fastest growing form of astrocytoma; tumors which start in the glial cells of the brain.

Currently, most people diagnosed with the condition die within two years. Doctors can try to treat glioblastoma with surgery to remove the cancerous cells, and blast them with radiation and chemotherapy. However, as the disease spreads, it becomes difficult to differentiate healthy brain cells from cancerous glioblastoma stem cells, and the condition is therefore almost impossible to completely remove.

Read more: New prostate cancer DNA spit test developed by scientists

Each year, glioblastoma kills around 15,000 adults in the U.S. The condition recently made headlines as the disease that killed senator John McCain at the age of 81. Symptoms include recurring headaches, loss of appetite, blurred vision, vomiting, shifts in personality and the ability to learn, seizures and the gradual loss of speech.

“Thus, development of an effective therapy to kill glioblastoma stem cells is urgently needed,” Dr. Pei-Yong Shi, professor of genetics at the University of Texas Medical Branch and author of the study published in the journal mBio told Newsweek.

As both the Zika virus and glioblastoma can affect the brain, the team hypothesized that the former could be harnessed to treat the latter.

In 2015, countries in the Americas, including Brazil, as well as parts of Africa, were hit by a public health crisis following outbreaks of Zika and its link to encephalitis, a condition where the brain becomes swollen.

The majority of Zika cases result in a mild fever, rash, aches and pains, conjunctivitis and a headache. But if a pregnant woman becomes infected, the virus can target neural progenitor cells in her fetus, putting the infant at risk of being born with microcephaly. This is where the head develops smaller than normal.

The study showed that a live-attenuated Zika vaccine (containing a weakened version of the virus that does not cause disease in humans) could selectively infect and kill human glioblastoma stem cells, explained Shi. That’s because glioblastoma stem cells have similar properties to neural stem cells.

To investigate whether ZIKV-LAV, a vaccine developed at the University of Texas shown to protect mice and non-human primates against the virus, could kill human glioblastoma stem cells, the scientists injected a combination of glioblastoma stem cells from two human donors and the vaccine into mice.

The animals dosed only with the stem cells developed tumors. But those injected with the combination lived to around 50 days, 20 days longer than the stem cell mice.

When the team sequenced the RNA (a molecule that helps with gene expressions) of glioblastoma stem cells exposed to the vaccine and then those which weren’t, they found the virus prompted an antiviral reaction in the exposed cells in what is known as an oncolytic response.

Before undergoing surgery, cancer patients could be given the Zika vaccine to "let the viruses hunt down the GSCs [glioblastoma stem cells] and eliminate them,” said virologist Dr. Cheng-Feng Qin of the Chinese Academy of Military Medical Sciences in Beijing, who worked on the study.

Shi said: “Scientists may turn the 'bad' side of a devastating pathogen—Zika virus—for potential cancer therapy.”

However, he cautioned any potential treatment which could emerge from the study is far from being rolled out.

“We still need to further improve the specificity of the cancer-killing ability, while retain the safety of the vaccine strain,” Shi explained. “For example, we need to make sure that the therapeutic vaccine virus does not infect and kill normal neurons in humans.”

Dr. Harry Bulstrode, brain tumor expert funded by the charity Cancer Research U.K. who is researching how Zika could be used to treat aggressive brain tumors, who was not involved in the study, told Newsweek: "This study is another interesting piece in the jigsaw, but it is never going to demonstrate what we believe to be the really exciting properties of the virus. These are its ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and to selectively infect and concentrate in the brain tumor stem cells left behind after surgery."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We learn from this story that mice with the attenuated Zika virus lived 50 days, in comparison to mice in the control group that lived 30 days. We aren’t given specific numbers on how much tumor development was delayed. We’ll award a satisfactory grade since the story did at least quantify the overall survival difference between the two groups (something rarely reported on in coverage of rodent studies). However, given that this was a study in mice, we were looking for strong cautions that we simply have no evidence if this will work in humans, which is true of all animal studies on potential human treatments. That’s a deficit we’ll address below under the Evidence criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Pathway Genomics, a company known for pushing the boundaries of direct-to-consumer genetic testing, on Thursday will launch a cancer screening test designed to detect bits of cancer DNA in the blood of otherwise healthy people.

The test represents a first in the rapidly developing field of “liquid biopsies,” which use gene sequencing technology to screen blood samples for trace amounts of DNA associated with different cancers.

Several cancer diagnostic companies have been working on the tests, a field that has recently been joined by makers of DNA blood screening tests for fetal abnormalities after the tests detected early cancers in expectant mothers. Cowen & Co estimates that use of DNA blood tests for cancer screening will exceed $10 billion a year by the end of the decade.

But the move by Pathway, a privately owned maker of genetic tests ranging from cancer risk and heart health to drug response, underscores a growing debate over how much genetic information should be made available to healthy people if it is not yet clear how it can improve their health.

The company has already run into trouble on a similar issue. In 2010, Walgreens pulled Pathway’s genetic testing kits from its pharmacies after U.S. health regulators warned patients might take action without understanding the results.

Several oncology experts said liquid biopsy tests like Pathway’s, while exciting, still require large clinical studies proving they help people beat cancer through early detection. Doctors will also need a clear assessment of their accuracy.

“For any given test, the rate of false positives causing unnecessary alarm and false negatives that provide false security should be known,” said Dr. Keith Stewart, an oncologist who heads Mayo Clinic’s Center for Individualized Medicine.

Pathway’s screening test looks at 96 genetic markers associated with major cancer types such as breast, ovarian, lung, colon and melanoma. The company is focusing on mutations that are relatively well-understood, and for which there are specific treatments, said Chief Executive Jim Plante.

The cost to consumers begins at $299 to periodically check for DNA in their blood that could act as an early warning sign of cancer. The tests must be ordered by a doctor, based on a patient’s risk profile. A positive test will require additional checks to find where the cancer is growing.

Pathway also launched a blood test for patients already diagnosed with cancer to help determine whether a treatment is working, or whether the disease is likely to return.

Scientists have long known that cancers shed bits of genetic material into the blood. Privately held Guardant Health and Personal Genome Diagnostics Inc already offer blood tests for cancer patients. Roche-backed Foundation Medicine Inc, Genomic Health Inc, Illumina Inc and Sequenom Inc say they have similar tests in the works.

But cancer experts say there are major differences between using such tests to screen for cancer and monitoring patients who are already known to have it.

For example, some early cancers may not secrete DNA fragments into the bloodstream and require other types of detection. A colonoscopy can find and remove polyps before they pose a threat as colon cancer.

“If we are relying on a test that can only detect cancer after it has formed, we miss a huge opportunity to intervene,” said Dr. Scott Kopetz of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Patients might be attracted to a less-invasive test for colon cancer, but if it is less effective, it might result in more cases of colon cancer, not fewer.

Another concern is that the tests may pick up on markers that are never destined to be cancer, something already known to occur in blood tests for prostate cancer, Kopetz said.

Pathway says its test is more than 99 percent accurate in detecting mutations in blood samples that contain at least nine copies of a tested mutation.

“We do expect to detect cancer DNA when the tumors are small - much sooner than stage three or four,” Plante said.

Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a cancer geneticist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, said Pathway’s figure represents the test’s technical ability to detect DNA in the blood.

Doctors, however, need an indication of how many patients will get a false positive result, something that can only be determined in a very large clinical trial, said Vogelstein. He is advising two companies developing liquid biopsy tests for cancer screening: Sysmex and Personal Genome Diagnostics.

Plante said the company has started two clinical trials involving patients but has yet to publish any results on how the tests perform in people.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story cites a company figure stating that the test “is more than 99 percent accurate in detecting mutations in blood samples that contain at least nine copies of a tested mutation.”
It then knocks down that figure with a quote from a researcher who says the statistic represents the test’s “technical ability to detect DNA in the blood.” It goes on to state that a large clinical trial would be needed to determine the test’s true accuracy, including false positive and false negative results. But such a study hasn’t yet been done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Chicago – Chronic back and leg pain sufferers in search of better pain relief options may have a new choice. According to a study published in the Online First edition of Anesthesiology, the official medical journal of the American Society of Anesthesiologists® (ASA®), patients who received a novel high frequency form of spinal cord stimulation (SCS) therapy experienced significantly greater, long-term relief for both chronic back and leg pain, when compared to a traditional low frequency form of SCS therapy.“This is the first long-term study to compare the safety and effectiveness of high frequency and traditional SCS therapy for back and leg pain,” said Leonardo Kapural, M.D., lead study author and professor of anesthesiology at Wake Forest University School of Medicine and clinical director at Carolinas Pain Institute at Brookstown in Winston-Salem, N.C. “Chronic back and leg pain have long been considered difficult to treat and current pain relief options such as opioids have limited effectiveness and commonly known side effects. Given the prevalence of chronic pain, high frequency SCS is an exciting advance for our patients.”



SCS is an increasingly common therapy that delivers electric pulses to the spinal cord, through a small device implanted under the skin, for difficult to treat chronic pain in the trunk and limbs. SCS is reversible and is an important option for chronic pain sufferers who otherwise would rely on opioids or back surgery for relief. The new treatment, called HF10™ therapy, uses proprietary high frequency pulses of 10,000 Hz, compared to traditional SCS which uses frequencies of 40 to 60 Hz. HF10 therapy also provides pain relief without paresthesia – a stimulation-induced sensation commonly perceived as tingling or buzzing, which masks a patient’s perception of pain – typical of traditional SCS. These sensations are often distracting or uncomfortable to patients and limit the utility and acceptance of traditional devices. Identifying a new intervention that does not rely on paresthesia to mask pain is novel to SCS and has the potential to improve pain relief and quality of life for these complex patients. In the study, researchers examined 171 patients with chronic back or leg pain who were implanted at 10 comprehensive pain treatment centers. Of these, 90 patients received HF10 therapy, while 81 patients had traditional SCS.



At three months, 85 percent of back pain and 83 percent of leg pain patients in the HF10 therapy group experienced a 50 percent reduction in pain or greater. Conversely, only 44 percent of back pain and 56 percent of leg pain patients in the traditional SCS group experienced a 50 percent reduction in pain. None of the patients in the HF10 therapy group experienced paresthesia. HF10 therapy remained more effective than traditional SCS over the 12 month study period. More patients in the HF10 therapy group reported being “very satisfied” with their pain relief (55 percent versus 32 percent). More than 1.5 billion people worldwide suffer from chronic pain, with lower back pain being the most frequent condition affecting 23 to 26 percent of the population.



THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF ANESTHESIOLOGISTS



Founded in 1905, the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) is an educational, research and scientific society with more than 52,000 members organized to raise and maintain the standards of the medical practice of anesthesiology. ASA is committed to ensuring that physician anesthesiologists evaluate and supervise the medical care of patients before, during, and after surgery to provide the highest quality and safest care that every patient deserves.



For more information on the field of anesthesiology, visit the American Society of Anesthesiologists online at asahq.org. To learn more about the role physician anesthesiologists play in ensuring patient safety, visit asahq.org/WhenSecondsCount.



# # #
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of putting some numbers on the potential benefits. For example, the release gives us the absolute number of pain patients in each group who experienced a 50% or greater reduction in symptoms.
“At three months, 85 percent of back pain and 83 percent of leg pain patients in the HF10 therapy group experienced a 50 percent reduction in pain or greater. Conversely, only 44 percent of back pain and 56 percent of leg pain patients in the traditional SCS group experienced a 50 percent reduction in pain.”
Of course, it’s worth noting that these are the findings after 3 months, and the study lasted for 12 months. However, it doesn’t look like the benefits were diminished too greatly with longer-term use of the device, so we’ll award a Satisfactory grade — even though it would have been preferable to also see the findings after a full year of use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 12, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Higher vitamin D levels in patients with advanced colon cancer appear to improve response to chemotherapy and targeted anti-cancer drugs, researchers say.

"We found that patients who had vitamin D levels at the highest category had improved survival and improved progression-free survival, compared with patients in the lowest category," said lead author Dr. Kimmie Ng, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Those patients survived one-third longer than patients with low levels of vitamin D -- an average 32.6 months, compared with 24.5 months, the researchers found.

The report, scheduled for presentation this week at the Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium in San Francisco, adds more weight to suspicions that vitamin D might be a valuable cancer-fighting supplement.

However, colon cancer patients shouldn't try to boost vitamin D levels beyond the normal range, one expert said.

The study only found an association between vitamin D levels and colon cancer survival rates. It did not prove cause and effect.

Researchers for years have investigated vitamin D as a potential anti-cancer tool, but none of the findings have been strong enough to warrant a recommendation, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society.

"Everyone comes to the same conclusion -- yes, there may be some benefit, but we really need to study it carefully so we can be certain there aren't other factors that make vitamin D look better than it is," Lichtenfeld said. "These findings are interesting, and show that vitamin D may have a role in improving outcomes in cancer care."

In this study, researchers measured blood levels of vitamin D in 1,043 patients enrolled in a phase 3 clinical trial comparing three first-line treatments for newly diagnosed, advanced colon cancer. All of the treatments involved chemotherapy combined with the targeted anti-cancer drugs bevacizumab and/or cetuximab.

Vitamin D is called the "sunshine vitamin" because human bodies produce it when the sun's ultraviolet rays strike the skin. It promotes the intestines' ability to absorb calcium and other important minerals, and is essential for maintaining strong, healthy bones, according to the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

But vitamin D also influences cellular function in ways that could be beneficial in treating cancer, Ng said. For example, she said it appears to reduce cell growth, promote the death of diseased cells, and inhibit the formation of new blood vessels to feed cancerous tumors.

The study authors found that certain types of cancer patients tended to have lower vitamin D levels. These included people whose blood specimens were drawn in the winter and spring months, people who live in the northern and northeastern states, older adults, blacks, overweight or obese people, and those who had lower physical activity and were in worse physical condition.

The patients were divided into five groups based on vitamin D levels, ranging from low to high. After adjusting for prognosis and healthy behaviors, the researchers found that patients in the group with the highest levels of vitamin D lived about eight months longer on average than those in the group with the lowest levels.

"We had a lot of information on their tumor, their treatment and their survival times, and their diet and lifestyle," Ng said. "That really allowed us to adjust for other potential factors that could influence what we're seeing."

It also took longer for cancer to progress in people with higher vitamin D levels -- an average 12.2 months compared with about 10 months in the group with the lowest. No significant differences were seen with regard to the type of therapy the patients received.

This increase in progression-free survival is the most compelling evidence indicating that vitamin D makes a difference in colon cancer, said Dr. Smitha Krishnamurthi, an associate professor of hematology and oncology at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine in Cleveland.

"That is interesting because that's more of a cancer-specific endpoint as opposed to overall survival, which could be influenced by other factors like heart health," Krishnamurthi said.

Everyone should maintain healthy vitamin D levels anyway, to protect their bone health, Ng and Krishnamurthi said.

Based on this new study, Krishnamurthi said she would emphasize the importance of vitamin D for patients with colon cancer.

"They should take supplements to bring it into normal range, because we know it is good for bone health and it may have an anti-cancer effect," she said.

However, "if someone has a normal vitamin D level, I wouldn't take supplements to increase it because we won't know the true effect on cancer until we see the results of a clinical trial," she said.

The U.S. National Institutes of Health funded the study. Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more on vitamin D and cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story offers a good explanation of the survival benefit observed in the study and puts it in appropriate context. It notes that patients in the highest vitamin D category lived an average of average of 32.6 months, compared with 24.5 months for those in the lowest category. That being said, it would be hard for any reader to clearly understand from this story that the vitamin D levels among the better-surviving patients were still well within the normal range. Even those patients in the “higher” level category averaged just  27.5 nonograms/mililliter on a clinical spectrum that considers 25 to 80 optimal and safe.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Shares of Evofem Biosciences Inc jumped as much as 38 percent on Monday after its birth control gel showed effectiveness in a late-stage study, bringing the first hormone-free contraceptive close to approval.

Male condoms and oral pills dominate the $5.5 billion contraceptive market in the United States. However, oral pills cause side effects such as bleeding between periods, mood swings and nausea in women.

“These results pave the way for Amphora’s disruption of the contraception market as a novel, highly effective, non-hormonal and woman-controlled method that finally answers women’s long-awaited desire to avoid hormones,” Roth Capital Partners analyst Yasmeen Rahimi said.

Evofem’s Amphora gel works by regulating vaginal pH within the normal range of 3.5 to 4.5, creating a hostile environment for sperm and certain viral and bacterial pathogens that can cause sexually transmitted diseases.

An estimated 16.5 million women in the United States do not use any method of contraception, according to the company, on fear of side effects, leaving them highly susceptible to unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases.

Amphora was found to have an 86 percent efficacy rate in avoiding pregnancies and no serious side-effects were observed in the study, which evaluated about 1,400 healthy women belonging to the age group 18-35 years, Evofem said.

Condoms, the most common non-hormonal method of contraception, have an efficacy rate of 82 percent. The rate stands at about 91 percent for oral pills and intrauterine devices, according to brokerage Roth Capital Partners.

“Our research and current understanding of women suggests the time is now for there to be a new non-hormonal category in contraception,” Chief Executive Saundra Pelletier said on a conference call with analysts.

The company’s shares were up 22.6 percent at $4.28 in mid-morning trade after touching a high of $4.90.

Oppenheimer analyst Leland Gershell said he expects Amphora, the company’s lead product, to bring in sales of up to $415 million by 2032.

The company plans to resubmit the marketing application for Amphora in the second quarter next year and if approved, plans to launch the product in January 2020.

Evofem is also testing Amphora as a preventive treatment for chlamydia and gonorrhea - two of the world’s most common sexually transmitted infections.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story briefly describes a study in 1,400 young women, from which researchers calculated that the gel had an 86% efficacy rate — a common measure of birth control efficacy. However, it could have explained that better: In the contraceptive research world, this generally means that the failure rate is 14 pregnancies per 100 women in a year. But researchers only studied the gel for seven menstrual cycles.
The story compares this pregnancy rate to a couple of of other forms of birth control, which is good, but it’s worth pointing out that those failure rates have far more evidence behind them. The efficacy rate for this new product is based on just one industry study.
Also, the story makes a vague reference that the gel may kill “certain viral and bacterial pathogens that can cause sexually transmitted diseases.” Only at the end of the story do we find out that researchers have no data yet for this claim.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Characterized by the World Health Organization as a "neglected tropical disease," leprosy (also known as Hansen's disease) is one of the most ancient diseases known to humankind and is caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium leprae. Nearly a quarter of a million people worldwide have leprosy, which causes disfiguration of the skin and mucous membranes as well as progressive and incurable nerve damage. While drug therapy exists for leprosy, it must be taken for many months, has many side effects and often is given too late to reverse the permanent damage caused by the bacterial infection. A viable vaccine to prevent and/or treat leprosy is the next step in the effort to bring this disease to an end.

Scientists at IDRI, along with national and international collaborators including the National Hansen's Disease Program and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, with financial support from American Leprosy Missions, have developed a promising leprosy vaccine candidate designed to help treat leprosy and prevent exposed individuals from developing disease and the resulting disabilities. Based on data generated in preclinical studies, the vaccine candidate, called LepVax, has progressed to Phase I clinical testing in the United States, the first stage of safety testing in human volunteers. The clinical trial is focused on safety, as well as evaluating the immune response to the vaccine.

"While previous attempts have used vaccines primarily developed for other diseases, this is the first totally defined vaccine candidate developed specifically for leprosy, using the latest technologies and offering no less than those exposed to leprosy deserve," said Steven Reed, Ph.D., IDRI President, CEO & Founder. "The leprosy vaccine program at IDRI has benefited greatly from what we've learned in the development of tuberculosis vaccine candidates over the past two decades. Although the bacteria that cause tuberculosis and leprosy are related, leprosy vaccine development posed great challenges. This vaccine represents a unique accomplishment, requiring the most advanced technologies in molecular biology and immunology, and American Leprosy Missions has been there from the beginning." IDRI scientists have also developed two vaccine candidates for tuberculosis, both in clinical stages of development.

"We are thrilled that after 15 years and an investment of over $5.1 million, made possible by our faithful donors and partners, a leprosy-specific vaccine is beginning a Phase I clinical trial," says Bill Simmons, President and CEO of American Leprosy Missions. "We believe this may be the most exciting breakthrough in leprosy treatment since multi-drug therapy, the current treatment for leprosy, was launched in the 1980s. We look forward to this vaccine improving the health outcomes of people diagnosed with leprosy. And, it may be that this vaccine can lead to interruption of the transmission of leprosy all together. What a tremendous legacy this would leave for millions of people worldwide."

The vaccine was developed through significant efforts in screening and identifying M. leprae proteins that trigger an effective immune response. IDRI scientists then produced a fusion of four leprosy proteins, which is combined with IDRI's proprietary immune-stimulating adjuvant (GLA-SE). With recent developments in vaccine technology, IDRI scientists can now induce protective responses even after infection, meaning it could be possible to prevent disease development in people already infected with the leprosy bacterium.

"This generation of a vaccine to prevent and possibly treat leprosy is the result of years of research. The development has been complicated by the fact that the organism that causes leprosy cannot be grown in culture in the laboratory," Reed explained. "This is a unique example of a vaccine produced by totally synthetic methods."

Reed added that, without the foresight and support of American Leprosy Missions, there would be no leprosy vaccine candidate. "The vision and support of American Leprosy Missions has been tremendous as we've worked with them throughout the years, moving from our work in developing a leprosy diagnostic to our current focus on a successful leprosy vaccine," he said. "The progress we've had to date would not have been possible without American Leprosy Missions' financial support and guidance." Early results from the Phase I study should be available in 2018, and the partners are currently exploring mechanisms to advance the vaccine through later-phase clinical trials should results from the Phase I study (clinical trial NCT03302897) support further evaluation.

The vaccine candidate will serve as part of an overall strategy to end leprosy, which will require detection, prevention and treatment. IDRI had developed technology to enable a rapid, affordable, point-of-care diagnostic test, which was funded by NIAID (grant numbers 1R43AI066613-01A1 and 2R44AI066613-02.)

In addition to IDRI and American Leprosy Missions, a variety of partners are taking part in efforts to eliminate leprosy, including Novartis and the Novartis Foundation. Reed, along with scientists from a variety of scientific organizations recently published "Innovative tools and approaches to end the transmission of Mycobacterium leprae" in , outlining what is needed to achieve this goal. Together with scientific, government and NGO partners, the Novartis Foundation develops and implements strategies to help interrupt leprosy transmission, while Novartis donates the treatment for leprosy free of charge.

About IDRI: As a nonprofit global health organization, IDRI (Infectious Disease Research Institute) takes a comprehensive approach to combat infectious diseases, combining the high-quality science of a research organization with the product development capabilities of a biotech company to create new diagnostics, drugs and vaccines. Founded in 1993, IDRI has 125 employees headquartered in Seattle with nearly 100 partners/collaborators around the world. For more information, visit www.idri.org.

About American Leprosy Missions: American Leprosy Missions, based in Greenville, South Carolina, is the oldest and largest Christian organization in the United States dedicated to curing and caring for people affected by leprosy and related diseases. It funds projects and partners in countries across Africa, Asia and the Americas. During its more than 100-year history, American Leprosy Missions has provided holistic care to four million people around the world including medical treatment and training, Christian outreach, community development and vaccine research. For more information, visit www.leprosy.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does note that the study will be focused on safety and immune system response which earns a minimal Satisfactory rating for clearly establishing the purpose of a phase 1 study. 
There is currently no information on how effective this vaccine is in human subjects. There is also no mention of how this vaccine weakens the mycobacterial load in those already exposed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
IRVINE, Calif., May 10, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Proove® Biosciences, Inc. announces a new study validating the accuracy of precision medicine technology to predict prescription opioid abuse. This study, entitled "Evaluation of a Predictive Algorithm that Detects Aberrant Use of Opioids in an Addiction Treatment Centre", is published in the peer-reviewed Journal of Addiction Research and Therapy (Impact Factor: 1.4).

Distinguished Fellow American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM), Diplomate American Board of Addiction Medicine and Fellow American College of Preventive Medicine, J. Ramsay Farah, MD, MPH, MRO, CPE, led a research team that showed Proove Opioid Risk® identifies patients at risk for Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) with nearly 97% accuracy. This study evaluated 186 patients, comparing 94 Medicaid patients at an addiction treatment facility with confirmed cases of opioid abuse, and 92 healthy patients with no history of opioid use. The receiving operator characteristic (ROC) curve had an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.967. Furthermore, the sensitivity of the "moderate risk" cut-off score was 98%, while the specificity of the "high risk" score was 100%.

Dr. Farah, who serves as the Chief Medical Officer for the Phoenix Health Center in Hagerstown, prior NE Regional Medical Director for United Healthcare Clinical Services and Director ASAM explains, "Based on ASAM's definition of addiction, about half of substance abuse is due to genetic factors. This study shows that analyzing genetics with lifestyle and behavioral variables in a predictive algorithm can accurately stratify patient risk."

Dr. Ashley Brenton, Associate Director of R&D for Proove states, "This validation study builds on the peer-reviewed evidence supporting Proove Opioid Risk® and its components as an optimal model to predict opioid abuse risk."

Study author, Gregory A. Smith, M.D, former Director of Pain Management at Harbor UCLA, explains, "Having used this technology for 6 years, this data provides further evidence that clinicians can use Proove Opioid Risk® for ruling out patients unlikely to exhibit aberrant behaviors, and identifying high-risk patients for alternative therapies."

Proove Opioid Risk® is a proprietary precision medicine profile consisting of an algorithm which analyzes 17 variables (11 genetic and 6 lifestyle and behavioral factors) individually supported by over 30 peer-reviewed publications. Peer-reviewed clinical studies show that the Proove Opioid Risk® profile accurately identifies patient risk for opioid abuse.

About Proove® Biosciences: Proove® Biosciences is the leader in precision medicine for the condition that lies at the nexus of health – pain. Proove® delivers precision medicine solutions for the nation's most prevalent and expensive health condition by investing heavily in research that has won awards from leading medical societies and been published in peer-reviewed journals. Discovered by NIH-funded scientists, Proove® has translated into clinical practice the genetic variants and phenotypic factors contributing to pain sensitivity and chronic pain risk. Proove®'s medical advisory board is led by those NIH-funded researchers and the company has licensed some of its technology from leading academic centers, such as the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University of Utah, and other institutions. Positioned as The Healthcare Decision Company,™ Proove®'s patented technology platform combines genetic, clinical, environmental and lifestyle information to help clinicians better evaluate pain sensitivity, assess risk for opioid use disorder, predict therapeutic response to pain medications, and assess drug metabolism for the many medications used in chronic pain patients. For more information, please visit www.proove.com or call toll free 855-PROOVE-BIO (855-776-6832).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the algorithm correctly identified patients with a history of opioid misuse nearly 97 percent of the time, rarely mis-classifying the healthy controls as being at high or even moderate risk of opioid misuse. One question that remains unanswered in the release is whether the POR test would successfully distinguish people with opioid use disorder from individuals who have used opioids without becoming addicted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Testing cholesterol in toddlers and babies? Study says it could help

What if a blood test could reveal that your child is at high risk for early heart disease years in the future, giving you a chance to prevent it now? A big study in England did that — screening thousands of babies for inherited risk — and found it was twice as common as has been thought.

The study also revealed parents who had the condition but didn’t know it, and had passed it on to their children. Ninety percent of them started taking preventive medicines after finding out.

Researchers say the two-generation benefits may convince more parents to agree to cholesterol testing for their kids. An expert panel in the United States recommends this test for children between the ages of 9 and 11, but many aren’t tested now unless they are obese or have other heart risk factors such as diabetes or high blood pressure.

For every 1,000 people screened in the study, four children and four parents were identified as being at risk for early heart disease. That’s nearly twice as many as most studies in the past have suggested.

“We really need to pay attention to this,” said Dr. Elaine Urbina, director of preventive cardiology at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center and a member of the US. expert panel. “It’s reasonable to screen for something that’s common, dangerous and has a treatment that’s effective and safe.”

Dr. William Cooper, a pediatrics and preventive medicine professor at Vanderbilt University, called it “an innovative approach” that finds not just kids at risk but also parents while they’re still young enough to benefit from preventive treatment, such as cholesterol-lowering statin drugs.

Statins aren’t recommended until around age 10, but certain dietary supplements such as plant sterols and stanols could help younger kids, Urbina said.

“We’re not talking about putting all these kids on statins,” she said.

The study was led by Dr. David Wald at Queen Mary University of London. He and another author founded a company that makes a combination pill to prevent heart disease. The work was funded by the Medical Research Council, the British government’s health research agency. Results were published Wednesday by the New England Journal of Medicine.

Researchers were testing for familial hypercholesterolemia, a genetic disorder that, untreated, raises the risk of a heart attack by age 40 tenfold.

They did a heel-stick blood test on 10,059 children ages 1 to 2 during routine immunization visits to check for high cholesterol and 48 gene mutations that can cause the disorder. If a child was found with the disorder, parents were tested.

One in 270 children had the gene mutations; others were identified through cholesterol levels alone.

“That’s a pretty common genetic defect,” said Dr. Stephen Daniels, chairman of pediatrics at the University of Colorado School of Medicine and a member of the US expert panel.

But many parents balk at the idea of testing children for a disorder associated with middle age, experts say.

Karen Teber, a media relations specialist in Madison, Wis., was surprised when a doctor wanted to test her 12-year-old stepson. “My reluctance was really born out of lack of information,” she said. “I hadn’t heard of it before.”

The study did not address whether screening is cost-effective. In the US, cholesterol tests cost around $80 and usually are covered by health insurance though much lower prices often are negotiated. The study authors in England estimated that if cholesterol testing costs $7 and gene testing costs $300, it would cost $2,900 for every person identified as having the disorder.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantified the findings this way: “For every 1,000 people screened in the study, four children and four parents were identified as being at risk for early heart disease. That’s nearly twice as many as most studies in the past have suggested.” That lets us know how many more people might get identified if screening was widened, but readers should also be informed that it isn’t clear if this ultimately reduces cardiac deaths.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 25, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- After undergoing weight-loss surgery, women are significantly less prone to diabetes during pregnancy but twice as likely to deliver smaller-than-normal infants, a new study suggests.

Swedish scientists found that weight-loss (or "bariatric") surgery before pregnancy lowers the chances of certain complications for mothers and babies but raises the odds for others. They recommended any pregnancy after weight-loss surgery be considered high-risk and receive stricter monitoring.

"The number of women who are obese in early pregnancy has increased dramatically over the last decades," said study author Kari Johansson, a postdoctoral researcher and nutritionist at Karolinska Institute in Stockholm. "Consequently, there has been a dramatic rise in the number of women becoming pregnant after bariatric surgery," she added.

"The positive effects of bariatric surgery on health outcomes -- such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease -- are reasonably well-studied, but less is known about the effects on pregnancy and [post-delivery] outcomes," Johansson pointed out.

The study was published online Feb. 26 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

U.S. health officials say more than one-third of American adults are obese, with a body mass index (BMI, a height-weight calculation) of 30 or higher.

Nearly 179,000 obese people underwent weight-loss surgery in the United States in 2013, according to the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. While various techniques may be used, the surgery restricts the amount of food the stomach can hold and/or reduces the intestines' absorption of calories and nutrients from food.

Johansson and her colleagues used data from nationwide Swedish health registries to compare pregnancies between nearly 600 women who had given birth after bariatric surgery and more than 2,300 women who hadn't had the surgery but had the same BMI.

Only 2 percent of women who had weight-loss surgery developed gestational diabetes, compared to 7 percent of the other group, the researchers said. The surgical group was also much less likely to give birth to larger-than-normal babies.

However, the weight-loss surgery group was twice as likely to give birth to babies considered small for their gestational age, and their pregnancies were also of slightly shorter duration. Additionally, the surgical group experienced a slight bump in the rate of stillbirths, the study found.

The investigators didn't examine what might have caused smaller babies among bariatric surgery recipients, or higher stillbirths. But Johannson said those outcomes might be due to reduced nutrient absorption resulting from the surgery, with a fetus not receiving sufficient nutrition.

"It has been reported that gastric bypass [a form of bariatric surgery] increases the risk of protein, iron, vitamin B12, vitamin D and calcium deficiencies," she said. "Also, many women in our study may have been continuing to lose weight when they became pregnant. Continued weight loss may affect fetal nutrition and could influence growth."

Because obesity is linked to poor outcomes for expectant mothers and babies -- including birth defects, gestational diabetes, high blood pressure, premature birth and even childhood obesity -- efforts to lose weight before pregnancy are important, said Dr. Aaron Caughey, chair of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Oregon Health and Science University's School of Medicine.

But Caughey, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new research, said women considering weight-loss surgery should make the decision based on the long-term health benefits of the procedure -- not on potential pregnancy-related benefits.

"I don't think pregnancy should be the thing that tips the scale," said Caughey. "I don't think the evidence from this study is enough to say now that you should absolutely get this surgery so you have a better pregnancy outcome."

Caughey agreed with the researchers that any pregnancy occurring after weight-loss surgery merits a higher level of monitoring and should be considered high-risk.

He also noted that some experts advise women who undergo weight-loss surgery before pregnancy to delay conceiving until 12 to 24 months after the procedure, the period when the most rapid weight loss occurs.

"I think a conversation with someone who takes care of complicated pregnancies, a maternal-fetal medicine doctor, is a good idea," Caughey said.

The American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery offers more about weight-loss surgery.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article generally does a good job of describing the benefits. In one instance, it mentions the absolute difference in outcomes between the intervention and control group for gestational diabetes. (“Only 2 percent of women who had weight-loss surgery developed gestational diabetes, compared to 7 percent of the other group, the researchers said.”). That’s very useful. But we’re concerned that the story never explains why readers should be worried about a “larger than normal” baby. It sounds, at most, mildly worrisome, and some readers might even hope for a baby that’s “larger than normal.” But a baby that’s significantly larger than normal can increase risks for a variety of delivery complications such as difficult labor and need for cesarean delivery, vaginal tearing, and bleeding after delivery. Although we wish the story had explained this, we think its overall treatment of benefits merits a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In 1992, Harvard neuroscientist Richard Davidson embarked on an unusual research project to study the brains of Buddhist monks who spent thousands of hours meditating. He found that not only did the practice activate different parts of the brain, it also seemed to impact the body in ways that matter for health.

That pivotal study has led to a number of research projects in recent years that look at what calming the brain does for specific medical conditions and diseases.

The results of one of those studies are out Tuesday in JAMA. The study looks at adults with chronic low back pain, one of the leading cause of disabilities in the United States and one reason why more and more people are addicted to painkillers.

Led by Daniel C. Cherkin of Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, the experiment involved randomly assigning 342 adults with the condition to meditate, talk with a psychologist or continue with their normal techniques for addressing the pain, such as medication. The first group engaged in yoga and mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), which focuses on being aware of and accepting physical discomfort. The second group participated in cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) to change pain-related thoughts and behaviors during eight weekly two-hour group sessions.

The participants in the small study ranged in age from 20 to 70 and had suffered from back pain for an average of 7.3 years.

The results for both techniques were very positive. At 26 weeks, 61 percent of those in the meditation group reported improvement in the activities they could do, compared with 58 percent in the CBT group and 44 percent of those who stuck to their usual routines. The results for pain improvement were similar, with 55 percent in the meditation group reporting improvement compared with 45 percent in the CBT group and 27 percent in the usual-care group. The numbers were similar when rechecked at 52 weeks.

"These findings suggest that MBSR may be an effective treatment option for patients with chronic low back pain," the authors wrote.

The study did caution that 30 of the 103, or about one-third, of the participants in the meditation group reported an "adverse event," most often an increase in pain due to yoga.

In an editorial, Madhav Goyal and Jennifer A. Haythornthwaite of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine said that the mechanisms for why meditation might work on back pain is still a mystery but that this question is merely "academic" for many clinicians and their patients who need immediate relief.

The two wrote that despite this and other unknowns, the study provides "a compelling argument for ensuring that an evidence-based health care system should provide access to affordable mind-body therapies."

MIT scientists find evidence that Alzheimer’s ‘lost memories’ may one day be recoverable

’Siri, I want to commit suicide’ and other statements likely to yield unhelpful responses from your phone

Roots of Napoleon complex may be justified: Study finds short men get short of end stick in life.



Kids with August birthdays are more likely to get an ADHD diagnosis. Here’s why.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story tells readers what percentage of study participants who got MBSR treatment reported improvement in pain, as well as what percentage of MBSR participants “reported improvement in the activities they could do.”
It also offered the same numbers for participants who received CBT and for the control group, which received typical medical care for this condition. These details deserve a Satisfactory rating. But:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 17, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- For patients whose high blood pressure cannot be controlled despite taking several medications, a short burst of radio waves at the nerves around the kidneys may do the trick, a small new study says.

The treatment was effective for at least six months. The findings could be a significant step in treating people with resistant hypertension, which is a major risk factor for heart attack and stroke, the researchers said.

The technique -- called catheter-based renal denervation -- is minimally invasive. In it, doctors use a catheter inserted through the artery in the groin, which sends radio waves burning away nerve tissue around the arteries that feed the kidneys.

The procedure destroys nerves that help control and filter salt in the body and may be overactive in patients with high blood pressure. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not yet approved its use.

The study was funded by medical device maker Medtronic. The findings were published Dec. 17 in the journal Circulation.

"This is a very promising approach for managing medication-resistant hypertension," said Dr. Gregg Fonarow, a spokesman for the American Heart Association and professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles.

"High blood pressure is a major contributor to heart attack, stroke, heart failure, and [kidney] failure," said Fonarow, who was not involved in the study. "Despite the availability of a number of effective medications, many patients with hypertension have not achieved adequate control of their blood pressure. There is thus an important, but currently unmet, need for additional therapies to effectively control hypertension."

For the study, an international team lead by Dr. Murray Esler, professor and senior director of the Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute in Melbourne, Australia, assigned 35 patients to renal denervation and compared them to 47 patients who had already had the procedure.

All the patients suffered from drug-resistant hypertension. Their systolic blood pressure -- the top number in a blood-pressure reading -- remained dangerously high at 160 millimeters of mercury (mmHg) or above despite having taking three or more drugs to control blood pressure, the researchers noted.

Esler's team found that more than 83 percent of those who had denervation treatment before had a drop in systolic blood pressure of at least 10 mmHg after six months and almost 79 percent maintained the reduction at 12 months.

The 35 patients in this phase of the study had similar results to the initial group. Almost 63 percent of these patients saw a reduction in systolic blood pressure of 10 mmHg or more six months after treatment.

Fonarow noted: "In all, reductions in systolic blood-pressure levels on the order of 25 to 30 mmHg were achieved and maintained without any loss in efficacy."

The procedure is safe as well as effective, the study authors said.

"Participants' kidneys were not damaged or functionally impaired," Esler said in a journal news release. "We also found no ill effects on long-term health from the procedure."

Whether this technique might be useful in treating less severe high blood pressure hasn't yet been tested. If it is applicable, it could mean patients need not take blood-pressure drugs, Esler suggested.

Another expert, however, said that scenario is likely overoptimistic.

"Hypertension is a hard disease to treat because there are so many things that go into getting blood pressure under control," said Dr. Varinder Singh, chairman of cardiology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "There's lifestyle and diet, there is getting to the right doses of medications, there are adherence issues. So anything that will help patients get their goals is exciting."

Even with this technique, people will most likely still have to take blood-pressure medications, Singh said. "You may have to take less medication and you may have to take lower doses of medication, but we all expect that patients will still have to take some medication," he said.

Singh also noted that although this procedure is used in other countries it is not yet approved in the United States.

Fonarow added: "While this study demonstrates that renal denervation provides sustained reduction of blood pressure up to one year and appears safe, additional studies with longer-term follow-up are needed."

According to the American Heart Association, more than 78 million adults in the United States have high blood pressure, which is blood pressure higher than 140/90 mmHg.

Among these adults, about 9 percent have resistant hypertension, which means that even taking three or more medications to control their blood pressure, it remains higher than 140/90 mmHg.

To learn more about hypertension, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately reports what the researchers reported about decline in systolic blood pressure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EAST HANOVER, N.J., June 22, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- A new analysis published today in JAMA Cardiology has found that timely and broad adoption of Entresto® (sacubitril/valsartan) by all eligible heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) could prevent or postpone more than 28,000 deaths each year in the US alone.1 This analysis, based on an application of the results of PARADIGM-HF to published heart failure statistics, is the first to quantify the possible impact of Entresto's potential benefit in reducing death.1

Heart failure is a chronic condition that contributes to more than 300,000 deaths in the US every year.4 About half of people with heart failure have HFrEF.5 This new analysis estimates that as many as 28,484 deaths in HFrEF patients annually could be prevented or postponed with optimal use of Entresto (with sensitivity analyses demonstrating a range of 18,230 to 41,017).1

Further, the study suggests that delaying routine use of Entresto in clinical practice could have a substantial negative effect on patients, given the expected risk-benefit profile, as it could result in failure to prevent tens of thousands of deaths.1 These findings demonstrate the significant survival benefits Entresto could offer to those living with HFrEF, if patients in the group defined by the authors were given access to treatment.1 The study authors stated that nearly 84% of HFrEF patients – 2.2 million people – may be candidates for treatment with Entresto.1

Heart failure is a life-threatening condition and despite available medicines, about half of patients diagnosed with heart failure die within 5 years.4,6,7 According to the study authors, these findings may substantially impact the national health of the HFrEF population, offering significant clinical benefit in preventing or postponing death when applied in clinical practice.1

"This expert analysis adds to the already compelling case for the treatment of heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction with Entresto," said Fabrice Chouraqui, president of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. "In addition to survival benefits, the study also recognizes other treatment effects of Entresto, particularly in reducing HF hospitalizations.1 Coupled with the recent Class I recommendation, the strongest endorsement, in the focused update to the US HF Guideline,2 these findings underscore the potential of Entresto as a standard therapy for chronic HFrEF patients."

In a separate analysis published in the same issue of JAMA Cardiology, researchers used data from the PARADIGM-HF trial to model the health consequences and cost-effectiveness of Entresto over a 30-year time period.3 They compared Entresto to the ACE-inhibitor enalapril and found Entresto was associated with more than a year longer average survival time, and that it was cost-effective compared to enalapril when these medications were used with other standard of care therapies.3 For every 1,000 patients treated with Entresto vs. enalapril, potentially 59.7 HF hospital admissions could be averted per each year alive in the model.3 In addition, Entresto increased life expectancy at an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio consistent with other high-value widely accepted cardiovascular interventions such as implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) and cholesterol-lowering statins before they became generic.3

About Heart Failure

Heart failure is a debilitating and life-threatening condition, which impacts nearly 6 million Americans and is the leading cause of hospitalization among Americans over the age of 65.4,8 About half of people with heart failure have heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF).5 Reduced ejection fraction means the heart does not contract with enough force, so less blood is pumped out.9 Heart failure presents a major and growing health-economic burden that currently exceeds $30 billion in the United States, which accounts for both direct and indirect costs.10

About Entresto

Entresto is a twice-a-day medicine that reduces the strain on the failing heart. It does this by enhancing the protective neurohormonal systems (Natriuretic Peptide system) while simultaneously inhibiting the harmful effects of the overactive renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).11 Other heart failure medicines only block the harmful effects of the overactive RAAS.12 Entresto contains the neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril, and the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) valsartan.11

Entresto is indicated in the US to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and hospitalization for heart failure in patients with chronic heart failure (NYHA Class II-IV) and reduced ejection fraction.11 Entresto is usually administered in conjunction with other heart failure therapies, in place of an Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB).11 Entresto film-coated tablets are available in three dosage strengths: 24/26 mg, 49/51 mg, and 97/103 mg (sacubitril/valsartan).11 These doses are referred to as 50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg in the clinical trial literature including the New England Journal of Medicine publication of the results of PARADIGM-HF. The target treatment dose of Entresto is 97/103 mg twice daily.11

Novartis is committed to providing patients with affordable access and resources through Entresto Central. For more information, please call 1-888-ENTRESTO or visit www.entresto.com.

IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION 

Entresto can harm or cause death to an unborn baby. Patients should talk to their doctor about other ways to treat heart failure if they plan to become pregnant. If a patient gets pregnant while taking Entresto, she should tell her doctor right away.

Patients are not to take Entresto if they are allergic to sacubitril or valsartan or any of the ingredients in Entresto; have had an allergic reaction including swelling of the face, lips, tongue, throat or trouble breathing while taking a type of medicine called angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB); or take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto for at least 36 hours before or after they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients should talk with their doctor or pharmacist before taking Entresto if they are not sure if they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto if they have diabetes and take a medicine that contains aliskiren.

Before they take Entresto, patients should tell their doctor about all of their medical conditions, including if they have kidney or liver problems; are pregnant or plan to become pregnant; are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Patients should either take Entresto or breastfeed. They should not do both.

Patients should tell their doctor about all the medicines they take, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. They should especially tell their doctor if they take potassium supplements or a salt substitute; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); lithium; or other medicines for high blood pressure or heart problems such as an ACE inhibitor, ARB, or aliskiren.

Entresto may cause serious side effects including serious allergic reactions causing swelling of the face, lips, tongue, and throat (angioedema) that may cause trouble breathing and death. Patients are to get emergency medical help right away if they have symptoms of angioedema or trouble breathing. Patients are not to take Entresto again if they have had angioedema while taking Entresto. People who are black or who have had angioedema may have a higher risk of having angioedema if they take Entresto. Entresto may cause low blood pressure (hypotension). Patients are to call their doctor if they become dizzy or lightheaded, or they develop extreme fatigue. Entresto may cause kidney problems or an increased amount of potassium in the blood.

The most common side effects were low blood pressure, high potassium, cough, dizziness, and kidney problems.

Please see full Prescribing Information, including Boxed WARNING available at http://www.pharma.us.novartis.com/product/pi/pdf/entresto.pdf.

Patients are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch, or call 1-800-FDA-1088.

Disclaimer 

The foregoing release contains forward-looking statements that can be identified by words such as "could," "potential," "call for," "accelerate," "possible," "suggests," "expected," "may," "compelling," "endorsement," "potentially," "growing," "committed," or similar terms, or by express or implied discussions regarding potential new indications or labeling for Entresto, or regarding potential future revenues from Entresto. You should not place undue reliance on these statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of management regarding future events, and are subject to significant known and unknown risks and uncertainties. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. There can be no guarantee that Entresto will be submitted or approved for any additional indications or labeling in any market, or at any particular time. Nor can there be any guarantee that Entresto will be commercially successful in the future. In particular, management's expectations regarding Entresto could be affected by, among other things, the uncertainties inherent in research and development, including unexpected clinical trial results and additional analysis of existing clinical data; unexpected regulatory actions or delays or government regulation generally; the company's ability to obtain or maintain proprietary intellectual property protection; general economic and industry conditions; global trends toward health care cost containment, including ongoing pricing pressures; unexpected safety, quality or manufacturing issues, and other risks and factors referred to in Novartis AG's current Form 20-F on file with the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Novartis is providing the information in this press release as of this date and does not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statements contained in this press release as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.

About Novartis

Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation researches, develops, manufactures and markets innovative medicines aimed at improving patients' lives. We offer a broad range of medicines for cancer, cardiovascular disease, endocrine disease, inflammatory disease, infectious disease, neurological disease, organ transplantation, respiratory disease, eye and ear care and skin conditions. The company's mission is to improve people's lives by pioneering novel healthcare solutions.

Located in East Hanover, NJ Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation is an affiliate of Novartis AG, which provides innovative healthcare solutions that address the evolving needs of patients and societies. Headquartered in Basel, Switzerland, Novartis offers a diversified portfolio to best meet these needs: innovative medicines, eye care and cost-saving generic pharmaceuticals. Novartis is the only global company with leading positions in these areas. In 2015, the Group achieved net sales of USD 49.4 billion, while R&D throughout the Group amounted to approximately USD 8.9 billion (USD 8.7 billion excluding impairment and amortization charges). Novartis Group companies employ approximately 118,000 full-time-equivalent associates. Novartis products are available in more than 180 countries around the world. For more information, please visit http://www.novartis.com

Novartis is on Twitter. Sign up to follow @Novartis at http://twitter.com/novartis.
• Fonarow GC, Hernandez AF, Solomon SD, et al. Potential Mortality Reduction with Optimal Implementation of Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor Therapy in Heart Failure. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-4. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1724
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey Jr DE, Colvin MM, Drazner, MH, Filippatos G, Fonarow GC, Givertz MM, Hollenberg SM, Lindenfeld J, Masoudi FA, McBride, PE, Peterson PN, Stevenson LW, Westlake C, 2016 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update on New Pharmacological Therapy for Heart Failure: An Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure, Journal of the American College of Cardiology (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.05.011.
• Gaziano TA, Fonarow GC, et al. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Sacubitril/Valsartan versus Enalapril in Heart Failure Patients with Reduced Ejection Fraction in . JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-7. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1747
• Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2016 Update: A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;133;e38-e360. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000350.
• Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:251–259.
• Roger VL, Weston SA, Redfield MM, et al. Trends in heart failure incidence and survival community-based population. JAMA. 2004;292:344-350
• Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG, et al. Long term trends in the incidence and survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(18):1397-1422.
• Weir LM, Pfuntner A, Maeda J, et al. HCUP facts and figures: statistics on hospital-based care in , 2009. : Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2011.
• Heidenreich PA, Albert NM, , et al. Forecasting the impact of heart failure in : a policy statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:606-619.
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240-e327.

For questions about the site or required registration, please contact: journalisthelp@thenewsmarket.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release makes several statements about benefits to an entire population, not necessarily the benefits to an individual patient. The release provides a useful number-needed-to-treat explanation.
“For every 1,000 patients treated with Entresto vs. enalapril, potentially 59.7 HF hospital admissions could be averted per each year alive in the model.3 In addition, Entresto increased life expectancy at an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio consistent with other high-value widely accepted cardiovascular interventions such as implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) and cholesterol-lowering statins before they became generic.3″
One weakness in describing the benefits was the omission in the release (but not in the published study) of actual figures or percentages to back up the cost-effectiveness claim.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Young people suffering from treatment-resistant depression (TRD) showed a significant reduction of their symptoms after being administered ketamine injections, according to a study published in the Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology.

Researchers from the University of Minnesota (UM) and the nonprofit Mayo Clinic found that ketamine caused an average decrease of 42 percent on the Children’s Depression Rating Scale (CDRS)—the most widely used rating scale in research trials for assessing the severity of depression and change in depressive symptoms among adolescents.

Ketamine is perhaps best known for being a popular recreational drug and a useful medical anesthetic, but a growing body of research is indicating that the compound could be an effective treatment for depression. Several recent studies have shown that even a single dose in adults can lead to rapid reductions in depressive symptoms. However, relatively little research has been conducted into ketamine's antidepressant effects in adolescents.

"Adolescence is a very important time for studying depression, first because depression often starts during these years, and second because it is an important time for brain development," Kathryn Cullen, from the Department of Psychiatry at UM, told Newsweek.

"When adolescent depression persists without successful treatment, it can interfere with achieving important developmental milestones. Finding the right treatment is critical to allow the restoration of healthy brain development and prevent negative outcomes like chronic depression, disability and suicide."

Unfortunately, about 40 percent of adolescents do not respond to their first intervention and only half of nonresponders respond to the second treatment, according to the researchers.

"Standard antidepressant treatments do not work for everyone and take weeks to months to take effect, a time period when patients are at risk for continued suffering and suicide attempts," Cullen said. "The field is in need of new treatment options. Ketamine has a very different mechanism of action than standard treatments."

The latest study involved 13 young people ages 12 to 18 who had failed two previous trials of antidepressants. During a two-week period, the researchers gave them six ketamine infusions.

They found that the treatment was well tolerated, with the participants showing an average decrease in CDRS scores of 42.5 percent. Five of the participants met the criteria for clinical response and remission. Of these, three were still in remission after six weeks, while the remaining two relapsed within two weeks.

According to the scientists, the results demonstrate the potential role for ketamine in treating adolescents with TRD. However, they note that the study was limited by its small sample size, so future research will be needed to confirm these results.

"The purpose of our study was to investigate the effects of ketamine for TRD in younger patients for whom this indication for ketamine administration is not well studied," Mark Roback, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Minnesota, told Newsweek.

"I think our results show promise for this population, however this study is just a beginning. The study serves to point out the need for further, rigorous, study designed to answer the many questions that remain about ketamine for TRD, such as optimal dosing and route of administration, dosing interval and treatment length, and long-term effects—just to name a few."

James Stone, a clinical senior lecturer from the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience at King's College London, who was not involved in the study, told Newsweek that there is "a lot of potential for the use of ketamine as a second or third line antidepressant where other treatments have failed."

"Although ketamine is potentially a huge breakthrough in the treatment of depression, we still don’t know about the long-term safety, or about how to keep people well from depression without requiring regular ketamine dosing," Stone added. "Further studies are needed to address these questions."

This article has been updated to include additional comment from Kathryn Cullen.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did the bare minimum, pointing to “an average decrease of 42 percent” in criteria contained in a depression assessment tool. It also stated that five of the 13 participants “met the criteria for response and remission” and three of those were still in remission after six weeks, with the remaining two relapsed within two weeks.
The story would have served readers better by emphasizing those figures higher up and spelling out what “response and remission” mean in terms of a patient’s symptoms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
HOUSTON - For patients with advanced, inoperable stage 3 lung cancer, concurrent chemotherapy and the specialized radiation treatment, proton therapy, offers improved survival compared to historical data for standard of care, according to a new study from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

The research, published in JAMA Oncology, reported an overall survival (OS) of 26.5 months. In contrast, the historical OS rate with standard of care concurrent chemotherapy and traditional radiation was 16 months at the time when the study was designed.

The findings are the final results of the single institution, Phase II study and represent the longest follow-up to date of stage 3 lung cancer patients who have received proton therapy, said Joe Y. Chang, M.D., professor, Radiation Oncology and the study's corresponding author.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the U.S. According to the American Cancer Society, more than 222,500 people will be diagnosed and 155,870 will die from the disease in 2017, with the majority of patients still being diagnosed when the disease is in an advanced stage.

"Advanced lung cancer patients with inoperable disease traditionally have been treated with concurrent chemotherapy and conventional photon radiation therapy. However, the therapy can be very difficult for patients due to associated toxicities and because many patients are also dealing with comorbidities," explained Chang.

Proton therapy is an advanced type of radiation treatment that uses a beam of protons to deliver radiation directly to the tumor, destroying cancer cells while sparing healthy tissues. Protons enter the body with a low radiation dose and stop at the tumor, matching its shape and volume or depth. They deposit the bulk of their cancer-fighting energy right at the tumor, thereby reducing the dose to cardiopulmonary structures, which impacts the toxicity, functional status, quality of life and even survival for patients, explained Chang.

"With our study, we hypothesized that proton therapy would offer a survival benefit to patients and reduce treatment-associated toxicities, which can be very serious," he said.

The study opened at MD Anderson in 2006; in this research, Chang and his colleague report on the study's five-year results.

For the prospective Phase II trial, 64 patients with inoperable, Stage III non-small-cell lung cancer were enrolled. The study's primary endpoint was OS. The researchers hypothesized that the median OS would increase from historical data of 16 months on standard therapy to 24 months. Secondary endpoints included distant metastasis and local and regional recurrence rates. Toxic effects of treatment in both the acute and late settings also were analyzed.

Median follow up was 27.3 months for all patients, and 79.6 months for alive patients. At five years, the median OS was 26.5 months, and the corresponding five-year OS was 29 percent. Median progression-free survival was 12.9 months, with a five-year progression-free survival of 22 percent.

In sum, 39 patients experienced a relapse, with distant sites representing 62 percent of all recurrences. Local and regional recurrence rates were low, 16 percent and 14 percent, respectively.

Among the acute and late toxic effects diagnosed in patients were: esophagitis, pneumonitis and cardiac arrhythmia. Of note, said Chang, no patients developed the most severe, or grade five, toxicities, as seen in patients who receive standard of care.

Chang noted his study is not without limitations. Of greatest significance: the study was designed more than a decade ago. While the study's survival, recurrence rates and toxic effects are still favorable when compared to rates associated with the most advanced traditional photon radiation therapy, intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), technology to diagnose and stage the disease, as well all treatment modalities have significantly improved.

"When the study opened, PET imaging had just been approved for lung cancer staging. The image quality was poor and didn't include a CT component in most facilities across the country," said Chang. "Obviously, the technology has improved dramatically over the last decade and has made a significant impact on diagnosis and staging. Also, delivery of both the conventional intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and proton therapy (IMPT), have improved, thereby reducing side effects for both treatment modalities."

For example, MD Anderson proton therapy patients with advanced lung cancer now can receive IMPT. The technique uses an intricate network of magnets to aim a narrow proton beam at a tumor and "paint" the radiation dose onto it layer by layer. Healthy tissue surrounding the tumor is spared, and side effects are even more reduced than earlier proton delivery, said Chang.

Chang also noted the advancements in cancer biology and immunotherapy and that both are important areas of research focus in combination with proton therapy.

In addition to Chang, other authors on the all-MD Anderson study include: Stephen Hahn, M.D., Ritsuko Komaki, M.D., Pamela K. Allen, Ph.D., Zhongxing Liao, M.D., Steven H. Lin, M.D., Ph.D., Daniel Gomez, M.D., James Welsh, M.D., Melenda Jeter M.D., James Cox, M.D., Michael O'Reilly, M.D., Ming Li, M.D. and Wencheng Zhang, M.D., all of Radiation Oncology; John V. Heymach, M.D., Ph.D. and Charles Lu, M.D., both of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology; Ronald X. Zhu, Ph.D., Xiaodong Zhang, Ph.D., Heng Li, Ph.D., Radhe Mohan, Ph.D., all of Radiation Physics; and Ara A. Vaporciyan, M.D., Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. Vivek Verma, M.D., now at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, also contributed to the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release spells out the different measurements in both relative and absolute terms about the benefits of the therapy, but it is full of so much medical jargon that journalists and others would have a hard time following. The clearest statement is that they found “an overall survival (OS) of 26.5 months. In contrast, the historical OS rate with standard of care concurrent chemotherapy and traditional radiation was 16 months at the time when the study was designed.” Contrast that with, “In sum, 39 patients experienced a relapse, with distant sites representing 62 percent of all recurrences.” What is a distant site? Were these people living on islands? What they mean is that in 62 percent of the cases where cancer came back, it was where the cancer had spread to other parts of the body. But it’s unclear what this means in relation to the overall purpose of the study.  The primary outcome reported is overall survival: 29 percent were alive at 5 years, meaning  71 percent had died. As discussed elsewhere, the key issue is, compared to what?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists are finding more clues to help determine whether people with mild dementia symptoms are at risk for Alzheimer's.

A new study suggests that biomarkers found in cerebrospinal fluid (fluid that surrounds the spinal cord and brain and acts as a protective cushion) could predict who would develop Alzheimer's disease 90% of the time among patients with mild cognitive impairment, a condition characterized by measurable memory problems.

Researchers report these findings in the journal Archives of General Psychiatry.

This is the longest clinical follow-up ever of patients who begin with mild cognitive impairment, researchers reported. Patients were tracked from four to 12 years, with a median of 9.2 years. The research builds on a 2006 Lancet Neurology study that followed patients for a median of 5.2 years, beginning with a group of 137 volunteers with mild cognitive impairment.The new study is important because of the long follow-up period, according to Adam Brickman, assistant professor of neuropsychology at Columbia University School of Medicine, who was not involved in the research.

Knowing which patient with mild cognitive impairment patients may go on to develop Alzheimer's is vital information for researchers, who are looking for treatments for the fatal brain disease. The current thinking is that interventions will be most effective when given to a patient as early as possible, Brickman said. Clinical trials can better focus their efforts if patients are known to be in the early stages of Alzheimer's. Generally, about 30% to 60% of patients with mild cognitive impairment show evidence of underlying symptoms of Alzheimer's, so not everyone with this condition is a good candidate for an Alzheimer's trial.

Researchers focused on two biomarkers previously thought to be involved in Alzheimer's disease: a kind of protein called beta-amyloid, and another protein type called tau. Experts believe a decrease in beta-amyloid in the fluid of the spinal cord is associated with a toxic buildup of that protein in the brain, which causes the formation of plaques linked to Alzheimer's disease. Tau has been tied to neurofibrillary tangles in the brain; researchers find that an increase in tau in cerebrospinal fluid is associated with Alzheimer's also.

The results from the study suggest that beta-amyloid is a much earlier predictor of Alzheimer's disease than tau, which supports the hypothesis that beta-amyloid accumulation in the brain occurs first in the course of the disease.

Some of the participants, who were originally found to be stable with mild cognitive impairment after about five years, went on to develop Alzheimer's disease during the longer follow-up. That suggests that a five-year follow-up period is not long enough to determine how well biomarkers can predict which patients will develop Alzheimer's disease, researchers say.

The association between biomarkers in the fluid and Alzheimer's was also described in studies in December 2009 and August 2010, building on the idea that a spinal tap could be useful in predicting Alzheimer's.

When these sorts of studies get published, Brickman and other doctors get phone calls from aging adults wondering whether they should be getting spinal taps to assess their risk. But it's too early to use this as a diagnostic tool in clinical settings, says Brickman. Down the road, the "fantasy" is that asymptomatic people will be able to get a biomarker test to determine whether they'll one day get Alzheimer's, but that's not possible right now, he adds.

"What I tell people is: If they’re worried about their thinking abilities, that they should make an appointment with a neuropsychology or a neurologist to get an evaluation," Brinkman says. "The way we diagnose Alzheimer’s disease is by evaluating the behavior and the risk factor medical profile, not by looking at biological markers at this point."

As scientists gain more insight into predicting Alzheimer's, aging adults may struggle with the question of whether they want to know their risk, especially since there's still no cure. Some people want to enroll in clinical trials as soon as they start showing symptoms; others would rather be ignorant of their status since there is no cure. In looking for treatments, however, researchers depend on people's willingness to contribute to science.

The Alzheimer's Association runs a system called TrialMatch. Check it out if you're interested in finding a trial for yourself or someone you care about.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story a satisfactory grade for providing context for the projected benefits of the test:
“A new study suggests that biomarkers found in cerebrospinal fluid (fluid that surrounds the spinal cord and brain and acts as a protective cushion) could predict who would develop Alzheimer’s disease 90% of the time among patients with mild cognitive impairment, a condition characterized by measurable memory problems.
…
Knowing which patient with mild cognitive impairment patients may go on to develop Alzheimer’s is vital information for researchers, who are looking for treatments for the fatal brain disease.  The current thinking is that interventions will be most effective when given to a patient as early as possible.”
But the story is quick to note that it’s too early to use this as a diagnostic tool in clinical settings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today permitted marketing of the first blood test to evaluate mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), commonly referred to as concussion, in adults. The FDA reviewed and authorized for marketing the Banyan Brain Trauma Indicator in fewer than 6 months as part of its Breakthrough Devices Program.

Most patients with a suspected head injury are examined using a neurological scale, called the 15-point Glasgow Coma Scale, followed by a computed tomography or CT scan of the head to detect brain tissue damage, or intracranial lesions, that may require treatment; however, a majority of patients evaluated for mTBI/concussion do not have detectable intracranial lesions after having a CT scan. Availability of a blood test for concussion will help health care professionals determine the need for a CT scan in patients suspected of having mTBI and help prevent unnecessary neuroimaging and associated radiation exposure to patients.

“Helping to deliver innovative testing technologies that minimize health impacts to patients while still providing accurate and reliable results to inform appropriate evaluation and treatment is an FDA priority. Today’s action supports the FDA’s Initiative to Reduce Unnecessary Radiation Exposure from Medical Imaging—an effort to ensure that each patient is getting the right imaging exam, at the right time, with the right radiation dose,” said FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb, M.D. “A blood-testing option for the evaluation of mTBI/concussion not only provides health care professionals with a new tool, but also sets the stage for a more modernized standard of care for testing of suspected cases. In addition, availability of a blood test for mTBI/concussion will likely reduce the CT scans performed on patients with concussion each year, potentially saving our health care system the cost of often unnecessary neuroimaging tests.”

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 2013 there were approximately 2.8 million TBI-related emergency department visits, hospitalizations and deaths in the U.S. Of these cases, TBI contributed to the deaths of nearly 50,000 people. TBI is caused by a bump, blow or jolt to the head or a penetrating head injury that disrupts the brain’s normal functioning. Its severity may range from mild to severe, with 75 percent of TBIs that occur each year being assessed as mTBIs or concussions. A majority of patients with concussion symptoms have a negative CT scan. Potential effects of TBI can include impaired thinking or memory, movement, sensation or emotional functioning.

“A blood test to aid in concussion evaluation is an important tool for the American public and for our Service Members abroad who need access to quick and accurate tests,” said Jeffrey Shuren, M.D., director of the FDA’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health. “The FDA’s review team worked closely with the test developer and the U.S. Department of Defense to expedite a blood test for the evaluation of mTBI that can be used both in the continental U.S. as well as foreign U.S. laboratories that service the American military.”

The Brain Trauma Indicator works by measuring levels of proteins, known as UCH-L1 and GFAP, that are released from the brain into blood and measured within 12 hours of head injury. Levels of these blood proteins after mTBI/concussion can help predict which patients may have intracranial lesions visible by CT scan and which won’t. Being able to predict if patients have a low probability of intracranial lesions can help health care professionals in their management of patients and the decision to perform a CT scan. Test results can be available within 3 to 4 hours.

The FDA evaluated data from a multi-center, prospective clinical study of 1,947 individual blood samples from adults with suspected mTBI/concussion and reviewed the product’s performance by comparing mTBI/concussion blood tests results with CT scan results. The Brain Trauma Indicator was able to predict the presence of intracranial lesions on a CT scan 97.5 percent of the time and those who did not have intracranial lesions on a CT scan 99.6 percent of the time. These findings indicate that the test can reliably predict the absence of intracranial lesions and that health care professionals can incorporate this tool into the standard of care for patients to rule out the need for a CT scan in at least one-third of patients who are suspected of having mTBI.

The Brain Trauma Indicator was reviewed under the FDA’s De Novo premarket review pathway, a regulatory pathway for some low- to moderate-risk devices that are novel and for which there is no prior legally marketed device.

The FDA is permitting marketing of the Brain Trauma Indicator to Banyan Biomarkers, Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release refers to a multi-center prospective study of 1,947 blood samples, but does not tell us the citation for publication of that study. The blood sample tests were able to “predict the presence of intracranial lesions on a CT scan 97.5 percent of the time and those who did not have intracranial lesions on a CT scan 99.6 percent of the time. These findings indicate that the test can reliably predict the absence of intracranial lesions.”
The release claims that the blood testing will rule out the need for a CT scan in “at least one-third of patients who are suspected of having mTBI.” This is the main purported benefit, along with reducing costs.
The Brain Trauma Indicator was able to predict the presence of intracranial lesions on a CT scan 97.5% of the time and those who did not have intracranial lesions on a CT scan 99.6% of the time. These findings suggest that the test can reliably predict the absence of intracranial lesions and that health care professionals can incorporate this tool into the standard of care for patients to rule out the need for a CT scan in at least one-third of patients who are suspected of having mTBI.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By the time 8-year-old Ava Christianson got to the National Institutes of Health this summer, she had lost several grueling rounds to leukemia and was bracing for the next one.

Intensive chemotherapy, which cures up to 90 percent of children with the most common type of leukemia, hadn’t kept her cancer from coming back. Neither had a painful bone-marrow transplant nor an experimental treatment. Her careworn father cried in the shower to hide his anguish. Her mother couldn’t help but wonder, “Why is this happening to our child?”

But Ava was fortunate in one respect. Discoveries in the burgeoning field of immunotherapy are offering lifelines to desperate patients who previously had none. “Five years ago,” said her mother, Bethany Christianson, “our doctor would have just had to tell us to go home.”

Instead, in a five-minute procedure at the NIH Clinical Center in late July, the freckle-face girl got another chance to beat the acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) that has stalked her since age 4. She was infused with 30 million of her own T cells, a key part of the immune system, that had been genetically modified to track down and kill her cancer like a pack of crazed dogs.

Ava’s treatment, called CAR T-cell therapy, is one of the new immunotherapies that attempt to rally the body’s own defenses to fight malignancies. Unlike other cancer advances, it is being tested widely in children because of its stunning effectiveness in ALL, the most common pediatric cancer. In early-stage trials, many patients who had repeatedly relapsed saw their leukemia disappear. Some remain cancer-free.

Yet big questions surround the therapy, and many scientists are urging caution. “There’s very real promise with this approach, but the immune system is complicated,” said Terry Fry, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) scientist who is running Ava’s trial. “There’s a lot that still needs to be worked out.”

[Here’s what you need to know about immunotherapy]

Complications can be lethal; one clinical trial was briefly halted in July after three young adults died of brain swelling. It is also far from clear that such a personalized approach — possibly costing hundreds of thousands of dollars — is economically viable on a large scale or will produce the lasting remissions that everyone hopes to see.

U.S. researchers running CAR T-cell trials for children and adults with leukemia and lymphoma have reported remission rates up to 90 percent in some cases. That’s a major achievement in a group whose cancer is emboldened by every treatment failure. But rates in other trials are considerably lower, and many patients eventually relapse.

“The treatment is great about getting people into remission but not at keeping everyone in remission,” said Rebecca Gardner, a pediatric oncologist at Seattle Children’s hospital. She ran an early-stage trial using CAR T-cell therapy in which 39 of 42 patients went into complete remission. By a year, about half had relapsed, either because their T cells had inexplicably disappeared or their cancer had changed so that the T cells could no longer recognize it. “Leukemia is really smart,” she said.

Ava’s family understands that better than most. She underwent her first CAR T-cell procedure in Minnesota last year, but her leukemia returned within six months. Her treatment at NIH involved a next-generation version, developed by NCI, that used a different target for her marauding T cells. In this first-in-humans trial, she is Patient No. 18.

In late August, the Christiansons learned that Ava had gone into remission. She and her mother, who were still at the Clinical Center in Bethesda, Md., gleefully rushed home to Wisconsin so Ava could start third grade.

Her parents, so frequently disappointed, remain guardedly optimistic. “Hope is all you have,” said her father, Jay Christianson.

Her mother added, “We just need this to work and to stay working.”

NCI’s Fry is careful not to make any promises about an extended remission. “I can’t say that’s going to be the case,” he said, “because we just don’t know. It’s too soon.”

Scientists have wanted for decades to marshal the immune system to vanquish cancer, but their attempts have mostly been frustrated. In the past few years, however, breakthroughs have led to the development of two types of immunotherapy — checkpoint inhibitors and CAR T cells — that are generating enormous excitement.

Checkpoint inhibitors are off-the-shelf therapies aimed at unleashing the immune system’s power to see and attack the disease. Used mostly in adults, to date, they are producing impressive results, albeit in a minority of cases. The most prominent: Jimmy Carter. The former president became the poster patient when he was successfully treated last year with a checkpoint inhibitor called Keytruda, along with surgery and radiation, for his advanced melanoma.

Much of the earliest research for customized CAR T-cell therapy was conducted at NCI, the University of Pennsylvania, the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Seattle Children’s.

“The technology of CAR T cells is really a breakthrough, especially for children,” said Michael Jensen, director of the Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research at Seattle Children’s Research Institute.

Almost all the initial work focused on CD19, a protein found on the surface of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Scientists figured out ways to use a chimeric antigen receptor, or CAR, to reprogram T cells to recognize the protein and kill the cancer.

[Immunotherapy is showing benefits in an increasing number of cancers]

Zane Esposito, a 13-year-old from Plano, Tex., calls himself the “T-Cell Explorer.” He was diagnosed with ALL in June 2010. “I just thought my back hurt,” he said. “I couldn’t walk up the steps very well.” Almost three years of treatment, including punishing chemotherapy, provided a couple of years of remission. His leukemia returned in January, and this time it did not respond to treatment.

Soon after Zane relapsed, he and his father bumped into friends in a local doughnut shop who told them about a TV segment on CAR T-cell therapy. Paul Esposito searched online and found Gardner’s clinical trial in Seattle. Zane signed on, got the treatment, went back into full remission and gained 25 pounds.

His Texas doctors have talked about a bone-marrow transplant to increase the chance of a true cure, but the Espositos have resisted. The Seattle doctors say it is not clear yet whether that is necessary or whether there would be still other options should Zane’s cancer recur.

Zane is moving on, with dreams of competing on “Chopped Junior” to show off his homemade pasta and pizza. On July 27, the day that Ava got her T cells, he celebrated his 13th birthday.

Ava was 4 when she started having leg pains, then trouble standing up. Her mother suspected Lyme disease. “You never think of cancer with a child,” she said, eyes filling as she recalled her daughter’s cancer diagnosis in November 2012. The doctors assured the family that it was typical leukemia — and curable.

Like most children, Ava quickly went into remission after starting the prescribed 30 months of chemotherapy. But at home in Prescott, a small Wisconsin city at the confluence of the Mississippi and St. Croix rivers, things did not get easier for the Christiansons. In early 2013, Ava was hospitalized in Minneapolis for a lung infection. About the same time, the couple’s second daughter, Audrey, was born 13 weeks premature and hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care unit in St. Paul. Bethany, who manages occupational therapists for a nursing-home chain, and Jay, a rural mail carrier, shuttled between the Twin Cities visiting their daughters.

“I would be with Ava during the day, and then when Jay got home, he would stay with Ava, and I would spend time with Audrey,” she said. “No matter what you do, you feel like a bad mom.”

A year or so after treatment began, Ava relapsed. Now she was in a much more dangerous category: children whose leukemia no longer responds to chemo. Her doctors arranged for a bone-marrow transplant, with her baby sister as the donor.

The transplant made her sick and the whole family miserable. Ava spent months in the hospital and then a year at home. Because of fears of infection, she couldn’t go out much. She missed all of first grade. But her parents had hope that the transplant would keep her cancer at bay.

[Brain cancer now the leading cause of cancer deaths in children]

At a six-month checkup, tests showed that the leukemia was back again. There were no more conventional treatments to try. But because of her two relapses, Ava was now eligible for a CAR T-cell trial at the University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospital. Her T cells would be genetically altered to go after CD19.The number of cells then would be vastly increased and reinfused.

It sounded like science fiction, but Bethany Christianson found comfort in talking to the father of Emily Whitehead. In 2012, the 6-year-old Pennsylvania girl became the first child to be treated with reprogrammed T cells for leukemia. She has been in remission ever since.

Ava got her treatment in April 2015 — after her cells were extracted via a tube inserted into her neck — and five days later had a massive immune reaction with a high fever and intense pain. While that is typical, some patients become dangerously ill. Yet Ava recovered fast, went into remission and attended summer school, where she learned how to make pigs-in-a-blanket and wrote her own cookbook.

By then, her parents had gotten used to living in the midst of remissions and relapses. “When she felt better, we would do everything we could,” Bethany said. They visited Robot World, a scientifically themed attraction a few hours from Prescott. “You don’t put things off, because you are always thinking, ‘What if?’ ”

Last fall, doctors delivered the bad news. Ava’s cancer had changed. It was no longer producing the CD19 protein, which meant her modified T cells could no longer recognize the disease. But the leukemia was still producing another common protein, called CD22, and that offered an opportunity.

As it happened, Fry, head of the blood-cancer section in NCI’s pediatric oncology branch, had already launched the world’s first trial using CAR T-cell therapy to focus on CD22. It seemed an equally promising target that could broaden the therapy’s impact, researchers thought. At the time, they did not realize that a significant percentage of patients in the other trials might relapse because of changes in their cancer.

Fry insisted as he designed the study that children be included, despite ever-present concerns about exposing them to safety risks. He wanted to avoid a delay in testing what could be a lifesaving pediatric treatment. “I didn’t want to take two to three years on adults, and then go back and do children,” he said.

[For a 6-year-old with cancer, a future staked on medicine’s hottest field]

The clinical trial already has treated nearly two dozen leukemia and lymphoma patients through age 30. The majority have gone into remission, although some have had their cancer return. While it is far too early to know long-term outcomes, Fry said he is convinced the CD22 treatment holds much potential. He is planning another trial next year with the Stanford University School of Medicine. It will target both proteins — CD19 and CD22 — simultaneously.

Once Ava relapsed after the Minnesota trial, Fry’s study at the NIH Clinical Center appeared to be the only option. But there was no slot immediately available. With Ava deteriorating, doctors put her on an experimental treatment that sent her into remission but had serious side effects.

They immediately stopped the medication when they learned Ava might get her T-cell therapy in January — she actually needed a high level of leukemia in her body to participate. But on this wrenching roller coaster of research and treatment, it turned out that she still had to wait several more months.

Ava’s cancer returned in June. Her T cells were extracted in preparation for the trial, even as she got sicker and sicker.

She was admitted to the Clinical Center in mid-July, to a room with dancing penguins painted on the windows. The day before her therapy, an ebullient Audrey burst into the room and the two sisters ran down the hall to a play space.

Her mother was ready this time for the intense immune reaction that followed treatment, although she still found it hard to watch Ava spike a fever of 106. “When you see that temperature on the thermometer, every bone in your body says it’s wrong to let it get that high,” Bethany said. “Then suddenly it’s over.”

If his daughter’s cancer returns yet again, “I have no idea what we’ll do,” Jay said. “We’re kind of up against the edge.”

Fry thinks she might be able to undergo a second round of her latest immunotherapy, as long as her cancer is still producing CD22 proteins. Doctors in Minnesota also might recommend a second bone-marrow transplant — something her parents dread, saying it was the roughest treatment of all.

For now, Ava is happily back in school. “I just want her to be a kid,” Bethany Christianson said. “She has missed out on a lot of that.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provides a broad overview of multiple trials, rather than spending a lot of time on any specific study. That can be dicey, given variability between trial results. However, the story still manages to offer some real numbers — and grounds the benefits with qualifiers. For example, in referring to multiple trials in both adults and children, the story says that some trials have reported “remission rates of up to 90 percent.” The story then notes that “rates in other trials are considerably lower, and many patients relapse.”
Elsewhere, the story quotes one researcher as saying “The treatment is great about getting people into remission but not at keeping everyone in remission.” The story then offers some information on one study by the same researcher, stating “39 of 42 patients went into complete remission. By a year, about half had relapsed.” That combination of real numbers, with a sobering qualifier, is important.
What we would have liked to have seen: Along with remission discussion, some extra assessment of what the research shows on overall survival rates, and how long people on the drug can be expected to live.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Reuters - A nicotine addiction pill can help smokers quit gradually when they can’t go cold turkey, a study finds, suggesting that it may be time to revisit practice guidelines that focus primarily on immediate cessation.

Smokers who took the pill, sold as Chantix in the U.S. and Champix elsewhere, were much more likely to quit after cutting back on cigarettes than smokers who didn’t use the drug, the study found.

“This allows us to reach a much broader population of smokers who aren’t willing to quit abruptly or set a quit date, and it shows that people can quit without going cold turkey,” said lead study author Dr. Jon Ebbert, a professor in primary care and internal medicine at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota. “This is very strong support for changing clinical practice to include gradual reduction aided by medication.”

Smoking is the leading cause of preventable death in the U.S., according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And tobacco kills one in 10 people worldwide, according to the World Health Organization.

Quitting can reduce the risk of heart attacks, strokes, and cancers of the mouth, throat, esophagus and bladder. Ten years after quitting, the risk of lung cancer drops by half, according to the CDC.

To see if Chantix, which is manufactured by Pfizer, could help smokers quit without going cold turkey, Ebbert and colleagues randomly assigned 1,510 people at 61 centers in 10 countries to receive either the drug or a placebo for 24 weeks.

They asked study participants to reduce cigarette use by 50 percent by the fourth week, and by 75 percent by the eight week, with the goal of quitting by week 12.

By the last ten weeks of treatment, weeks 15 to 24, the group taking the pill had significantly higher abstinence rates than the group on placebo.

This held true even after treatment stopped. For weeks 21 through 52 of the study, 27 percent of the people who had previously taken the drug successfully avoided smoking, compared with less than 10 percent of those who received the placebo.

“This is the first study of its kind to enroll a group of smokers who are not traditionally enrolled in clinical trials because they are not ready to quit,” said Dr. Caryn Lerman, professor of psychiatry and deputy director of the Abramson Cancer Center at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.

“It offers compelling evidence that gradual reduction should be considered to facilitate quitting,” she said.

But even though the approach helped some hard-to-reach smokers, the majority of them still failed to quit, noted Lerman, who wasn’t involved in the study. Other treatments, such as nicotine patches and gum, can also help some smokers cut back gradually, she said.

While the study shows that Chantix, which is known generically as varenicline, can be effective for some smokers, the group taking the pill also experienced more side effects such as nausea, abnormal dreams, insomnia, constipation, vomiting, and weight gain.

Previous research has linked Chantix to side effects including suicidal thoughts, erratic behavior and drowsiness. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration placed a black box warning - its most severe and restrictive warning - on the product in 2009, highlighting the drug’s adverse neuropsychological effects.

People with a history of major depressive or anxiety disorder, suicidal behavior, panic disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, schizophrenia, or psychosis were excluded from the study, published in the American Medical Association’s journal JAMA.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: There are two ways to think about benefits in a story like this one: the benefit of quitting smoking and the benefit of using the smoking cessation drug. The story thoroughly addresses both. First, the story tells readers exactly how much more likely people were to quit smoking when using the drug (compared to those using a placebo) — and that they were able to stay smoke-free for up to a year. Second, the story offers some specifics on how quitting smoking reduces health risks. For example, the story states: “Ten years after quitting [smoking], the risk of lung cancer drops by half, according to the CDC.”
Another area where the story excelled is in characterizing the motivation level of the study participants. It noted that they wanted to quit and were willing to start reducing their cigarette consumption — they just couldn’t “go cold turkey.” The competing Times piece wasn’t as clear on that point.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An easy, two-minute vision test administered on the sidelines after a young athlete has hit his or her head can help to reliably determine whether the athlete has sustained a concussion, according to a new study of student athletes, some as young as 5.

The test is so simple and inexpensive that any coach or parent potentially could administer it, the study’s authors believe, and any league afford to provide it as a way to help evaluate and safeguard players.

Those of us who coach or care for young athletes know by now that an athlete who falls or collides with something during play or seems dazed, dizzy, loses consciousness or complains of head pain should be tested for a concussion, which occurs when the brain is physically jostled within the skull.

But most of us are clueless about how to test young athletes. The most commonly recommended sideline test is the Standardized Assessment of Concussion, a multipart examination during which athletes are asked to name the date, describe how they feel, memorize and recall lists of words, and do jumping jacks and other tests of coordination. Ideally, this assessment should be administered and evaluated by a medical professional.

But while the sidelines of college and professional games are crowded with doctors and certified athletic trainers, few high schools and youth leagues have those resources. Most of the time, concussion testing in youth sports falls to volunteer coaches or parents with little if any medical experience.

That situation prompted researchers at New York University’s Langone Concussion Center to begin wondering recently whether there might be other, easier diagnostic tools to check young players for concussions.

Their thoughts soon turned to vision.

“About 50 percent of the brain’s pathways are tied in some to way to vision and visual processing,” said Dr. Steven Galetta, chairman of neurology at N.Y.U. Langone Medical Center and senior author of the study, which was published in The Journal of Neuro-Ophthalmology.

Eye tests can tell evaluators a great deal about how well someone’s brain is working.

But for the most part, visual tests have not been part of the standard protocol for sideline concussion testing of young athletes.

However, the N.Y.U. researchers knew that in recent years, trainers working with athletes in sports such as boxing and mixed martial arts, where concussions are common, had begun supplementing the Standardized Assessment with a simple vision exam, known as the King-Devick test, during which someone reads slightly jumbled lines of numbers printed on three cards as quickly as possible. (See below for more information.) The King-Devick test measures rapid eye movement, visual tracking and related cognitive responses and is a reliable indicator of cognitive problems. If an injured adult reads the numbers more slowly after a head impact than in baseline testing, he or she is considered to have sustained a concussion.

But it had not been evaluated for use in young athletes. So the N.Y.U. researchers decided to test it.

They recruited 243 young hockey and lacrosse players between the ages of 5 and 18, and 89 collegians from the same sports.

These athletes all completed a baseline Standardized Assessment of Concussion exam during preseason and walked as fast as possible along a narrow 10-foot long strip of athletic tape to measure their balance. They also completed the King-Devick test.

Then they went out to play.

During their subsequent competitive seasons, 12 athletes hit their heads and were put through the full battery of sideline concussion tests by parents or coaches, under the supervision of N.Y.U. medical personnel. Fourteen age-matched uninjured athletes in the same sports completed the same tests, to serve as controls.

Neurologists later confirmed that the 12 injured athletes had sustained concussions.

Then the N.Y.U. researchers compared how well the various sidelines tests had done at pinpointing the brain injury.

The Standardized Assessment of Concussion had performed rather miserably, correctly identifying only two of the concussed athletes, missing 10, and finding that three of the uninjured control athletes had supposedly sustained a concussion, since their scores had declined compared with their baseline (almost certainly, the study’s authors believe, because these young athletes were physically tired).

The King-Devick test did much better, correctly assessing concussion in 75 percent of the young injured players and inaccurately identifying it in only one.

The pace-along-the-tape test was also relatively accurate. Ten of the 12 injured athletes were slower now, but so were five of the unhurt players.

Overall, the King-Devick test had by far the greatest accuracy and lowest risk of false positives.

The upshot, Dr. Galetta believes, is that parents and coaches “should absolutely consider” familiarizing themselves with the King-Devick test and administering it to young athletes before the season starts, then having those baseline numbers and the test itself handy on the sidelines.

If an athlete hits his or her head and is then slower than baseline by even a fraction of a second at reading off the numbers, Dr. Galetta said, it is very probable he or she has a concussion and needs to be taken from play and seen by a doctor.

It is still too early to say, however, whether the King-Devick test can replace other, more conventional concussion evaluations for young athletes, including the standardized assessment, despite its shortcomings in this study, Dr. Galetta cautioned. For now, he says, it probably should be used in conjunction with other tests.

How to Administer the King-Devick Concussion Test

During preseason, use a stopwatch to time the athlete as he or she reads off the numbers on each line from left to right as quickly as possible. The cards should be read in order. This establishes a baseline time. For the greatest precision, you might want to have athletes perform the test twice and use their best reading.

During the season, if an athlete is suspected of sustaining a concussion, have him or her repeat the test on the sidelines. If the time is slower, even by a small amount, he or she probably has a concussion, according to neurologists.

Interestingly, uninjured athletes are almost always faster at reading the numbers during games or practices, because physical exertion sharpens the kind of visual performance being tested.



 For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provides a good discussion of how the vision test compared in reliability with the standard testing protocol including a cognitive test and a balance test. The tests were applied to 243 young (age 5-18) and 89 college athletes playing a season of hockey or lacrosse.
Among the 12 students that sustained head injuries, the researchers found the King-Devick test correctly assessed concussion in 75 percent of the injured players and misidentified one. In comparison, the standard testing protocol accurately assessed only two of the concussed athletes and missed 10. The standard tests also misidentified three athletes as having sustained a concussion, according to the study. The study authors concluded that the vision test was the more sensitive, accurate test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES -- Researchers have demonstrated for the first time that the progression of Type-1 diabetes can be halted -- and possibly reversed -- by a stem cell transplant that preserves the body's diminishing ability to make insulin, according to a study published today.

The experimental therapy eliminated the need for insulin injections for months or even years in 14 of 15 patients who were recently diagnosed with the disease. One subject, a 30-year-old male, hasn't taken insulin since his stem cell transplant more than three years ago, according to the study in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

The study suggests a new avenue for treating the intractable disease, in which the immune system destroys insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. Without insulin, patients can't metabolize sugar and risk developing nerve damage, cardiovascular disease, kidney failure, and blindness.

Patients with Type-1 diabetes typically compensate by monitoring their blood sugar levels every few hours and injecting themselves with insulin as many as five times a day.

After the stem cell treatment, "patients are absolutely medication-free; they're off insulin," said Dr. Richard Burt, chief of the division of immunotherapy at Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine and senior author of the study.

The strategy is similar to an approach showing some success in treating other immune-system disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and multiple sclerosis.

"We all realize that without addressing the problem at the level of the immune system, we'll never really beat Type-1 diabetes," said Dr. Francisco Prieto, who treats diabetics in Elk Grove, Calif., and wasn't involved in the study. "This is very encouraging work."

Burt and his colleagues cautioned that they don't yet know whether the fix is permanent and, if it is not, how long it will last. One of the subjects was insulin-free for one year but then relapsed after a respiratory viral infection, said lead author Dr. Julio Voltarelli, associate professor at Ribeirao Preto Medical School at the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil.

The researchers also cautioned that the process is not without risk, with patients vulnerable to infection during part of the therapy.

But other doctors said that even if the benefits of the therapy are temporary, the research provides valuable insight into the mechanism behind the disease.

The Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation in New York estimates that as many as 3 million Americans have Type-1 diabetes, with between 30,000 and 35,000 new cases diagnosed each year.

The age of onset is considerably younger than for Type-2 diabetes patients, who can still make insulin but can't use it efficiently.

The stem cell approach mirrors the bone marrow transplants used to treat patients with certain cancers and blood diseases. The idea is to wipe out the faulty immune system and replace it .

In the study, 15 Brazilian patients were treated within a few months of their diagnosis, before their immune systems had the chance to eradicate all of their insulin-producing cells.

The study was conducted in Brazil because of Voltarelli's interest in the experiment. It was funded by the Brazilian Ministry of Health and other sources.

The patients, who ranged in age from 14 to 31, were treated with drugs and hormones that prompted the body to produce hematopoietic stem cells and send them from the bone marrow into the bloodstream, where they were extracted by a special machine.

About two weeks later, the patients checked into the hospital and received chemotherapy and other drugs to kill off their immune systems over five days.

After a day of rest, they were infused with their own hematopoietic stem cells, which took about eight to 12 days to establish a new immune system. In the interim, they were given antibiotics to protect against infections.

The treatment had no effect on one patient, whose disease had already progressed too far, doctors decided. Of the remaining 14 patients, 12 were able to stop taking insulin shortly after their transplants. Altogether, five patients have not needed insulin injections for at least 23 months, and two have been insulin-free for more than 18 months.

Even if patients continue to require insulin shots, the treatment should be considered a success if it halts the destruction of beta cells, said Dr. Jay Skyler, with the Diabetes Research Institute at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story states that the new therapy eliminated the need for injections for months or years in 14 of 15 patients, thereby describing absolute benefits. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, an immune checkpoint inhibitor has been proven to increase survival among patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC), a patient population for whom treatment options are currently limited.

Researchers at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center demonstrated a median overall survival benefit of 25 months with nivolumab, a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved immunotherapy agent, compared with 19.6 months for everolimus, a current standard of care for patients with metastatic kidney cancer.

Published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and being presented this week at a Presidential session of the European Cancer Congress (ECC), the findings of CheckMate-025 provide definitive evidence that an immune checkpoint inhibitor is a valid treatment strategy for patients with advanced RCC, and supports a paradigm change in the standard of care treatment, according to the authors.

Nivolumab, marketed as Opdivo, is currently used to treat metastatic melanoma and advanced non-small cell lung cancer. CheckMate-025 is an example of how investigators are examining approved immunotherapy drugs to determine potential impact on other tumor types.

"Immunotherapy has long been believed to have the potential to make an impact in kidney cancer, but until now we had not been able to demonstrate such a significant survival benefit. We have a real opportunity to change clinical practice for patients when other therapies have failed," said principal investigator Padmanee Sharma, MD, PhD, professor, Departments of Genitourinary Medical Oncology and Immunology and scientific director of the Immunotherapy Platform, part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program.

"Through studies such as CheckMate-025, we are learning to target the patients' immune systems to fight cancer rather than targeting the tumor itself. This is a new way forward."

In the randomized phase III clinical trial, patients whose disease progressed on antiangiogenic therapies were treated with either nivolumab or everolimus. Median overall survival was 5.4 months longer with nivolumab (25 months) compared with everolimus (19.6 months).

The study included 821 patients with advanced RCC across 151 sites in 24 countries in North America, Europe, Australia, South America and Asia. All had previously been treated with one or two antiangiogenic therapies, drugs that inhibit the growth of new blood vessels, a critical component of cancer development. The median duration of treatment was 5.5 months with nivolumab and 3.7 months with everolimus.

In addition to demonstrating increased overall survival, the researchers showed a higher objective response rate - the number of patients who respond to the treatment - with nivolumab. Of the 821 patients enrolled, 25% responded to nivolumab versus 5% of those treated with everolimus.

Among these patients, partial responses were observed in 24% of those treated with nivolumab and 5% of patients treated with everolimus; complete responses were observed in 1% (four patients) treated with nivolumab and fewer than 1% (two patients) treated with everolimus.

Further, among patients who showed a response, the impact was "durable," according to Sharma. While median progression-free survival appeared similar between treatments (4.6 months and 4.4 months with nivolumab and everolimus, respectively), when researchers explored a delayed progression-free survival benefit at six months, they reported 15.6 months with nivolumab and 11.7 months with everolimus. This ongoing response was observed among 44% of those treated with nivolumab and 36% of those treated with everolimus. More than 12 months later, 31% and 27% of patients treated with nivolumab and everolimus, respectively, continued to show a response.

For some patients, even after treatment with nivolumab ended, response to the drug continued. "The immune system has a memory, so even when treatment has stopped, the body continues to exhibit a long-term response - meaning these patients can live normal lives without progressive disease."

Finally, the investigators observed fewer treatment-related adverse events, including fatigue and nausea, and improved quality of life with nivolumab.

These results led the trial to be halted early in July 2015 when an assessment conducted by the independent Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) concluded that the study met its primary endpoint, demonstrating superior overall survival in patients receiving nivolumab.

Nivolumab blocks a T cell inhibitory signaling pathway known as PD-1 that controls the immune response and can prevent the immune system from attacking cancerous cells. The drug is approved for metastatic melanoma patients who show no response to other treatments and for advanced squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with progression on or after chemotherapy. Based on the CheckMate-025 findings, earlier this month (September 16) the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation to nivolumab for the potential indication of metastatic RCC. The Breakthrough Therapy designation is intended to expedite the development and review of medicines with early signals of clinical benefit in serious diseases to help ensure patients have access to new therapies as soon as possible.

"The next questions are, 'how do we increase the number of patients who respond?' and 'how do we move immune checkpoint agents into the frontline setting?' - not just using them when other therapies have failed but intervening earlier," said Sharma. "We're studying combination therapies to answer these questions and believe these studies will change the way we treat many cancers."

Each year, there are 338,000 new cases of RCC diagnosed worldwide; it is the most common type of kidney cancer among adults and approximately 30% of patients present with metastatic disease at diagnosis, according to the scientific literature. A number of targeted therapies have been approved in recent years for the treatment of advanced RCC, with five antiangiogenic and two mTOR inhibitors (including everolimus; these drugs block a protein that regulates cell growth, proliferation, survival, etc.), showing benefits in pivotal phase III trials.

"While these treatments have changed the therapeutic landscape for RCC, they are associated with limited survival following emerging resistance to therapy," said Sharma. "The overall survival benefit shown in this study sets a new benchmark for therapeutic strategies for advanced RCC patients in need of a second-line therapy."

Sharma is scientific director of MD Anderson's immunotherapy platform, which provides immune monitoring expertise to MD Anderson's 85 clinical trials of immunotherapy drugs as single agents or in combinations. Platform investigators conduct research to understand which patients will benefit from immunotherapy, to evaluate effective drug combinations and to identify new molecules that block or stimulate immune response.

The platform is part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program, which is designed to harness scientific knowledge and develop new technologies that will dramatically reduce cancer deaths through prevention, early detection and treatment.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The primary outcome measure for the study was median survival.  The news release notes, “In the randomized phase III clinical trial, patients whose disease progressed on antiangiogenic therapies were treated with either nivolumab or everolimus. Median overall survival was 5.4 months longer with nivolumab (25 months) compared with everolimus (19.6 months).” We are also told, “More than 12 months later, 31% and 27% of patients treated with nivolumab and everolimus, respectively, continued to show a response.”
If one is discerning, it becomes clear that this new treatment buys a patient about 5 months of survival time. That’s certainly valuable time, but it’s debatable whether that amounts to the kind of benefit patients associate with the term “breakthrough.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have slowed down the ageing process by implanting stem cells into the brains of animals, raising hopes for new strategies to combat age-related diseases and extend the human lifespan.

Implants of stem cells that make fresh neurons in the brain were found to put the brakes on ageing in older mice, keeping them more physically and mentally fit for months, and extending their lives by 10-15% compared to untreated animals.

The work, described as a tour de force and a breakthrough by one leading expert, suggests that ageing across the body is controlled by stem cells that are found in the hypothalamus region of the brain in youth, but which steadily die off until they are almost completely absent in middle age.

Researchers at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York hope to launch clinical trials of the procedure soon, but must first produce supplies of human neural stem cells in the lab which can be implanted into volunteers.

“Of course humans are more complex,” said Dongsheng Cai, who led the research. “However, if the mechanism is fundamental, you might expect to see effects when an intervention is based on it.”

Previous experiments had already hinted that the hypothalamus, an almond-sized part of the brain in humans, played some role in the ageing process, but what it was remained unclear. The latest investigation from the US team pinpoints which cells are important and how they might work.

In the first of a series of experiments in mice, Cai showed that neural stem cells, which are found in a handful of brain regions at birth, disappear from the hypothalamus over time. The stem cells are known to form fresh brain cells in youth, but the process slows down dramatically in adults. Though small, the hypothalamus forms a crucial connection between the body’s nervous and hormonal systems.

To test whether the decline in stem cells was causing ageing, and not itself a result of old age, the researchers injected mice with a toxin that wiped out 70% of their neural stem cells. The effect was striking. Over the next few months the mice aged more rapidly than usual, and performed much worse than control animals on a battery of tests of endurance, coordination, social behaviour and ability to recognise objects. “Behaviourally mice aged faster when these cells were removed during early ageing,” Cai told the Guardian. The animals died months earlier than healthy control animals.

Next, the scientists looked at what happened when aged mice received injections of fresh neural stem cells. This time the mice lived longer than controls, typically several months more, an increase of about 15%. If a similar extension was achieved in humans, a person with a life expectancy of 80 years could live to 92.

Having proved that it was neural stem cells that were important for ageing, the scientists ran further tests to work out what the cells were doing. They found that molecules called microRNAs, or miRNAs, that are released from neural stem cells were responsible for most of the ageing effects. When the molecules are produced in the hypothalamus, they flow into the clear fluid in the brain and spinal cord and affect how genes operate.

“The mechanism is partially due to these cells secreting certain miRNAs which help maintain youth, and the loss of these leads to ageing” said Cai, whose study is published in Nature. The next step is to create human neural stem cells in the lab for testing.

“It is a tour de force,” said David Sinclair at Harvard Medical School. “It’s a breakthrough. The brain controls how long we live. I can see a day when we are implanted with stem cells or treated with stem cell RNAs that improve our health and extend our lives. I would love to know which brain stem cell secretions extend a mouse’s lifespan and if human stem cells make them too.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story says the stem cell intervention extended the rodents’ lives “by 10-15% compared to untreated animals.”  At another point, it said, “the mice lived longer than controls, typically several months more, an increase of about 15%.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Oct. 26, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental psoriasis treatment performed significantly better than the commonly prescribed medication methotrexate in a new clinical trial.

The drug briakinumab reduced psoriasis symptoms by at least 75 percent in nearly 82 percent of those taking it, compared to just 40 percent of those on methotrexate. But serious side effects were more common among the briakinumab users.

"Very high levels of response" were observed and maintained throughout the study period, said lead researcher Dr. Kristian Reich, a professor of dermatology at the University of Gottingen and a managing partner at Dermatologikum Hamburg, both in Germany.

Results of the study are published in the Oct. 27 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. The study was funded by the drug's manufacturer, Abbott Laboratories.

Psoriasis affects about 5 million Americans, according to the U.S. National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS). The disease causes patches of thick, red, inflamed skin that have silvery scales. Psoriasis can affect any part of the body, including the skin, nails, genitals and inside the mouth, according to NIAMS.

The current study included 317 people with moderate to severe psoriasis. The study volunteers had had psoriasis for at least six months, and the condition affected at least 10 percent of their bodies.

Nearly half of the study participants were randomly selected to receive injections of briakinumab at a dose of 200 milligrams (mg) for the first and fourth week of the study, and 100 mg at week eight and every four weeks thereafter. The study lasted one year. The remaining volunteers were given between 5 mg and 25 mg of oral methotrexate weekly.

After six months, nearly 82 percent of those in the briakinumab group had at least a 75 percent improvement in the psoriasis area-and-severity index (PASI), a commonly used measurement to assess the severity of psoriasis. Slightly less than 40 percent of those on methotrexate had a 75 percent improvement in their PASI score, according to the study.

After a year, about 66 percent of those taking briakinumab had a 75 percent improvement in their PASI score compared to almost 24 percent for those on methotrexate, according to the study.

Briakinumab works by dampening the immune system response that causes psoriasis, said Bruce Bebo, director of research and medical programs for the National Psoriasis Foundation, based in Portland, Ore.

More serious infections were seen in people taking briakinumab (2.6 percent) vs. those taking methotrexate (1.8 percent). There were also two cases of cancer in people taking briakinumab and none in the methotrexate group. However, the researchers said these differences weren't statistically significant.

"Cancer risk is extremely hard to define, and this study was not powered to detect any difference in the risk of developing a malignancy," said Bebo.

He said that in an earlier trial of briakinumab, some unexplained major adverse cardiac events occurred. At the time, Abbott withdrew its application for approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration pending further research. In the current study, no serious cardiovascular events were reported.

Of the increased infections and cancers, Reich said, "Although these differences were not statistically significant, they lead to questions regarding a favorable risk-benefit profile of the drug."

Research on briakinumab is continuing. An ongoing three-year trial involves 248 people from the current study.

For people living with psoriasis, Bebo said the message from this study is that "dramatic progress has been made from where we were just five years ago."

Learn more about psoriasis treatments from the National Psoriasis Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Adequate explanation of what the study showed for potential benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON--A new dietary review of 49 observational and controlled studies finds plant-based vegetarian diets, especially vegan diets, are associated with lower levels of total cholesterol, including lower levels of HDL and LDL cholesterol, compared to omnivorous diets. The meta-analysis appears as an online advance in Nutrition Reviews.

The study authors--Yoko Yokoyama, Ph.D., M.P.H., Susan Levin, M.S., R.D., C.S.S.D., and Neal Barnard, M.D., F.A.C.C.--reviewed 30 observational studies and 19 clinical trials, which met their inclusion criteria. They find:

A plant-based vegetarian diet is associated with total cholesterol that's 29.2 mg/dL lower in observational studies. In clinical trials, a plant-based diet lowers total cholesterol by 12.5 mg/dL.
• In observational studies, a plant-based vegetarian diet is associated with a 22.9 mg/dL reduction in LDL cholesterol and a 3.6 mg/dL reduction in HDL cholesterol, compared to control groups following an omnivorous diet.
• In clinical trials, a plant-based vegetarian diet lowers LDL cholesterol by 12.2 mg/dL and reduces HDL cholesterol by 3.4 mg/dL, compared to control groups following an omnivorous, low-fat, calorie-restricted, or a conventional diabetes diet.
• A plant-based vegetarian diet is not associated with statistically significant changes in triglyceride levels in observational studies or in clinical trials.

The authors predict the strong correlation between vegetarian diets and lower cholesterol levels may be due to the association a plant-based diet has with a lower body weight, a reduced intake of saturated fat, and an increased intake of plant foods, like vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts, and whole grains, which are naturally rich in components such as soluble fiber, soy protein, and plant sterols.

The study authors hypothesize that the greater risk reduction for total, HDL, and LDL cholesterol levels observed in the longitudinal studies is likely due to long-term adherence to plant-based eating patterns and changes in body composition.

"The immediate health benefits of a plant-based diet, like weight loss, lower blood pressure, and improved cholesterol, are well documented in controlled studies," says study author Susan Levin, M.S., R.D., C.S.S.D. "Our goal with studying plasma lipids throughout the lifespan is to capture the net risk reduction of using a vegetarian diet to control lipid levels. We hope to empower patients with new research about the long-term cardiovascular health benefits of a vegetarian diet, which include a reduced risk of a heart attack, stroke, and premature death."

Charles Ross, D.O., a member of the nonprofit Physicians Committee and a former emergency department physician, has firsthand experience with putting a plant-based diet into practice.

Dr. Ross is in his late 60s, takes no medications, and lowered his previously high total cholesterol from 230 mg/dL to a healthy 135 mg/dL after adopting a whole-food, plant-based diet in 2012. Within the first month of making the dietary change, he effortlessly lost 10 pounds. Within a year, Dr. Ross traded a 34-year career of practicing emergency medicine for a new career path: lifestyle medicine. After 5.5 years of making the career switch, he continues to host free biweekly nutrition classes for his primary care patients and the community. More than 700 people have enrolled to learn how to lose weight, eliminate the need for medications to treat type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and elevated cholesterol, and to simply feel better. His former hometown of Roseburg, Ore., is now a Blue Zones community. He is a part-time instructor at the College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific Northwest and hopes to set an example for future physicians.

"I no longer work for a living," notes Dr. Ross, who now resides in Westfir, Ore. "I wake up every day eager to hear about how a plant-based diet and a healthful lifestyle is changing and saving lives in our community. What I've found is that if you want your patients to make significant health changes, you have to make them yourself. The prescription started to spread soon after my family, co-workers, neighbors, and friends heard about my experience."

For clinicians concerned about spending extra time in and outside of the exam room, the study authors encourage time-strapped health care providers to refer patients to registered dietitians who can help with the transition to a plant-based vegetarian diet. The 2015 Dietary Guidelines for Americans highlights a healthy vegetarian diet as one of three healthful eating plans to follow.

The study authors also note hyperlipidemia, or elevated cholesterol and triglycerides, is often underdiagnosed and undertreated. A 10 percent increase in the prevalence of treatment for hyperlipidemia can prevent 8,000 deaths each year. Taking small steps, like those proposed by the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel 3, which include assessing heart disease risk, making lifestyle and dietary recommendations, and assessing the need for future follow-up appointments and pharmaceutical interventions, could prevent approximately 20,000 heart attacks, 10,000 cases of coronary heart disease, and save almost $3 billion in medical costs each year.

"To make any form of health care work and to truly power economic mobility, we have to get healthy," says Levin. "The first place to start is by building meals around nutrient-packed, plant-based foods, which fit into nearly every cultural template, taste preference, and budget."

To request a copy of the study or to request an interview with a study author, please contact Jessica Frost at 202-527-7342.

Founded in 1985, the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine is a nonprofit organization that promotes preventive medicine, conducts clinical research, and encourages higher standards for ethics and effectiveness in research.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: This release clearly states the benefits of a plant-based vegetarian diet for cholesterol. In clinical trials, a plant-based diet was reported to lower total, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels by 12.5 mg/dL, 3.4 mg/dL, and 12.2 mg/dL respectively. In observational studies, a plant-based diet was associated with reductions in total, HDL, and LDL cholesterol levels of 29.2 mg/dL, 3.6 mg/dL, and 22.9 mg/dL respectively. The release also included information on the lack of association between dietary patterns and blood triglyceride (a type of fat) levels — an important mention of results that were not statistically significant.
However, the case description based on the physician’s subjective personal experience was over the top and detracted from the more balanced aspects of the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Medical researchers have recently returned to this plant product to investigate its effect on blood pressure and explore opportunities to put it to use in modern medicine and the home management of conditions.

Researchers have concluded that one glass of beetroot juice a day is enough to significantly reduce blood pressure in people with high blood pressure. They conducted a placebo-controlled trial with dozens of participants.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), high blood pressure is either the primary cause of or contributes to more than 1,000 deaths in the United States every day.

Because of the widespread impact of high blood pressure, researchers are likely to investigate in some depth any simple dietary interventions that could potentially benefit the wider population.

High blood pressure is a serious public health concern. It increases the risk of more dangerous health conditions, such as heart attack, stroke, and chronic heart failure. High blood pressure is also a major risk factor for kidney disease.

Beetroot contains high levels of dietary nitrate (NO3), which the body converts into biologically active nitrite (NO2) and nitric oxide (NO). In the human body, NO relaxes and dilates blood vessels.

Other leafy vegetables, such as lettuce and cabbage, also have high levels of the compound. They take it up from the soil through their roots.

A meta-analysis of 16 trials was published in The Journal of Nutrition in 2013.

The researchers found that "Inorganic nitrate and beetroot juice supplementation was associated with a significant reduction in systolic blood pressure."

One major trial was carried out at Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) in the United Kingdom and published in the journal Hypertension. The research was funded by the British Heart Foundation.

They found the following results:

For the trial, Prof. Amrita Ahluwalia of the vascular pharmacology department at QMUL and her colleagues recruited 64 people aged between 18 and 85 years.

Half of the participants were taking prescribed medication for high blood pressure but did not reach their target blood pressure, and the rest had been diagnosed with high blood pressure but were not yet taking medication for it.

The participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group consumed a 250-milliliter (ml) glass of beetroot juice, and the other group had the same, except their beetroot juice was nitrate-free.

The nitrate-free beetroot juice was the basis of the placebo group.

All groups consumed the juice daily for 4 weeks. They were also monitored for 2 weeks before and after the study, bringing the total trial period to 8 weeks.

The trial was double-blind, which means neither the administering clinicians nor the patients knew whether the beetroot juice they were given was the placebo or the active supplement.

During the 4 weeks in which they were taking the juice, patients in the active supplement group, whose beetroot juice contained inorganic nitrate, experienced a reduction in blood pressure of 8/4 millimeters of mercury (mmHg).

The first figure is systolic pressure, generated when the heart is pumping, and the second figure is diastolic pressure, created when the heart is relaxing and filling with blood. The 8/4-mmHg reduction brought the blood pressure of many participants back into the normal range.

In the 2 weeks after they stopped drinking the juice, their blood pressure returned to the higher levels noted at the start of the study.

This is the first study that shows evidence of dietary nitrate supplementation's long-lasting benefit in a group of patients with high blood pressure.

The patients in the active supplement group also experienced a 20 percent or so improvement in blood vessel dilation capacity, and their artery stiffness reduced by around 10 percent.

Studies show that these changes are linked to a reduced risk of heart disease.

There were no changes in blood pressure, blood vessel function, or artery stiffness in the placebo group.

The authors note that the reduction achieved in the active supplement group is close to that achieved by medication. The average reduction in blood pressure caused by a single anti-hypertension drug is 9/5 mmHg.

To put the importance of these findings in context: The authors note that large-scale observational studies show that for every 2 mmHg increase in blood pressure, the risk of death from heart disease goes up 7 percent and the risk of stroke by 10 percent.

Commenting on the findings, Prof. Ahluwalia says:

She says that one reason the findings are exciting is that they open up the potential for people with high blood pressure to increase dietary nitrate in a way that can be easily worked into their daily lives while still providing a positive benefit.

"It is hugely beneficial for people to be able to take steps in controlling their blood pressure through non-clinical means, such as eating vegetables," Prof. Ahluwalia adds. "We know many people don't like taking drugs life-long when they feel okay, and, because of this, medication compliance is a big issue."

"The possibility of using a natural product, rather than another pill, to help lower blood pressure, is very appealing," adds Dr. Amoils.

Prof. Ahluwalia advises that people looking to increase their daily nitrate intake should avoid boiling vegetables, as the nitrate dissolves in water. Instead, "steaming, roasting, or drinking in a juice all has a positive effect," she notes.

As for the next step in confirming the relationship between beetroot juice and blood pressure, she says this was a small trial. The next stage would be a larger study that tries to replicate the findings over a longer period with a much larger group of people who have high blood pressure.

Here is a link to a wide range of natural beetroot products. Please note that this will open an external site.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that people in the experimental group who consumed the nitrate-containing beetroot juice showed a reduction of 8/4 mmHg in their blood pressure after drinking the juice.  In addition, the experimental group showed as much as a 20 percent increase in blood vessel dilation, which may be helpful in reducing the risk of heart disease.  No such changes appeared in those people taking the placebo. Finally, the story notes how the changes in blood pressure might be expected to influence overall cardiovascular risk: “The authors note that large-scale observational studies show that for every 2 mmHg increase in blood pressure, the risk of death from heart disease goes up 7% and from stroke by 10%.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two big studies suggest possible new ways to screen healthy people for cervical or prostate cancers, but a third disappointed those hoping for a way to detect early signs of deadly ovarian tumors.

-For women 30 and over, a test for the virus, HPV, is better than a Pap smear for predicting cervical cancer risk, and those who test negative on both can safely wait three years to be screened again.

-A single PSA blood test at ages 44 to 50 might help predict a man's risk of developing advanced prostate cancer or dying of it up to 30 years later. The PSA test is notoriously unreliable, but using it this way separates men who need a close watch from those who are so low-risk that they can skip testing for five years or more.

-Screening women with no symptoms for ovarian cancer with a blood test and an ultrasound exam is harmful. It didn't prevent deaths and led to thousands of false alarms, unneeded surgeries and serious complications.

The last study is a warning to people who get screening tests that aren't recommended, or who question whether screening can ever hurt.

"The answer is, it could hurt a lot," said Dr. Allen Lichter, chief executive of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. The group published these and 4,000 other studies Wednesday, ahead of its annual meeting next month.

Cervical cancer is easy to prevent. It's very slow-growing and screening finds precancerous cells and allows early treatment. The new study was the first big one to examine a newer screening tool, HPV tests, with or without Pap smears in routine practice.

For a Pap test, cells scraped from the cervix, the gateway to the uterus, are checked under a microscope. But this can miss problems or raise false alarms.

HPV tests detect the human papillomavirus, which causes most cases of cervical cancer. But HPV is "the common cold" of the nether regions — most sexually active young people have been exposed to it, said Debbie Saslow, the American Cancer Society's director of breast and gynecologic cancer. Most infections go away on their own; they're only a cancer risk when they last a year or more.

Younger women tend to have short-term infections, so Pap tests are a better way to screen them. HPV tests are approved as an option along with Paps for women 30 and older, and the cancer society says that if a woman tests negative on both, she can wait three years to be screened again. Few take this advice, though.

"Women still want their annual Pap and doctors still want to give them," and think it's rationing care to test less often, Saslow said.

The new study gives "very, very solid support" for screening less often, Lichter said.

Hormuzd Katki of the National Cancer Institute studied more than 330,000 women getting HPV and Pap tests through Kaiser Permanente Northern California for five years.

Only about three out of 100,000 women each year developed cervical cancer after negative HPV and Pap tests. HPV tests were twice as good as Paps for predicting risk. Adding a Pap after a negative HPV test did little to improve risk prediction.

However, if an HPV test was positive, a Pap test helped confirm or rule out the need for follow-up.

The study didn't look at the downside of HPV testing — how many false alarms and needless procedures it triggered. HPV tests cost $80 to $100 compared to $20 to $40 for Paps.

The prostate study sought a better way to use PSA tests, which are troublesome because PSA can be high for many reasons besides cancer, and doctors don't know which cancers need treatment or whether screening saves lives. Most groups don't recommend PSA tests, but most men over 50 get them anyway.

The new study "is not going to end the controversy, but it suggests a very interesting middle ground," Lichter said.

Researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York used stored blood samples that 12,000 Swedish men gave for a heart study decades ago, when most were 44 to 50 years old. They also had second samples from some of them six years later, and samples from other 60-year-old men.

Looking 27 years later, researchers saw that 44 percent of cancer deaths occurred in men whose initial PSAs had been in the top 10 percent when they were 44 to 50 years old.

Conversely, scoring below the median meant very little cancer risk years later.

"They're identifying a group of guys who don't need to be screened, or need to be screened less often," said Dr. Otis Brawley, the cancer society's chief medical officer.

The results are "provocative," but this type of study can't prove that screening prevents deaths, said Dr. Matthew R. Smith of the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center. Few of the Swedish men were treated for prostate cancer as most men are today, which can affect survival.

The National Cancer Institute, the Swedish Cancer Society and several foundations paid for the work, and one researcher holds patents for two PSA-related tests.

Baseline PSA tests for men in their 40s can't be recommended yet, Brawley said. The cancer society says men should be informed of the risks and benefits of PSA tests starting at age 50, and sooner for blacks and those with family history of prostate cancer.

The government-funded ovarian cancer study involved nearly 80,000 women. Half were screened annually with an ultrasound for four years and a blood test for six years. The blood test looked for CA-125, a substance often elevated in ovarian cancer.

After 13 years, there were no major differences in ovarian cancers found or deaths from the disease. Screening found only 212 cancers while giving 3,285 false alarms that led to 1,080 unneeded biopsy surgeries and 163 serious complications.

"So many people say `how can cancer screening be harmful?' This thing documents it," Brawley said.

The results don't apply to using these tests on women with symptoms of ovarian cancer or abnormal physical exams. That's still the best way to check for ovarian cancer in those cases.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story quantifies the benefits, or lack of benefits, in terms that everyone can understand. For example, it says, “Only about three out of 100,000 women each year developed cervical cancer after negative HPV and Pap tests. HPV tests were twice as good as Paps for predicting risk. Adding a Pap after a negative HPV test did little to improve risk prediction.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An immunotherapy drug has been hailed as a potential 'game changer' after being found to greatly improve survival for patients with relapsed head and neck cancer - a disease which is notoriously difficult to treat.

Nivolumab became the first treatment to extend survival in a phase III clinical trial for patients with head and neck cancer in whom chemotherapy had failed - and it did so with fewer side-effects than existing therapeutic options.

More than double the number of patients taking nivolumab were alive after one year as those treated with chemotherapy, reported the major international trial, published today (Sunday) in the New England Journal of Medicine.

There are currently no other treatment options that improve the survival of patients with cisplatin-resistant relapsed or metastatic head and neck cancers. This group of patients are expected to live less than six months.

The trial was led in the UK by Professor Kevin Harrington of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, and involved 20 research organisations from around the world. It was funded by Bristol Myers Squibb.

Of the 361 patients in the trial, 240 with relapsed or metastatic head and neck cancer were allocated to receive nivolumab and 121 to one of three different chemotherapies. UK patients received the chemotherapy drug docetaxel, which is the only treatment approved for advanced head and neck cancer by NICE.

After one year of the study, 36 per cent of patients treated with nivolumab were still alive compared with 17 per cent for the comparator arm.

Median survival for patients on nivolumab was 7.5 months, compared with 5.1 months for chemotherapy.

The survival benefit was more pronounced in patients whose tumours had tested positive for human papillomavirus (HPV). These patients survived an average of 9.1 months with nivolumab and 4.4 months with chemotherapy.

HPV-negative patients survived an average of 7.5 months with nivolumab and 5.8 with chemotherapy.

Importantly, fewer patients experienced serious side-effects from taking nivolumab than with conventional treatment - only 13 per cent compared with 35 per cent of patients who received chemotherapy.

Patients given chemotherapy reported feeling physically, socially and emotionally worse off, whereas those who were given nivolumab remained stable during the course of treatment.

Professor Harrington will be presenting some of the findings at the European Society for Medical Oncology 2016 Congress in Copenhagen, simultaneously with publication.

Nivolumab will still have to go through approval by the European Medicines Agency and NICE before it is available for head and neck cancer patients on the NHS.

UK trial lead Professor Kevin Harrington, Professor of Biological Cancer Therapies at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and Consultant at The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, said:

"Nivolumab could be a real game-changer for patients with advanced head and neck cancer. This trial found that it can greatly extend life among a group of patients who have no existing treatment options, without worsening quality of life.

"Once it has relapsed or spread, head and neck cancer is extremely difficult to treat. So it's great news that these results indicate we now have a new treatment that can significantly extend life, and I'm keen to see it enter the clinic as soon as possible."

Professor Paul Workman, Chief Executive of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, said:

"Nivolumab is one of a new wave of immunotherapies that are beginning to have an impact across cancer treatment. This phase III clinical trial expands the repertoire of nivolumab even further, showing that it is the first treatment to have significant benefits in relapsed head and neck cancer.

"We hope regulators can work with the manufacturer to avoid delays in getting this drug to patients who have no effective treatment options left to them."

Some of the data was presented at 16:25 CEST today (Sunday) at the European Society for Medical Oncology 2016 Congress in Copenhagen.

For more information please contact Claire Hastings on 020 8722 5380 or claire.hastings@icr.ac.uk. For enquiries out of hours, please call 07595 963 613.

There were around 11,000 new cases of head and neck cancer and 3,300 deaths in the UK in 2012, 600,000 globally, and more than half relapse within 3-5 years.

The Institute of Cancer Research, London, is one of the world's most influential cancer research organisations.

Scientists and clinicians at The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) are working every day to make a real impact on cancer patients' lives. Through its unique partnership with The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and 'bench-to-bedside' approach, the ICR is able to create and deliver results in a way that other institutions cannot. Together the two organisations are rated in the top four centres for cancer research and treatment globally.

The ICR has an outstanding record of achievement dating back more than 100 years. It provided the first convincing evidence that DNA damage is the basic cause of cancer, laying the foundation for the now universally accepted idea that cancer is a genetic disease. Today it is a world leader at identifying cancer-related genes and discovering new targeted drugs for personalised cancer treatment.

A college of the University of London, the ICR is the UK's top-ranked academic institution for research quality, and provides postgraduate higher education of international distinction. It has charitable status and relies on support from partner organisations, charities and the general public.

The ICR's mission is to make the discoveries that defeat cancer. For more information visit http://www.

The Royal Marsden opened its doors in 1851 as the world's first hospital dedicated to cancer diagnosis, treatment, research and education. The Head and Neck Unit at The Royal Marsden is one of the largest of its kind in Europe.

Today, together with its academic partner, The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR), it is the largest and most comprehensive cancer centre in Europe treating over 50,000 NHS and private patients every year. It is a centre of excellence with an international reputation for groundbreaking research and pioneering the very latest in cancer treatments and technologies.

The Royal Marsden, with the ICR, is the only National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for Cancer. First awarded the status in 2006, it was re-awarded in 2011. A total of £62 million is being provided over five years, to support pioneering research work, and is being shared out over eight different cancer themes.

The Royal Marsden also provides community services in the London boroughs of Sutton and Merton and in June 2010, along with the ICR, the Trust launched a new academic partnership with Mount Vernon Cancer Centre in Middlesex.

Since 2004, the hospital's charity, The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity, has helped raise over £100 million to build theatres, diagnostic centres, and drug development units.

Prince William became President of The Royal Marsden in 2007, following a long royal connection with the hospital.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: There are two way of considering benefits in relation to this study: survival time and quality of life. The release addresses both of these. For example, the release notes that median survival time for patients receiving nivolumab was 7.5 months, as compared to 5.1 months for patients receiving conventional chemotherapy. The release also notes that fewer patients in the nivolumab group (13 percent) experienced “serious side-effects” than in the chemotherapy group (35 percent).
The release states: “More than double the number of patients taking nivolumab were alive after one year as those treated with chemotherapy.”  However, according to a table published as part of the study, the actual numbers of patients at that point had dwindled to 24 on the drug and five on conventional treatment, from the original group of 361 patients. Three months later this was down to five on the drug and one on conventional treatment, and 3 months after that (18 months into the trial), all patients had died. (as per Fig 1)
It’s worth noting that the group receiving nivolumab was significantly younger than the control group; the majority were under age 65. Drug companies do many things to bias their studies in subtle ways–might having relatively younger, healthier people in their drug group be one?  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Middle-aged women may find some relief from hot flashes and other menopause problems with soy supplements, according to Chinese researchers.

They found daily supplements of soy germ isoflavones reduced the sudden sweats more than inactive placebo pills after six months.

But a U.S. expert wasn’t convinced by the results, which run counter to other published studies.

“The majority of them are showing no benefit,” said William W. Wong, a nutrition researcher at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston who wasn’t involved in the new work.

The new study, published in the journal Menopause, is based on 90 Chinese women. A third of them received placebo pills made of starch, while the rest took soy germ isoflavones, either 84 or 126 milligrams a day.

They all kept diaries of their hot flashes and filled out questionnaires about various problems tied to menopause, including hot flashes, sweating, insomnia, tiredness and headache.

At six months, their Kupperman scores — a measure of symptom severity that ranges from 0 to 63 — had dropped by more than 40 percent from an initial value of about 25 in the soy groups.

The number of hot flashes also fell from about 20 a week to less than 10.

While the same pattern was seen in the placebo group, it was less pronounced. Their symptom score dropped by 29 percent and the number of hot flashes by 35 percent, according to Dr. Yan-bin Ye of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou.

The work was supported by Frutarom Netherlands, which also donated the supplements.

Wong cautioned that the new study was small and that the women involved only had few hot flashes. He said it was “hard to believe” that soy would have an effect on these women.

In one of his own studies, Wong found no effect on soy germ isoflavones among women who took the supplements for two years.

The standard drug treatment for stubborn menopause symptoms is hormone replacement therapy. But doctors and women have become increasingly wary of that option because of serious side effects such as increased risk for heart attack, stroke and breast cancer.

“It is something they need to gauge, is it worth the risk?” Wong told Reuters Health.

He generally recommends exercise and an active lifestyle to women who feel bothered by menopause.

Soy supplements also have side effects such as nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the National Institutes of Health. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

Wong said that in Asia, women tend to think of menopause problems as a natural part of life — not a medical problem.

“There is a major cultural difference in how we deal with menopause symptoms,” he mused.

The new study didn’t find significant hormone changes in women who took soy supplements, and Wong said the compounds are probably safe for women.

“Consuming soy is not bad for them,” Wong noted, “but it might be a waste of money if you don’t see any benefit.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: There was a discussion about the reductions of symptoms among patients in the study in both relative and absolute terms.  Would have liked a better idea if the levels in the study among Chinese women are what American women also experience.
In most prior studies of hot flashes, the frequency has been much higher in study subjects – more like 5 – 10 per day, not per week.  So, as commenter in story notes, these Chinese women were not very symptomatic compared to their American counterparts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are lung cancer scans really ready for prime time?

News that annual CT lung scans can reduce the risk of lung cancer death among former and current heavy smokers was celebrated by national heath officials this month. A major government study found the screening scans saved the life of one person for every 300 current or former smokers who were scanned.

But now cancer and screening experts are worried that the limited findings will be used by private screening centers to promote the test to a broader group than was studied. That, in turn, could lead to thousands of unnecessary lung scans, causing excess radiation exposure and unnecessary biopsies and surgery.

Dr. Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, said he was stunned to hear a radio advertisement for an Atlanta screening center cite the study just a few days after the government had announced the results. The wording of the ad seemed to be aimed at a broad group, ranging from heavy smokers to women who had never smoked, Dr. Brawley said.

“We really need to weigh the harms associated with screening,” he said. “The scientific community still needs to digest this. To take a trial that involves people at high risk for lung cancer and to extrapolate it and say it’s good for people with intermediate or low risk is not appropriate.”

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, focused on a specific high-risk group: 53,000 current and former heavy smokers, aged 55 to 74, who had smoked for at least 30 pack-years. That means someone who smoked one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years or three packs a day for at least 10 years would qualify for the study.

Former smokers who had accumulated 30 pack-years were included only if they had stopped smoking within the previous 15 years.

The smokers and former smokers were given either annual CT lung scans or chest X-rays. Compared with conventional X-rays, the CT, or computed tomography, scans create a detailed three-dimensional image of the lungs. The study was stopped when it was found that the scanning group had a 20 percent lower risk of dying from lung cancer than those being screened with X-rays.

But the early results also showed a downside of scanning: one of every four lung scans showed an abnormality, which often led to additional worry, radiation exposure from follow-up scans and, sometimes, lung biopsies and even risky surgery. But because the study was stopped early, a full analysis of the harms caused by screening scans is still months away.

Reading the scans is tricky because harmless nodules can be misinterpreted as suspect lesions. In the study, even experienced radiologists at major cancer centers had a high rate of false positives, suggesting that the rate would be even higher in the real world.

“There is a learning curve to reading spiral CTs,” Dr. Brawley said. “I’m concerned that some radiologists might be early in that learning curve and some patients may be harmed because of it.”

While the study found a benefit to scanning a specific group of high-risk smokers, that doesn’t mean other groups will get the same benefit, says Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. In lower-risk groups, for instance, it’s likely that thousands of people would need to be exposed to the risks of screening before a single life was saved. And it’s possible that many of those scanned unnecessarily could be seriously harmed.

“The aggregate harms to all the people’s lives who are not saved have to be taken into account,” Dr. Bach said. “Even in these highly controlled settings, about 1 percent of the people had surgery or a part of their lung removed for something they thought was cancer and it wasn’t.”

Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms.

For now, most consumers who want a scan will have to pay for it themselves, although it is expected that insurance companies eventually will approve scanning for those in high-risk groups. (Medicare officials have indicated that they will soon reconsider paying for the screening tests.) The government has estimated the cost at about $300 a scan, but some centers may charge $1,000 or more.

The day the government announced the study results, Westside Medical Imaging of Beverly Hills, Calif., issued a press release saying that the study “should once and for all settle the controversy” about whether CT lung scans save lives.

In the release, Dr. Norman E. Lepor said the scans were an “indispensable” part of annual exams for patients who have smoked for 10 years.

In an interview, Dr. Lepor said that he only offers lung scans to those at high risk, and that he turns people away who are at low risk but want the scan anyway because “they just want to know.”

Dr. Lepor said it would be “imprudent” not to incorporate the latest study data into his practice right away.

“There are people who, with good conscience and their take of the data, say it’s not ready for prime time, and there are people who look at the same data and they come to other conclusions,” Dr. Lepor said. “This is not the first study that has supported screening. We know from our own anecdotes that we have saved a lot of lives.”

Dr. Lepor said that he had just met a woman who had smoked for 50 years and was concerned about her risk. “She’s the poster person for this test,” he said.

Dr. Brawley said he’s worried that the few early press releases and radio advertisements are just the beginning of widespread promotion of screening lung scans.

“It was sort of ominous to be working Sunday evening in my home office and this thing comes on the radio,” he said. “A lot of people run out when there is a new announcement and get the new test. We’re very frightened some people are going to be harmed because of this.”

A version of this article appeared in print on Nov. 16, 2010, on page D5 of the New York edition of The Times.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Excellent.  The story put the important number needed to screen in the third sentence of the story:  “A major government study found the screening scans saved the life of one person for every 300 current or former smokers who were scanned.”  It went on to explain “The study was stopped when it was found that the scanning group had a 20 percent lower risk of dying from lung cancer than those being screened with X-rays.”
It could have done so in absolute terms, not relative risk reduction, but overall it warrants a satisfactory score.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Maryland medical group has started treating autistic children in South Florida with shots of a drug used for chemical castration, a therapy widely panned by mainstream experts.

The group gives children the cancer drug Lupron to stop their bodies from making testosterone, saying the drug helps expel toxic mercury and quells aggressive or sexually explicit behavior by kids with excessive levels of the male hormone.

A Boca Raton mother who just put her 18-year-old son on the drug said it seems to help.

But numerous physicians, researchers and therapists insist there's no proof mercury causes autism, that Lupron removes mercury or that autistic kids have excessive testosterone. What's more, the drug carries a risk of bone damage, stunted growth and heart trouble, and can render children impotent.

These experts contend that Lupron, costing about $5,000 a month but seldom covered by insurance, is one of many treatments that cash in on the desperation of parents trying to cope with an incurable condition for which medicine has few good answers outside of painstaking behavioral therapy.

"Not only is there no scientific backing whatsoever for Lupron treatments, there are several major concerns for the children's health," said neurologist BethAnn McLaughlin, an adviser to the Dan Marino Foundation autism group in Weston and the mother of two developmentally disabled children.

"These people are preying on the fears of parents. We cannot be using these children who are so vulnerable as guinea pigs in a medical experiment."

Untested autism treatments have flourished while science struggles to explain the disorder, which disrupts the abilities to speak, concentrate, connect with people and control impulses.

For unknown reasons, autism has been on the rise for the past few decades, with an estimated 675,000 children – about one in 100 – now having mild to severe symptoms. Scientists believe it stems from genetic defects that may only cause problems after an environmental trigger.

A vocal subset of parents and activists blame vaccines, especially those with the mercury-based preservative thimerosal, which has been banned from virtually all as a precaution. Numerous studies have found no connection between autism and vaccines or thimerosal.

Lupron therapy grew from the mercury camp. Baltimore researcher Dr. Mark Geier started using the drug in 2005 on the theory – disputed by mainsteam doctors – that testosterone binds mercury in the body and that many autistic kids have high levels of the hormone.

Lupron halts production of the female hormone estrogen, which the body uses to make testosterone. The drug mainly is used to treat endometrial cancer in women and prostate cancer in men, and sometimes to chemically castrate sex offenders.

Geier's promotional materials said he has treated hundreds of children with Lupron and has launched nine ASD Centers in eight states. In his latest, he teams with Dr. David Clayman, a Boca Raton radiologist who has an autistic teen son and is opening an ASD office beside his MRI center in Tamarac.

Clayman said he would not comment until he treats patients with Lupron therapy for a year. Geier could not be reached for comment despite several attempts by phone. He told one parent he did not plan to comment for this story.

The medical group began recruiting Florida patients in March when Geier spoke at a Fort Lauderdale conference for parents of children with autism.

Teresa Badillo was at the meeting. Her family has searched in vain for a way to help their autistic son, Marco, 18. Badillo said he has little speech or interaction with others, but is doing OK in high school. Lately, though, Marco has grown more aggressive, physical and rebellious.

"We were basically under seige in this house," Badillo said. "This kind of behavior is more scary at 18 [than] at 3. I had choices to make. If you see there is another option out there that can help your child, most parents are going to choose that option."

Also, Marco had discovered sex and sometimes touched himself inappropriately in public, a common problem among those with autism.

"The kids don't understand. They have impulses. It's what happens when you have high testosterone," Badillo said.

The family put Marco on Lupron about six weeks ago. He gets two injections a month at a dosage larger than used on adult cancer patients, plus a small daily shot.

"The therapy immediately stopped the aggression," Badillo said. "This is not castrating a kid. It's just lowering the [testosterone] levels enough to normal range so the kid is not aggressive."

She said Geier plans to continue the Lupron for several months to see if it helps Marco's other autistic behavior. She said she knows the drug has risks but believes Lupron critics do not fully grasp the hard realities of life with an autistic child.

Lupron critics said autism parents may not understand the dangers.

The drug is not approved for children – except a rare few with premature puberty – because it can impair bone development crucial to growth, said Dr. Gary Berkovitz, chief of pediatric endocrinology at the University of Miami medical school.

It's not recommended for people with heart disease, kidney disease, asthma, depression or seizures because it can worsen those conditions. Autistic children are prone to seizures.

"It has not been tested so there's no way to know if it has adverse effects in the long run," Berkovitz said.

Said neurologist McLaughlin: "We have very significant concerns about irreversible damage to sexual function and the brain and sex organs of these children."

In addition, the Food and Drug Administration is investigating complaints that Lupron causes diabetes in adults.

Geier published a 2006 study contending that 11 autistic children taking Lupron did better on tests of awareness, sociability and behavior. He has since issued other studies finding that mercury leads to excess testosterone and that autistic children have excessive levels of the hormone.

Other doctors said Geier's studies were small, were not scientifically sound and were published in journals that do not follow the standard practice of having experts review the methods.

The area's largest autism treatment center jointly run by the University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University, as well as another at Florida Atlantic University, frown on Lupron and other untested therapies, officials at the centers said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story, as noted, cites the Maryland researcher’s claims from small published studies, but also states: "      
numerous physicians, researchers and therapists insist there’s no proof mercury causes autism, that Lupron removes mercury or that autistic kids have excessive testosterone."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 31, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Weight-loss surgery helps people drop a significant amount of weight, and now a new study confirms that much of the weight appears to stay off for at least 10 years.

"This study suggests that patients interested in bariatric surgery, especially gastric bypass surgery, should be able to lose a significant amount of weight and keep that weight off for a very long time," said study researcher Matt Maciejewski. He's a professor of medicine at Duke University School of Medicine, in Durham, N.C.

While other research has found that weight-loss surgery is the most effective treatment for obese patients, there is less data on long-lasting effects. The new study is notable because of the decade-long follow-up, said Maciejewski, who is also a research career scientist at Durham Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

In the two-part study, Maciejewski's team first looked at the results of about 1,800 men and women who had gastric bypass surgery. The investigators compared weight changes in gastric bypass surgery patients to weight changes in more than 5,300 obese veterans who had no weight-loss surgery or formal weight-loss treatment.

Gastric bypass surgery involves making the stomach smaller, and attaching the lower part of the small intestine directly to the stomach, so much of the small intestine is bypassed. After surgery, people feel much fuller, faster. The surgery also appears to alter gut hormones, gut bacteria and metabolism, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK).

At the study's one-year mark, those who had the bypass had lost 31 percent of their starting weight, but the non-surgical patients had lost just 1 percent.

At 10 years, the researchers had weight information on 564 of the nearly 1,800 patients who had the gastric bypass. Only 19 of them had regained so much weight that they were nearly back to their starting weight; the rest kept off the weight.

Compared to the non-surgical group, the bypass group weighed 21 percent less than at the start of the study.

Next, the researchers compared three types of weight-loss surgeries: gastric bypass; sleeve gastrectomy; and adjustable gastric banding. In gastric banding, a band is placed at the top of the stomach to create a small pouch that reduces the size of the stomach. In sleeve gastrectomy, most of the stomach is removed, leaving a banana-shaped sleeve. As with gastric bypass surgery, both of these procedures leave people feeling full faster, according to NIDDK.

After four years, those who had gastric bypass lost nearly 28 percent of their starting weight. People who had sleeve gastrectomy lost about 18 percent and those with gastric banding lost about 11 percent, the researchers found.

The average age of the men and women studied was about 52, and three-quarters were men. Most were white.

The study was published online Aug. 31 in JAMA Surgery.

The study helps address a knowledge gap about long-term outcomes of bariatric surgery, said Dr. Jon Gould, chief of general surgery at the Medical College of Wisconsin in Milwaukee.

The study "shows that the gastric bypass procedure compared to sleeve gastrectomy or adjustable gastric banding produces more weight loss and it was sustained over the long term," Gould said. He wrote a commentary to accompany the study in the same issue of the journal.

Based on the new study findings, Gould said, "I think a patient who is young and who has a long way to go may want to think about these results, and all other things being equal, might pick a gastric bypass for the long-term weight loss."

The new finding, he added, validates his belief that the gastric bypass could be a "durable procedure."

Maciejewski acknowledged that the study has limitations. For example, the study included mostly men, so the findings may not apply to women. In addition, women who undergo bariatric surgery are typically in their 30s through their 50s, he said. In this study, the average age of the men and women was 52.

"These results may not generalize to everyone," he said.

Another possible limitation was the loss of patients during the follow-up, which could have affected the results, the researchers noted.

To learn more about bariatric surgery procedures, visit the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a nice job of making the weight loss comparisons—both over time for gastric bypass surgery and across surgical options—clear.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, March 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A simple blood test may one day offer a safe way to detect Down syndrome during pregnancy, researchers say.

In a small study, an experimental blood test identified a gene mutation associated with Down syndrome with 100 percent accuracy, according to the Cyprus scientists.

"Down syndrome is a common birth defect, with one Down syndrome birth in every 600 births in all populations," said lead researcher Philippos Patsalis, chief executive medical director of the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics in Nicosia. "This is due to an extra chromosome 21, and that leads to physical and mental impairment."

"With our method we identify all normal and all Down syndrome [pregnancies]," Patsalis said.

Currently, Down syndrome is diagnosed using one of two invasive procedures, amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Because these tests, while 80 percent accurate, carry a 1 percent to 2 percent risk of miscarriage, only about one in 10 pregnant women opts for them, he said.

The new test eliminates the risk of miscarriage, Patsalis said.

It also can identify Down syndrome in the 11th week of pregnancy, early enough for a woman to end her pregnancy if she chooses, Patsalis said.

Although Down syndrome varies in severity, it usually causes some intellectual impairment and distinguishing facial features. Heart defects and other health problems are also common, according to the March of Dimes. Older mothers are more likely to give birth to Down syndrome babies.

People with Down syndrome, also known as Trisomy 21, carry three copies of chromosome 21, instead of two.

For the study, published online March 6 in Nature Medicine, Patsalis and his colleagues took blood samples from pregnant women and mothers of Down syndrome and healthy babies. In each case, the test quickly pinpointed the chromosomal variation, identifying 14 Down syndrome cases and 26 normal fetuses, the study authors said.

If larger clinical trials confirm the results, the test could become standard practice, Patsalis said. "The cost is much lower than the invasive procedures," he said. "We estimate we can introduce this to clinical practice in a couple of years."

Dr. Brian Skotko, clinical fellow in genetics at Children's Hospital Boston and a spokesman for the National Down Syndrome Society, said this study has widespread implications for the incidence of Down syndrome.

With this new test, women will know if their baby has Down syndrome even before they look pregnant, Skotko said. "So they will be able to make a very personal decision without anyone realizing it," he said.

Noting that most of his Down syndrome patients say they lead fulfilling lives, Skotko said, "The overwhelming majority of family members say they can't imagine their life without their family member with Down syndrome."

For more information on Down syndrome, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that “the test quickly pinpointed the chromosomal variation, identifying 14 Down syndrome cases and 26 normal fetuses.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Treating more Americans with statins is worth the small risk of side-effects and would be cost-effective, a new report finds.

New guidelines from the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology in 2013 broadened the definition of who should get cholesterol-lowering statins, which are among the most widely prescribed drugs in the world. One of the recommendations was that statins should be prescribed to anyone with a 7.5 percent risk or higher of developing heart disease over the next 10 years.

Patients and doctors alike complained that the new guidelines were confusing. But in the new report, Dr. Thomas Gaziano of the Harvard School of Public Health and colleagues say they’re in fact simpler than the old guidelines, which advised people to aim for a total cholesterol level of less than 200, keeping “bad” LDL cholesterol to 130 for average people and under 100 for those considered at risk of a heart attack.

There’s an online tool that people or their doctors can use to calculate their risk of heart disease, which is based on age, sex, blood pressure and cholesterol levels.

Gaziano and colleagues created a computer simulation to see if giving statins to more people would be worth the risk of side-effects and the extra cost.

It would be, they report in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

“You have to be at extremely low risk before the risk of statins outweighs their significant, profound benefits,” Gaziano said.

Experts estimate that another 8 million to 13 million Americans would get statins if everyone used the new criteria -– with just under half of all adults aged 40 to 75 eligible.

Statins, which include Lipitor, Mevacor, Crestor and Zocor, are extremely popular. They’re prescribed to about 15 percent of U.S. adults, at a cost ranging from about $4 a month for the cheapest generic version to $600 for a pricey name-brand.

They can damage muscle in 5 to 15 percent of patients. In 2012, the Food and Drug Administration updated labeling on statins to include warnings about confusion and memory loss, elevated blood sugar leading to Type 2 diabetes, and muscle weakness.

But even with those risks, it’s worthwhile, Gaziano’s team found. And if even more people were given statins -- if they were given to people with a 3 percent risk of developing heart disease over 10 years -– another 160,000 heart attacks and strokes would be prevented, they estimated.

Limiting factors should be a patient's own preference about taking a daily pill, price and the risk of diabetes, they said.

“There is no longer any question as to whether to offer treatment with statins for patients for primary prevention, and there should now be fewer questions about how to treat and in whom,” Dr. Philip Greenland, an expert in preventive medicine at Northwestern University and a senior editor of the journal, and Dr. Michael Lauer of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute wrote in a commentary.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did quantify benefits using absolute numbers when describing the potential impact on heart attacks from wider statin use. The story said that “if even more people were given statins — if they were given to people with a 3 percent risk of developing heart disease over 10 years — another 160,000 heart attacks and strokes would be prevented, they estimated.” We thought the Times, though, did a better job overall providing context for those numbers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
What Happens If You Try To Prevent Every Single Suicide?

Each year, nearly three times as many Americans die from suicide as from homicide. More Americans kill themselves than die from breast cancer.

As Dr.Thomas Insel, longtime head of the National Institute of Mental Health, prepared to step down from his job in October, he cited the lack of progress in reducing the number of suicides as his biggest disappointment. While the homicide rate in the U.S. has dropped 50 percent since the early 1990s, the suicide rate is higher than it was a decade ago.

"That to me is unacceptable," Insel says.

It hasn't been for lack of trying. The U.S. has a national suicide hotline, and there are suicide prevention programs in every state. There's screening, educational programs, and midnight walks to raise awareness. Yet over the past decade or so, the national suicide rate has increased. In 2003, the suicide rate was 10.8 per 100,000 people. In 2013, it was 12.6.

An effort that began in Detroit in 2001 to treat the most common cause of suicide — depression — is offering hope. With a relentless focus on finding and treating people with depression, the Henry Ford Health System has cut the suicide rate among the people in its insurance plan dramatically. The story of the health system's success is a story of persistence, confidence, hope and a strict adherence to a very specific approach.

That approach saved the life of a woman who prefers to be known only by her first name, Lynn. She agreed to share her medical history on the condition that we not use her full name to protect her privacy.

Lynn, who's now in her mid-50s, has had bipolar disorder, also known as manic-depressive illness, for nearly 30 years. The depressive part of her illness "is like the pain of having a cancer," she says. About 15 years ago, she started getting irresistible urges to take her own life and she started making serious attempts — at times almost monthly.

"When I was in the depths of depression, I was being pulled and sucked into this black tunnel," she says. "I was desperately trying to grab onto something to stop from being sucked in." Sometimes she couldn't find anything to hang on to. "Those are the times when I finally let go and attempted suicide," she says.

The program that saved Lynn almost didn't get off the ground.

Fifteen years ago, suicide prevention care at Henry Ford, like in many places, was mostly reactive. When patients came in talking about suicide, health providers took notice. But little was done to find people before they reached that point.

Some of the health providers in the psychiatric division decided they could do better. So they applied to a foundation for a grant to provide something they called "perfect depression care" for the 200,000 patients in the health system. The goal: zero suicides.

The mental health division failed to win the grant, but the health system went ahead with the proposed changes anyway.

The plan it developed is intensive and thorough, an almost cookbook approach. Primary care doctors screen every patient with two questions: How often have you felt down in the past two weeks? And how often have you felt little pleasure in doing things? A high score leads to more questions about sleep disturbances, changes in appetite, thoughts of hurting oneself. All patients are questioned on every visit.

If the health providers recognize a mental health problem, patients are assigned to appropriate care — cognitive behavioral therapy, drugs, group counseling, or hospitalization if necessary. On each patient's medical record, providers have to attest to having done the screening, and they record plans for any needed care.

Therapists involve patients' families, and ask them to remove guns or other means of suicide from their homes. Clerks are trained to make sure that patients who need followup care don't leave without an appointment. Patients themselves come up with "safety plans."

Lynn has two copies, one by her nightstand and one in her kitchen. Each lists things she can do when she feels depression coming on. She could sit on her balcony, or do some drawing or painting. The list includes her therapists' phone numbers. And there's a reminder that the feeling will pass — it has before.

Before the zero suicide plan went into effect, says psychiatrist Doree Ann Espiritu, acting head of the zero suicide program at Henry Ford, you might make a contract with a patient where the patient agrees not to commit suicide. Studies show it doesn't work very well, she says.

Today, providers are trained to be comfortable asking their patients about suicidal thoughts. "There is a fear among clinicians that if you ask questions about suicide, you are giving the patient an idea that this could be an option," says Espiritu, "and if you ask about guns or pills, that you are giving them some hints on how they can carry out a plan." The Henry Ford therapists are trained to break that barrier.

For Lynn, the key was persistence — her therapists', and her own. "I recall one time with my psychiatrist, who kept trying to encourage me and help me find ways of coping, and I can remember saying, 'I don't believe there's hope, I don't see it, I don't feel it, I need you to hold on to that for me because it's not there,' " she recalls.

Her therapists never gave up. "There is no question that the message I got from Day 1 is that they knew they could help me, and they would help me," Lynn says. Over the years she's been in group therapy, day treatment, and, when things got bad, the emergency room.

The Henry Ford approach is catching on. A stream of visitors from U.S. health insurers and from the United Kingdom have made site visits. The Suicide Prevention Resource Center has run two zero suicide training academies for teams from health care systems based on the Henry Ford principles. Other health systems have adapted the plan, including Group Health Cooperative in Seattle and the behavioral health provider Centerstone in Tennessee.

Espiritu started work at Henry Ford just as the program was starting, and she remembers the initial staff meetings: "There was a lot of, 'How can you do this? How can you aim for zero? How can you expect your clinicians to be perfect and follow this protocol?' " Some people didn't think it could be done, she says, or even attempted.

Still, the health system went ahead, and the rewards were nearly immediate. Henry Ford epidemiologist Brian Ahmedani studies the numbers. In 2009, for those being actively treated for a mental health problem or substance abuse, "we had a rate of zero per hundred thousand," he says. It's crept up to 20 per 100,000 per year, but that's still 80 percent lower than it was when the program began. The rate is five per 100,000 in the organization's general population, which is well below the national average and has remained steady despite an increasing rate of suicide statewide.

There's reason to think a full-bore effort to treat depression could reduce health costs, because untreated depression is associated with higher medical bills for chronic illnesses such as diabetes and hypertension. But there are training costs involved, and the Henry Ford system has had to keep its staffing up to be able to provide care for people who need it.

Officials at Henry Ford say they haven't analyzed the costs. But Centerstone has. The behavioral health provider in Nashville implemented the Henry Ford approach for nearly 200 patients who'd already made a suicide attempt. Reductions in emergency room visits and hospitalizations over the course of a year resulted in savings of more than $400,000.

Why push for zero, rather than just a reduction? "Because if you say we're OK with five a year, one of those might be your brother or your friend," says Espiritu. "We aim for zero because it reminds all of us of what we would want for ourselves." Maybe it is not possible, she says. But it is a goal.

And as for Lynn, she doesn't consider herself cured. She says with the treatment she's received at Henry Ford, she's learned to live, even thrive, with bipolar disease. And she's alive. That, she says, makes her a big success story.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that the Henry Ford Health System currently has a suicide rate of 20 per 100,000 among patients with mental health and/or substance abuse problems, which is 80 percent lower than than it had been when the “perfect depression care” was launched in 2001. It also notes that the overall suicide rate for system patients is five per 100,000 — which is significantly lower than the national average of 12.6 per 100,000. It would have been good if the story had simply given the starting suicide rate among patients with mental health and/or substance abuse problems in 2001 (according to Henry Ford it was apparently 89 per 100,000), rather than asking readers to do the math.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(New York, NY - January 18, 2017) An international phase 3 trial has found that the drug regorafenib improved survival in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a form of liver cancer, giving people who previously had no other options a better chance at survival. Results from the study, which included researchers at The Tisch Cancer Institute at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, were recently published online in The Lancet. The trial, funded by Bayer, included 152 sites in 21 countries.

About 40 percent of HCC cases are diagnosed at advanced stages, a point when HCC is particularly difficult to treat. This trial provides evidence that regorafenib is the first systemic treatment for patients whose HCC progressed during treatment with sorafenib, the only other drug with proven clinical benefit.

This study tested regorafenib's effectiveness as a second-line therapy on 573 patients previously treated with sorafenib, 194 of whom were given a placebo. Regorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, significantly improved overall survival, from 7.8 months on placebo to 10.6 months with regorafenib. Two patients treated with regorafenib had their tumor shrink to an undetectable level, according to the study.

"This study represents a breakthrough in the management of hepatocellular carcinoma, since it provides evidence for clinical benefits in an area that was an unmet medical need," said Josep M. Llovet, MD, founder and Director of the Liver Cancer Program and Professor of Medicine and Liver Diseases at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. "Regorafenib has shown it can improve survival in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma progressing on sorafenib. Previously, no treatment was available for these patients."

Dr. Llovet was a member of the clinical trial's steering committee, and Charissa Chang, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine and Liver Diseases at the Icahn School of Medicine, was principal investigator of the Mount Sinai testing site.

The success of this trial opens the field for testing drugs in third-line treatment of HCC and provides a rationale to test regorafenib as a first-line treatment or in combination with therapies administered directly into the tumor or diseased liver in patients in an earlier stage of HCC, according to Dr. Llovet. In this trial, regorafenib was well-tolerated with manageable adverse events, according to the paper in Lancet.

In January, Bayer announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had granted priority review status for Stivarga (regorafenib) as a second-line systemic treatment for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. This research was also presented during the European Society of Medical Oncology's World Congress on Gastrointestinal Cancer in June.

Liver cancer is the second-leading primary cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release is pretty clear on this point, noting that patients who received regorafenib had an overall survival of 10.6 months, compared to 7.8 months for patients who received a placebo.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“We had outstanding results, and our study, we think, is representative of these treatments in the and ,” said Dr. Thomas G. Brott, director for research at the campus in , Fla., and lead author of the North American study, called Crest (for Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy versus Stenting Trial). “Prior to the Crest trial, we really did not have the best evidence, but these results indicate that we have two very safe and effective methods to prevent stroke.”

Though there are differences in risk between the two procedures and individual variations, he said, “the results from stenting are very comparable to those for carotid surgery.”

But Dr. Martin M. Brown, chief investigator for the European trial, the International Carotid Stenting Study, said that although differences in the groups studied might explain the disparate results, “nobody has really shown stenting is better than surgery, so why choose a stent?”

Dr. Brown added, “Even if Crest shows little difference between the two, there are three other trials that suggest surgery is safer.”

Strokes are the third leading cause of death in the United States and a major cause of disability among adults. Each year, almost 800,000 Americans suffer a stroke, and more than 140,000 die.

Although many patients take drugs like statins and medicine to reduce their risk of stroke, surgical treatment of severe blockages in the carotid artery has been shown to be more effective than medical therapy alone in preventing ischemic strokes caused by a buildup of plaque in the arteries.

The Crest trial, sponsored by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke with additional financing from the stent maker Abbott Vascular, is one of the largest randomized clinical trials to study the two major procedures used to open blocked neck arteries and restore blood flow to the brain.

It included 2,502 patients at more than 100 in the United States and Canada, who were randomly assigned to receive either surgery or stenting over a period of nine years. Most of the patients had an artery blockage greater than 70 percent. The trial included patients who had suffered a stroke or a ministroke and those who were asymptomatic.

The death rate in the trial was very low, but risks varied depending on the procedure. Within the first month after the procedure, 4.1 percent of stent patients had suffered a stroke, compared with 2.3 percent of the surgery patients. But surgery patients were at higher risk for , with 2.3 percent suffering a heart attack in the first 30 days compared with 1.1 percent of stent patients. Strokes had a higher impact on the patient’s quality of life, the study reported.

Younger patients — those under 70 — had better results with stenting, while older patients had better results with surgery, the study found.

Long-term follow-up of patients, which was two and a half years on average but is continuing, found both groups at equal risk of suffering a stroke that should have been prevented by the procedure: 2 percent of those in the stent group compared with 2.4 percent of the surgical patients.

The European trial, which included 1,713 patients randomly assigned to either stent or endarterectomy, found that stent patients were at much higher risk of stroke, death or heart attack in the first 30 days after surgery, with 7.4 percent suffering one of these adverse events, compared with 4 percent of the surgery group.

Among the possible explanations offered for the disparities are that the European study included only symptomatic patients, who may have had more advanced disease, and that the North American trial carefully screened the doctors doing the stenting procedure, including only highly skilled physicians with a lot of experience.

Dr. Walter J. Koroshetz, deputy director of the institute that sponsored the North American trial, said the Crest trial was the first in which the results of stenting and surgery had been found to be equivalent — suggesting that the stent procedure had improved with time.

The most important message is that the overall death rate was extremely low, 0.6 percent, said one of the study’s principal investigators, Dr. Gary S. Roubin, the chairman of cardiovascular medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.

“What this trial has done overwhelmingly,” he said, “is shown that in , with the very skilled surgeons and physicians performing stenting, the outcomes were extremely safe.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a satisfactory job of presenting the major findings using the appropriate statistics. Like the LA Times, however, this story suggests that the disparate findings of the two studies might be explained by the better training and experience of the American CREST surgeons compared with their European counterparts in the ICSS trial. We wish it had spent some time exploring whether the typical patient in the U.S. can expect to receive the kind of expert care offered by the top CREST surgeons. In many cases, the "real-world" outcomes of patients will be less favorable than what the CREST team reported.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBIA, Mo. (March 10, 2016) - Approximately 14 percent of men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some point in their lifetimes, according to the National Institutes of Health. Radiation therapy traditionally has been a primary treatment for the cancer, but one-fourth of men have a recurrence of prostate cancer within five years after the therapy. Now, a University of Missouri School of Medicine researcher has found that a complex procedure to remove the prostate achieves excellent long-term survival for men after radiation therapy has failed.

"Prostate cancer, unfortunately, is a common cancer, and more than 27,000 men are estimated to have died from the disease in 2015," said Naveen Pokala, M.D., an assistant professor in the Division of Urology at the MU School of Medicine and lead author of the study. "By studying a national database of prostate cancer cases, we found that a procedure known as salvage radical prostatectomy can greatly increase a man's chance of survival when traditional radiation therapy has failed to eradicate the cancer."

Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program database, Pokala and his research team studied 364 patients who underwent a salvage radical prostatectomy surgery after unsuccessful radiation treatments. Looking at survival rates, the researchers found that 88.6 percent of men were still alive 10 years later and 72.7 percent of men were still alive 20 years later.

During a salvage radical prostatectomy, the prostate gland and surrounding tissue are surgically removed to keep the cancer from spreading. The procedure is challenging because tissue that surrounds the prostate is scarred during radiation treatment, making it difficult for the surgeon to identify and cut out tissue that needs to be removed. If the cancer is localized, a highly skilled surgeon can remove the gland and surrounding tissue using a robotic minimally invasive technique or through an open surgery.

"Because radical prostatectomy is a complex surgery, there can be a reluctance to undergo the procedure," Pokala said. "However, this study shows that it is a viable treatment option. This can bring a renewed hope and peace of mind to men living with prostate cancer."

The study, "Survival Outcomes in Men Undergoing Radical Prostatectomy after Primary Radiation Treatment for Adenocarcinoma of the Prostate," recently was published by Clinical Genitourinary Cancer, a peer-reviewed journal on the detection, diagnosis, prevention and treatment of genitourinary cancers.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release adequately quantifies the benefits with this statement:
“Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program database, Pokala and his research team studied 364 patients who underwent a salvage radical prostatectomy surgery after unsuccessful radiation treatments. Looking at survival rates, the researchers found that 88.6 percent of men were still alive 10 years later and 72.7 percent of men were still alive 20 years later.”
It would have been beneficial to readers if the release had also included cancer-specific survival. Without a comparison group, it’s hard to draw any conclusions about the benefit of this approach. Even if there was a comparison, it’s also hard to draw conclusions from observational data. While they could report how many patients were alive at the end of the study period only a relatively small proportion of the patients would have been followed for the 20 years so it would be hard to interpret.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 23, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Implantable devices designed to control heart rhythm and efficiency while preventing sudden death among heart failure patients are as effective at ensuring patient survival in real-world situations as they are in controlled study environments, new research suggests.

The finding is based on an analysis of nearly 186,000 patients outfitted with either an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), a cardiac resynchronization therapy device (CRT), or a defibrillator combined with a CRT device (a CRT-D).

The study authors noted that the observation is somewhat surprising, given that some of the patients not enrolled in structured studies have already experienced a cardiac event and are therefore prescribed such devices to prevent a recurrence.

This would suggest that real-world heart failure patients, as a whole, might be more vulnerable to fatal events than those tracked in a study setting.

"I'm very encouraged that survival after defibrillator implant is as good as it is for as long as it is," co-author Dr. Leslie A. Saxon, chief of the division of cardiovascular medicine at the University of Southern California's Keck School of Medicine in Los Angeles, said in a news release from the American Heart Association.

"There's a lot of good news here," she added.

Saxon and her team reported their observations in the Nov. 22 online edition of Circulation.

Crunching the numbers, the authors determined that 92 percent of ICD patients survive one year out from device implantation. The same is true for 88 percent of CRT-D patients, they noted.

Five years out, those figures dipped to 68 percent for ICD patients and 54 percent for CRT-D patients.

Among those outfitted with CRT devices alone, one-year survival was pegged at 82 percent, while five-year survival came in at 48 percent, the investigators found.

The poorer prognosis for CRT-only patients was attributed to their older average age (76 years), and the fact that they may be relatively sicker overall. Patients today tend to receive CRT devices with defibrillators.

The study team also found that patients whose implants were monitored remotely, on a continual basis, by a health facility network were about half as likely to die as patients who only had intermittent in-person assessments.

Remote monitoring via telephone lines and online physician access is available for all ICD and CRT-D devices, the authors noted, and enrollment in such programs is typically free with a cardiologist's recommendation.

"It's highly likely the reason these patients did better is that they were receiving earlier diagnoses, and they were also empowered to take charge of their own health care more," Saxon said. "I don't think there's any reason not to put a patient on it."

Dr. Eric N. Prystowsky, cardiologist and director of clinical electrophysiology at St. Vincent Medical Center in Indianapolis, said that the findings are "good news," but cautioned against over-interpreting the data.

"These are very basic facts, concerning simply who lived and died," he noted. "So we don't really know what it all means, and it's inappropriate to suggest that we could, based only on this compilation of data."

But, Prystowsky continued, "this analysis does show two impressive things: one, that patients who are not super-selected for a trial do well with these devices from a mortality standpoint; and two, that patients who had home-monitoring had better outcomes."

Prystowsky added, "Now on the latter point, again, from this data we can't say exactly why that is. But at our facility we think it makes caring for a patient much easier. Physicians knowing things sooner will theoretically give a patient a better chance for quicker access to appropriate care. And that has to be good. So we think there's certainly no downside to remote monitoring and, wherever possible, it's reasonable to want to do this."

For more on implantable devices, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We give the story a barely passing grade here for at least providing readers with some numbers, although we feel that ultimately the numbers provide very little clarity. What was needed were some absolute numbers to show how many patients were in each group, how many died, how many lived and how many suffered side effects, etc. Instead, we are given sentences like this, “Among those outfitted with CRT devices alone, one-year survival was pegged at 82 percent, while five-year survival came in at 48 percent, the investigators found.”
In addition, the study was observational and as such, the benefits of remote monitoring seen may not be applicable to all patients. For example a selection bias (motivated patients and physicians signed on to the manufacturers registry) could explain a good deal of the results. The cautionary comments of Dr. Prystowsky provided sufficient balance to the comments of the investigator.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The finding is another in a series suggesting that early detection of cancer might not always lead to better outcomes for patients. A study published in March, for instance, suggested that early detection of using the blood test did not help men live longer but did lead to unnecessary treatments.

This new study does not refer to initial diagnosis of ovarian cancer, only to a relapse. Doctors are convinced that if the initial diagnosis can be made early, which is very difficult, the cancer can be treated by surgery. But for relapsed ovarian cancer, surgery is usually not an option.

Dr. Beth Karlan, director of gynecologic oncology at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in , said the results of the new trial would “make us all rethink the approach to treating patients with recurrent ovarian cancer.”

Dr. Karlan, who was not involved in the study but presented a commentary on it, said CA125 testing should be done less frequently. But she stopped short of saying it should be eliminated, saying that in any event, patients would not accept that.

“Many women often say they live from one CA125 to the next,” she said.

The new study, done in and nine other countries, compared 265 women who began chemotherapy after their CA125 levels began to rise with 264 women who waited to begin chemotherapy until they had symptoms, like or pain.

The group getting the test began chemotherapy a median of about five months earlier. But the overall median survival for the groups was the same, about months from the start of their remission. Moreover, the extra chemotherapy seemed to worsen the quality of life.

Dr. Rustin said the explanation for the counterintuitive results was not that CA125 was a poor predictor of cancer’s return. Rather, he said, some cancers were sensitive to chemotherapy, so it did not matter if they were treated early. Other were resistant to chemotherapy and would not respond to treatment no matter when it was given.

Dr. Andrew Berchuck, director of gynecologic oncology at , said that while “it’s the American way, sort of, to be aggressive” and treat early, some doctors and patients even now did not start chemotherapy when CA125 rises.

“I’ve had patients who wouldn’t dream of not being treated,” Dr. Berchuck said. “But there are also people who wouldn’t want to go back on chemo unless they absolutely have to.”

Diane Paul, an ovarian cancer survivor and patient advocate in , said that when she was getting the CA125 test, she asked her doctors not to tell her the results, to reduce her anxiety. “I was in a constant state of , waiting for the test, waiting for the results,” she said.

But others would prefer to know. “This makes me feel in control of this disease,” said Carol Tawney of Shawnee, Kan., a seven-year survivor who has her CA125 tested every two months.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately quantifies the survival benefit with CA-125 compared to no testing.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Even though her mammogram showed no sign of cancer, Sandra Litt knew she could feel a lump. She had a second mammogram. Nothing there, the radiologist assured her. "Then one night, I found the 'nothing there' had grown bigger," Litt said. Her self-exam had proved accurate. Two years ago, Litt underwent a double mastectomy and months of chemotherapy to survive an aggressive breast cancer. It defies common sense, she says, for scientists to conclude that breast self-exams do women more harm than good. "It's a very important tool," the 67-year-old Portland woman says. "Why throw away an important tool?" A scientific review, published in August by the

, highlighted the downside of doing breast self-exams: Women taught to perform the monthly ritual wind up having unnecessary biopsies. They are about twice as likely to undergo biopsies that won't find cancerous tumors, according to two studies tracking hundreds of thousands of women in China and Russia. Conflicting news coverage has heightened the confusion. "Breast self-exam has no benefit," one headline proclaimed. "Breast self-exam key in catching what mammogram may miss," another said. What is clear is that studies don't supply an answer that fits all women.

Dr. Elizabeth Steiner, director of the breast health education program at

, said each woman must decide for herself, with full knowledge of the pros and cons, whether to perform self-exams. And there's not a right or wrong answer. Some may do the exams and accept the risk of unnecessary biopsies, she said. Others may decide that either they can't commit the time to do them right, or that the potential for false alarms and anxiety isn't worth it. "That's a very personal decision," Steiner said.

When doctors began promoting breast self-exams in the 1950s, the benefits seemed obvious. Here was a simple, inexpensive do-it-yourself way for women to find tumors before it was too late. During the women's health movement of the 1970s, the self-exam gained importance as a means for women to take charge and rely less on a paternalistic health system. But researchers have learned that self-exams aren't at all simple. The technique is complicated and difficult to learn to do well. Guidelines on how to do them correctly have evolved, leaving many women and doctors with outdated ideas. Further, decades of research still have not produced good evidence that self-exams make any difference in breast cancer survival. "Not only do the trials not find a benefit, the trials demonstrate harm in terms of increased physician visits and benign breast biopsies," said Dr. Nancy Baxter, a University of Toronto surgeon who reviewed the evidence on self-exams for the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. She said self-exams may not reveal tumors early enough to improve survival. "By the time a breast cancer is large enough to be detected by self-exam, tumor biology is the most important predictor of outcome, not finding a tumor a few months before it would have become apparent," she said. Given the lack of evidence, the

considers the exams unproven. And the

has recommended against routine teaching of breast self-exams since 2001. Unnecessary biopsies may not be the only hidden cost. "One danger of pushing breast self-exams on patients is that they may be falsely reassured by it and opt out of their mammograms," said Dr. Heidi Nelson, medical director of the

in Portland. She stopped routinely teaching self-exams to patients after the large trials in China and Russia showed no benefit.

Some evidence does suggest that self-exams done properly could make a difference. For instance, they provide a means to search for tumors in outer parts of the breast where mammography may not reach. About half of breast cancers develop in the upper-outer quadrant of the breast, which is largely inaccessible to mammography scanners. A small study in Canada in 1997 found that self-exams seemed to improve survival among a subset of women using proper technique. The preferred method, known as the vertical strip, three-pressure test, has proved the most sensitive and least likely to produce false alarms, Steiner said. In the largest and most influential study to date, involving 266,000 women in Shanghai, Steiner said researchers taught an inferior method of exams. She said that could partly explain why the Shanghai study failed to find improved survival. Self-exams also appeal strongly to some younger women, whose main screening test is a manual exam done by a doctor or nurse. Mammography is considered inappropriate for women younger than 40, and many doctors don't recommend it until age 50. If a woman decides to do self-exams, Steiner said, it's important to learn to do them right -- and do them every month without fail. "Done haphazardly and irregularly, it is probably worse than no breast self-exam at all," Steiner said. She encourages women to schedule an appointment devoted to learning the technique, which should take at least a half-hour. A few minutes squeezed into a routine annual exam aren't enough, she said. Steiner said not all doctors are up to speed on breast exam technique, which calls for lying down, not taking a few minutes standing in the shower -- the form pushed for years by physicians and even anti-breast cancer groups. "It's important to ask, 'Do you feel confident in your own technique and training me how to do it?'" she said. Nelson cautions women not to skip their mammograms if they don't find lumps during self-exams. But finding a lump also is no reason to panic, given the limited accuracy of the self-test. Litt, the breast cancer survivor, has another piece of advice: "Do not ignore your own judgment; and be assertive," she said. "You don't get a do-over."

What to make of breast cancer's "1-in-8" statistic.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses two international studies upon which the Cochrane report is based and discusses the findings that there is no demonstrated benefit from regular BSE. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An Online Program May Help Prevent Depression In Some People

Working through a self-help program online can prevent or delay major depression disorder in people who are vulnerable, a study finds. Similar programs have been used to treat depression, but this may be the first one tested to prevent it, the researchers say.

Online programs for mental health problems can be as effective as face-to-face treatment and offer some advantages: Low cost, available at any time and customizable. But they're not panaceas.

In this experiment, half of the participants were asked to do six half-hour-long exercises that were based on cognitive behavioral therapy and problem-solving therapy, which are techniques commonly used for in-person therapy.

In the cognitive behavioral therapy, participants were asked to identify positive activities they used to engage in and then are asked to actively plan those activities again. At the next session, participants reflect on their experiences.

For the problem-solving therapy, people were asked to create a list of the things that matter most to them in their lives and brainstorm on how to incorporate those things into daily life. They next were asked to categorize problems and worries into "manageable" and "unmanageable"; the main focus in problem-solving therapy is to tackle those problems that are considered manageable.

Both cognitive-behavioral therapy and problem-solving therapy are intended to change negative thinking in order to alter mood and behavior.

After completing each exercise, participants in the intervention group received written individualized feedback from an online trainer. The trainers did not offer any therapeutic advice, only motivation and encouragement to continue the exercises. Participants also could repeat the online sessions as often as they liked.

The control group received information about depression but was under no obligation to read it.

The study, which was conducted by researchers from Leuphana University in Lueneburg, Germany, recruited 406 people with subthreshold depression, which is defined as having some symptoms of depression but not enough to be diagnosed with major depressive disorder. It was published Tuesday in JAMA, the journal of the American Medical Association.

Of the 406 participants that began the study, 335 completed the telephone follow-up at the end of 12 months. Twenty-seven percent in the intervention group experienced depression compared with 41 percent in the control group.

It is unclear if the people who went on to develop major depressive disorder had experienced it before. Lead author Claudia Buntrock, a PhD candidate in clinical psychology at Leuphana, says that because the study only tracked participants' mental health over the course of 12 months, the long-term effectiveness of the intervention is unknown.

It's also not clear if this kind of program could be scaled up. It took the trainers about 30 minutes to provide feedback for each session, and they also stayed in touch with participants via instant messaging, Buntrock says.

Other experiments with online therapy have found that people didn't continue it if it wasn't guided by an actual human. One reason could be that when people are depressed, they can have a hard time getting motivated to do things.

"More studies are needed to evaluate the preventive effects of unguided web-based interventions on the onset of major depressive disorder," Buntrock wrote in an email. Still, Buntrock seems pleased with the results, especially since the German insurance company BARMER GEK that sponsored the trial is now providing it to its customers.

"I was surprised by the big response to our study," Buntrock wrote. "And of course, I'm surprised about what happens now; that a health insurance company offers the intervention to its members. It's a success story you might dream of when you start, but it actually seeing to happen is a great feeling."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story made clear that patients who participated in one of two online self-help interventions had a 27 percent rate of experiencing major depression disorder (MDD) in the 12 months following the study, compared to a 41 percent rate for those who did not participate in the online interventions. That’s enough to earn a satisfactory rating.
It would have been even better if the story had addressed whether there was any difference in performance for patients who received the “cognitive behavioral therapy” intervention versus the “problem-solving therapy” intervention. And if the study didn’t differentiate between results for the two interventions, the story could have said that. This is significant because it’s not clear to readers whether one approach might have been significantly more effective at preventing the onsite of MDD, or if they had comparable results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A year-long, head-to-head study of four widely used diets found that overweight women who followed the very low-carbohydrate Atkins diet had no adverse health effects and lost slightly more weight than women on the other three.

The study by Stanford University researchers compared the Atkins approach with three others: the standard low-fat, reduced-calorie regimen long recommended by many physicians and weight-loss experts; the Zone, a reduced-carbohydrate approach developed by author Barry Sears; and the very low-fat, high-carbohydrate regimen created by Dean Ornish.

The latest findings add to a growing body of evidence that the high-protein Atkins diet does not cause the harmful heart and artery effects long feared by many researchers.

Women who followed the Atkins plan had a significant drop in triglycerides, one of the unhealthful blood fats linked to a higher risk of heart disease. Their blood pressure also dropped the most of the four groups, a finding that the researchers think may relate to their slightly greater weight loss. Those in the Atkins group also experienced the largest increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL), a protective type of cholesterol.

Most important, the Atkins group did not develop the soaring levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) that some experts have thought might result from eating a diet rich in saturated fat and cholesterol found in fatty cuts of meat, butter and cream. High levels of LDL are a major risk factor for heart disease. The study found that while LDL rose slightly for those in the Atkins group, their blood levels did not differ statistically from the other groups.

"This is the best study so far to compare popular diets," said Walter Willett, chair of the department of nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health, because of its size, duration and the small number who dropped out. The findings confirm, he said, that reducing carbohydrates, "especially those with refined starch and sugar like that found in the U.S. diet, has metabolic benefits." It also shows that replacing these carbohydrates with either fat or protein "can improve blood cholesterol fractions and blood pressure," he said.

The findings "are pretty much in line with what all the other studies have shown comparing Atkins and low-fat diets," said Bonnie Brehm, assistant professor of nutrition at the University of Cincinnati College of Nursing and co-author of two, independent studies of the Atkins diet. "We have found the same thing with all of our trials."

As for weight loss, the goal that concerns dieters the most, none of the groups managed to shed the large numbers of pounds touted by weight-loss programs and television shows such as "The Biggest Loser."

All the participants reported eating about 2,000 calories a day when the study began. All also reported having cut their intake -- some by as much as 500 calories per day at two to six months -- but then gradually adding back many of those calories. But as researchers noted, if participants ate as little as they said, all the groups would have lost much more weight.

At first, the Atkins group lost weight faster. But as in previous studies, the pounds shed began to even out across the four groups. After a year, women in the Atkins group averaged a modest 10-pound loss compared with about six pounds for those in the other groups.

Both the authors and other weight-loss experts were quick to note that the new findings did not answer the question of what is the best way for most people to shed weight.

"This isn't a study testing how well you would do if you followed these diets to the letter," notes Christopher Gardner, assistant professor of medicine at the Stanford Prevention Research Center and lead author of the study, which appears in tomorrow's Journal of the American Medical Association. "This is a study that shows what happens if you bought the book and tried to follow" the diets, as most dieters do.

The 311 overweight and obese women in the study were randomly assigned to one of the four groups. Each received a book detailing her prescribed diet. For the first eight weeks, the women also attended one-hour weekly group sessions with a registered dietitian trained to explain the diet in detail. Participants received follow-up phone calls and e-mails to remind them of appointments, and they were paid $25 to $75 for each appointment they made.

Reactions to the findings were mixed.

"It's bad science, good publicity," said the Zone's Sears.

"For all practical purposes, the programs all worked about the same," said Kelly D. Brownell, director of Yale University's Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity and creator of the Lifestyle, Exercise, Attitudes, Relationships and Nutrition (LEARN) program for weight management, one of the diets studied. The extra four pounds lost by the Atkins group are not very meaningful, Brownell said.

Others were more critical.

"This study is seriously flawed, and its conclusions misleading," said Ornish, clinical professor of medicine at the University of California at San Francisco. A careful read of the study shows "no significant difference in weight loss between the Atkins and Ornish or LEARN diets after one year!" he noted in an e-mail. "There was significantly more weight loss on the Atkins diet after one year only when compared with the Zone diet. This directly contradicts their primary conclusion."

All low-carbohydrate diets are not necessarily created equal, however. A study last year by Willett and his colleagues in the New England Journal of Medicine found that women on low-carb diets who ate mostly animal fat and animal protein did not reduce their risk of heart disease. But those who ate vegetable forms of protein, such as soy, and fat, such as olive oil, did reduce their risk of heart disease. As Willett said yesterday, "lower-carbohydrate diets look like a good option, but if you consider them, eat olive oil and fish rather than butter and sausage."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The primary outcome of the study was weight loss; after a year, individuals on the Atkins diet were reported to have lost about 10 pounds as compared to about a six pound loss on the other four diets.
The quantitative information on the other clincial parameters measures were not reported.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Science doesn’t just help to invent new products, it can push existing ones.

Look no further than the beauty industry. It does lots of testing and flaunts products with scientific terms like microbeads, enzymes and rejuvenating serums. But what are the data behind them? And what if the company selling the product did the tests?

Take Inneov Sun Sensitivity, a nutritional supplement “clinically proven” to protect your skin from the sun’s harmful UV rays while leaving you with a nice tan, according to its maker Laboratoires Inneov, a joint venture between L’Oreal and Nestle.

The pill combines lycopene and beta-carotene — the red and orange substances in tomatoes and carrots, respectively — with a probiotic reported to impact the skin’s response to UV light.

“The efficacy of our nutritional supplement was demonstrated by rigorous studies,” said Nathalie Piccardi, of Laboratoires Inneov, who worked on the study.

“The next step is to present this product to dermatologists,” she told Reuters Health, noting it has already been launched in Europe and South America.

But a closer look reveals some shaky science, said Dr. Peter Schalock, a dermatologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston who isn’t affiliated with Laboratoires Inneov.

“Scientifically there are no data there,” he said about one of the company’s experiments. “It sounds like opinion and nothing more.”

The only published data on the tanning pill’s ability to reduce sunburns came out last month in the British Journal of Dermatology. To test the pill, scientists had dozens of women expose their behinds or backs to strong UV light. They found an effect on immune cells in the skin, but the question was, would the women also get fewer sunburns and better tans?

To answer that, Laboratoires Inneov conducted a so-called randomized controlled trial — the most powerful kind of study in the scientific toolbox — in which women were randomly assigned to take Inneov Sun Sensitivity or a placebo pill.

But the researchers never compared the response directly between the two groups, the whole point of a randomized controlled trial. Instead, they used a weaker method comparing the before-and-after differences within each group.

While Piccardi said she thought this method was appropriate, it means the company can’t claim women taking their product had a higher threshold for sunburns than those taking a placebo pill. The same goes for the tan.

As a result, said Schalock, the company’s claim that women taking their product can sunbathe with less concern of getting burned might be a stretch.

Schalock told Reuters Health he has a “hard time seeing that statistically or scientifically they have proven it.”

The fact that the company did the testing itself could also raise a red flag.

“There is some evidence to indicate that we are right to be concerned about the quality of research when there is a conflict of interest,” said Josephine Johnston, a bioethicist at the Hastings Center in Garrison, New York.

Johnston, who said she could not speak to the scientific merits of the Inneov report, said other studies had shown industry-funded research is more likely to have positive outcomes, and that people could be influenced by financial interests even if they didn’t realize it.

“The major problem,” she told Reuters Health, “is that it has an impact of trustworthiness.”

Branding personal care products with clinical claims is a very common strategy, an expert who studies consumer marketing told Reuters Health.

“Claiming that kind of a benefit is certainly something people respond to,” said the expert, a professor at an East Coast university who asked to remain anonymous because his institution receives funding from the cosmetics industry.

While some people will want to see and feel an impact, he said, for many the clinical claim alone suffices. “The key question is, will the consumer view as credible that ingesting a pill will prevent (sun) damage?”

In another experiment, Laboratoires Inneov scientists gave the tanning pill to 80 women and asked them to sunbathe as they normally would over the summer, applying sunscreen at their discretion.

Then they asked dermatologists, recruited by a company paid by Laboratoires Inneov, a series of questions about how these women fared. According to the report, the dermatologists told Laboratoires Inneov the product prevented sunburns.

“We truly believed that this kind of study, taking into account consumers’ opinion, complements experimental and control studies,” said Piccardi.

But the study did not answer a number of questions: How did the women usually do in the summer? Did they end up like boiled lobsters or were they careful not to get burned? Might they have been extra cautious because they were part of a skin protection study?

“It would have been nice to really know that it worked, and that it’s not just a placebo effect,” Schalock said.

He pointed out it was hard to draw any conclusions from this part of the study because it didn’t include any data. What kind of evaluations did the dermatologists do? What exactly did they tell Laboratoires Inneov?

Of more than a dozen researchers and dermatologists contacted about the quality of this study, only Schalock agreed to comment.

Dr. Tobias W. Fischer, a dermatologist at the University Lubeck in Germany, offered this rationale for why he didn’t: “I don’t give interviews, criticizing other researchers’ work, even if industrial.”

The editor of the journal that published the study, Dr. Tanya Bleiker, said it had been reviewed by experts before acceptance, as are all the journal’s reports.

While there had been some concerns about the methods, “on balance there was enough interest to publish it,” she told Reuters Health.

The journal does ask researchers if they have financial ties to the products they are studying. According to Bleiker, “the authors stated very clearly that there was no conflict of interest.”

However, more than half of the authors work for Laboratoires Inneov, as indicated on the cover page of the report.

“It wasn’t being hidden that they worked for the company,” Johnston told Reuters Health. “The journal knew it.”

“The question for the journal, given that the authors worked for the company, is, ‘Do we publish something like that?’”

Johnston said there was an ongoing debate about whether or not scientists who review studies should know about potential industry interests.

The question then becomes what, if anything, to do when there is a conflict of interest.

“The reader can’t do anything,” said Johnston. “It needs to be done by people higher up in the food chain.”

Whether or not Inneov Sun Sensitivity has been “clinically proven” to protect against sunburns, “We have to deal with the fact that the scientific literature contains research from people with financial conflicts,” Johnston said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear the expert opinions that "there are no data there." 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many women with early-stage breast cancer can skip chemotherapy without hurting their odds of beating the disease — good news from a major study that shows the value of a gene-activity test to gauge each patient’s risk.

The test accurately identified a group of women whose cancers are so likely to respond to hormone-blocking drugs that adding chemo would do little if any good while exposing them to side effects and other health risks. In the study, women who skipped chemo based on the test had less than a 1 percent chance of cancer recurring far away, such as the liver or lungs, within the next five years.

‘‘You can’t do better than that,’’ said the study leader, Dr. Joseph Sparano of Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

An independent expert, Dr. Clifford Hudis of New York’s Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, agreed.

‘‘There is really no chance that chemotherapy could make that number better,’’ he said. Using the gene test ‘‘lets us focus our chemotherapy more on the higher risk patients who do benefit’’ and spare others the ordeal.

The study was sponsored by the National Cancer Institute. Results were published online Monday by the New England Journal of Medicine and discussed at the European Cancer Congress in Vienna.

The study involved the most common type of breast cancer — early stage, without spread to lymph nodes; hormone-positive, meaning the tumor’s growth is fueled by estrogen or progesterone; and not the type that the drug Herceptin targets. Each year, more than 100,000 women in the United States alone are diagnosed with this.

The usual treatment is surgery followed by years of a hormone-blocking drug. But many women also are urged to have chemo, to help kill any stray cancer cells that may have spread beyond the breast and could seed a new cancer later. Doctors know that most of these women don’t need chemo but there are no great ways to tell who can safely skip it.

A California company, Genomic Health Inc., has sold a test called Oncotype DX since 2004 to help gauge this risk. The test measures the activity of genes that control cell growth, and others that indicate a likely response to hormone therapy treatment.

Past studies have looked at how women classified as low, intermediate or high risk by the test have fared. The new study is the first to assign women treatments based on their scores and track recurrence rates.

Of the 10,253 women in the study, 16 percent were classified as low risk, 67 percent as intermediate and 17 percent as high risk for recurrence by the test. The high-risk group was given chemotherapy and hormone-blocking drugs. Women in the middle group were randomly assigned to get hormone therapy alone or to add chemo. Results on these groups are not yet ready — the study is continuing.

But independent monitors recommended the results on the low-risk group be released, because it was clear that adding chemo would not improve their fate.

After five years, about 99 percent had not relapsed, and 98 percent were alive. About 94 percent were free of any invasive cancer, including new cancers at other sites or in the opposite breast.

‘‘These patients who had low risk scores by Oncotype did extraordinarily well at five years,’’ said Dr. Hope Rugo, a breast cancer specialist at the University of California, San Francisco, with no role in the study. ‘‘There is no chance that for these patients, that chemotherapy would have any benefit.’’

Dr. Karen Beckerman, a New York City obstetrician diagnosed with breast cancer in 2011, said she was advised to have chemo but feared complications. A doctor suggested the gene test and she scored very low for recurrence risk.

‘‘I was convinced that there was no indication for chemotherapy. I was thrilled not to have to have it,’’ and has been fine since then, she said.

Mary Lou Smith, a breast cancer survivor and advocate who helped design the trial for ECOG, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, which ran it, said she thought women ‘‘would be thrilled’’ to skip chemo.

‘‘Patients love the idea of a test’’ to help reduce uncertainty about treatment, she said. ‘‘I’ve had chemotherapy. It’s not pretty.’’

The test costs $4,175, which Medicare and many insurers cover. Others besides Oncotype DX also are on the market, and Hudis said he hopes the new study will encourage more, to compete on price and accuracy.

‘‘The future is bright’’ for gene tests to more precisely guide treatment, he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: In the low risk population, women who had foregone chemotherapy had less than a 1 percent chance of cancer occurrence at another faraway spot, the story says. It also mentions that 16 percent of the 10,253 study participants were classified as low risk.
Later down in the article, it lists more study findings: “After five years, about 99 percent had not relapsed, and 98 percent were alive. About 94 percent were free of any invasive cancer, including new cancers at other sites or in the opposite breast.”
The only feedback we have is that the story could have been a bit clearer in pointing out that all of these figures pertained to the low-risk group.
But the quantifying of benefits was good enough to merit a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OAK BROOK, Ill. - A minimally invasive treatment can help restore fertility in women with uterine fibroids, according to a new study published online in the journal Radiology.

Uterine fibroids, abnormal masses of fiber and muscle tissue in the wall of the uterus, are considered one of the most common causes of infertility and complications related to pregnancy. Previous research has found that one out of every four women with fibroids has problems related to fertility. The standard treatment option for such women is myomectomy, or surgical removal of the fibroids.

However, myomectomy is not always possible or effective and can result in major complications including hysterectomy, according to study co-author João Martins Pisco, M.D., Ph.D., from the Department of Interventional Radiology at Saint Louis Hospital in Lisbon, Portugal.

Uterine fibroid embolization (UFE) is a less invasive option that involves injection of an embolic agent, typically made up of very small beads, into the uterine arteries to block the blood supply to the uterus and fibroids. As the fibroids die and begin to shrink, the uterus fully recovers. UFE can be performed in patients with a prior myomectomy or in vitro fertilization (IVF).

Despite its less invasive nature, UFE has yet to be fully embraced in the medical community as a fertility-preserving treatment for women with symptomatic fibroids due to concerns that the procedure may cause inadequate blood flow to the endometrium, or lining of the uterus, and the ovaries.

For the new study, Dr. Pisco and colleagues assessed pregnancy rates in 359 women with uterine fibroids who were unable to conceive and who underwent either conventional or partial UFE. In conventional UFE, all uterine artery branches are embolized. However, the partial procedure requires treatment of only the small vessels to the fibroids, leaving the corresponding larger vessels unaffected. Partial UFE may help reduce the risks of infertility associated with conventional UFE.

After an average follow-up of almost six years, 149 of the 359 women, or 41.5 percent, had become pregnant one or more times, and 131 gave birth to a total of 150 babies. It was the first pregnancy for more than 85 percent of the women who gave birth.

The procedures had a clinical success rate of approximately 79 percent for fibroid-related symptoms. Complication rates were 14.6 percent for partial UFE and 23.1 percent for conventional UFE. The procedure was repeated in 28 patients whose fibroids had not been fully treated, as shown by MRI, and 11 of those patients subsequently got pregnant.

"Our findings show that UFE is a fertility-restoring procedure in women with uterine fibroids who wish to conceive, and pregnancy following UFE appears to be safe with low morbidity," Dr. Pisco said. "Women who had been unable to conceive had normal pregnancies after UFE and similar complication rates as the general population in spite of being in a high-risk group."

Dr. Pisco suggested that UFE may become the first-line treatment for women with fibroids who wish to conceive, particularly for those with numerous or very large fibroids. Such patients have a fibroid recurrence rate of more than 60 percent after myomectomy, making UFE an important option.

The researchers are continuing the treatments and compiling data. Since the time of writing, there were 12 additional pregnancies.

"In our study there are now almost 200 newborns following UFE," Dr. Pisco said. "Our next step will be a randomized study comparing the results of partial and conventional UFE."

"Spontaneous Pregnancy with a Live Birth after Conventional and Partial Uterine Fibroid Embolization." Collaborating with Dr. Pisco were Marisa Duarte, M.D., Tiago Bilhim, M.D., Ph.D., Jorge Branco, M.D., Ph.D., Fernando Cirurgião, M.D., Marcela Forjaz, M.D., Lúcia Fernandes, M.D., José Pereira, M.D., Nuno Costa, M.D., Joana B. M. Pisco, M.D., and António G. Oliveira, M.D., Ph.D.

Radiology is edited by Herbert Y. Kressel, M.D., Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass., and owned and published by the Radiological Society of North America, Inc. (http://pubs. )

RSNA is an association of over 54,600 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job providing absolute numbers in describing the trial results:
After an average follow-up of almost six years, 149 of the 359 women, or 41.5 percent, had become pregnant one or more times, and 131 gave birth to a total of 150 babies. It was the first pregnancy for more than 85 percent of the women who gave birth.
The procedures had a clinical success rate of approximately 79 percent for fibroid-related symptoms.
However, to understand the actual benefits, we’d need to know more about the women who were treated with UAE.  This study enrolled women who had fibroids and/or adenomyosis (a different condition) that apparently caused symptoms, and had not become pregnant after a year of unprotected sex; it offered them the option of UAE, even though its fertility effects were not well understood at the time of the study. There is no information on whether these women had fibroids as the cause of their failure to conceive after a year.  Thus, the pregnancy rates achieved after UAE are difficult to interpret.
The release would also have been more informative had it broken down pregnancy rates by full or partial UAE.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dressed in street clothes, Tara Cassidy Driscoll lies face-down on an examining table at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Orthopedic surgeon George Theodore is about to blast her foot with powerful shock waves generated by sound.

After numbing her foot with Novocain, Theodore turns on an expensive German-made machine that beams tightly focused sound energy at Cassidy Driscoll's heel, near the point where her painful plantar fascia attaches to the heel bone. Suddenly the room is filled with the rhythmic click-click-click of a metronome.

It's a kind of paradox: Theodore is damaging her foot in order to heal it.

"The shocks are like a little baseball bat hitting the tissue," Theodore says. "It's producing a little bit of a repair process -- a little microbleeding."

The healing process takes place over several months after the shock-wave therapy, which Theodore does in a single treatment. [Other centers use lower-energy shock waves over several treatments.]

Theodore has been doing the shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis for about eight years, after longer experiences in Europe. It's the same technology used since the 1980s to blast kidney stones, an application called lithotripsy, but for foot problems doctors use less intense shock waves.

Shock-wave therapy for plantar fasciitis is beginning to catch on around the U.S., partly since this stubborn type of foot pain is so common -- and so difficult to treat. Nearly 2 million Americans seek care for plantar fasciitis (pronounced PLAN-tar FASH-ee-EYE-tus) every year.

Theodore tells Cassidy Driscoll that shock-wave therapy gives her a 60 to 80 percent chance of reducing her pain by half; about one-quarter of patients will become pain-free from the treatment.

After the 20-minute treatment, Cassidy Driscoll says she felt no pain, only a sort of tapping. She gets off the table, walks out of Theodore's office and drives herself home. Two days later, she says her foot felt bruised, but she didn't have enough pain to require medication.

Cassidy Driscoll will pay $1,000 for the treatment. Elsewhere the charge can range from $500 to several thousand dollars. But most insurers won't pay for it, because they consider it experimental.

Studies have given conflicting results, partly because there's no standardized way of doing shock-wave therapy. Different doctors use different sources of energy, different doses and a differing number of treatments.

"Is it rock-solid science that everyone agrees on? I would say no," says Dr. Naven Duggal, another Harvard orthopedic surgeon at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

Duggal is not impressed with reported success rates.

"Sixty to 80 percent [success] for something that somebody's not going to get guaranteed pain relief -- in my mind, it's not something I would go for," Duggal says.

Duggal says foot specialists don't really know what causes the pain of plantar fasciitis.

The plantar fascia is a tough, rubber-band-like structure on the bottom of the foot.

It has to be strong, because every time the foot strikes the ground, the plantar fascia bears the body's full weight. In high-impact activities like running, the forces even exceed the actual weight because it's so concentrated in a narrow spot where the fascia attaches to the heel bone. That's presumably why sufferers of plantar fasciitis feel the pain in the heel.

Concepts of what plantar fasciitis is have changed in recent years. Doctors used to think it occurred because the fascia became inflamed –- in fact, the suffix "-itis" denotes inflammation. But while inflammation can be involved in plantar fasciitis, it doesn't seem to be the cause, Duggal says.

Many think that plantar fasciitis is caused by heel spurs, bony hook-like growths that develop on many people's heels due to stress. But specialists don't think that anymore.

As ideas of what plantar fasciitis is change, so have treatments. Doctors don't do surgery for it anymore except in rare cases, largely because they've found surgery often makes people worse off.

"Patients have to be patient," Duggal says. "They have to understand that this condition unfortunately is not fully understood."

He's interested in another experimental treatment that's just entering clinical trials. It's called platelet-rich plasma, and it involves isolating blood cells called platelets from patients' own blood and injecting them into the plantar fascia. Though platelets are best known for their role in initiating blood clots, they also contain growth factors. So the hope is that platelet injections will stimulate healing without the damaging effects of shock-wave therapy. But it will be some years before that approach is proven -- or not.

Meanwhile, foot specialists and their patients are left with a smattering of low-tech treatments that they say all plantar fasciitis patients should try, whether or not they eventually go on to shock-wave therapy.

-- Icing the bottom of the foot, sometimes using ice to massage the heel area

-- Using cups made of gel in shoes to cushion the heel (and many orthopedic surgeons say expensive custom-made orthotics are not necessary)

-- Wearing a night splint, a simple brace that holds the foot in a flexed position to keep the plantar fascia stretched during sleep

-- Physical therapy, though some studies indicate that some PT practices such as ultrasound and whirlpool are not helpful

-- Use of NSAID (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory) drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen

-- Corticosteroid injections into the heel, though this is controversial and should not be used repeatedly

-- Backing off activities like running until the pain goes away, and then reinitiating them gradually

About 90 percent of sufferers will get better with time. Duggal says he advises patients to try a combination of these measures for at least a year.

Karen Firestone, a 54-year-old Boston businesswoman and avid runner, says that techniques like stretching, icing and taping were effective for her. She started having plantar fascia pain last summer, and on Duggal's advice has been diligent about doing everything she can to heal the problem.

"The stretching, the icing, the taping -- I do all these little pieces of help for my body, and it responds," Firestone says. "So I think people should take that message and go with it."

After a few months, she's back to running -- but shorter distances. And she stops whenever her heel pain acts up.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Even when it’s quoting a doctor who is clearly a proponent of shockwave therapy (as discussed above in the Evidence Quality criterion), the story treats benefits with appropriate caution and doesn’t succumb to hype. This story also seems to have avoided the compulsory anecdote about the patient who is feeling dramatically better after a new high-tech treatment. In fact, the story seems to go out of its way to provide the perspective of someone got better with low-tech standbys such as stretching, taping, and ice — valuable  context that is often lacking in coverage of medical treatments.
On the downside, the story focuses exclusively on pain and doesn’t tell us whether patients who receive shockwave treatment had improved functioning or could participate in more activities afterward. These are important measures of a treatment’s overall effect on patients. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pilot study published in the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association finds targeted pressure device significantly increased sleep for those with moderate to severe symptoms

Authors from Lake Erie Research Institute in Pennsylvania report an adjustable foot wrap caused to treat restless legs syndrome (RLS) is 1.4 times more effective than the standard pharmaceutical treatment. The pilot study published today in The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association.

The eight-week clinical trial involved 30 otherwise healthy adults with moderate to severe restless leg syndrome. Researchers studied Clinical Global Impression responses as well as the mean change in the International Restless Leg Syndrome Study Group Study Scale (IRLSSGS). A meta-analysis was then used to compare the RLS device with three historic studies of the medication ropinirole and a placebo.

Clinical Global Impression responses indicated significantly greater improvement with the RLS device (90 percent) compared with ropinirole (63 percent), the current standard dopamine therapy for RLS. Additionally, change in IRLSSGS score was significantly greater for the RLS device (17.22) compared to historic reports for ropinirole versus the placebo (12 versus 8.9 respectively). Patients using the RLS device also reported an 82 percent decrease in sleep loss.

The RLS device was designed to put adjustable targeted pressure on two muscles in the foot known to relax symptoms of RLS, the abductor hallucis and the flexor hallucis brevis. Researchers indicate that the pressure produced by the device may also stimulate a dopamine release, similar to massage therapy or acupressure.

"By putting pressure on specific muscles in the feet, we are able to create a response in the brain that relaxes the muscles activated during RLS," said Phyllis Kuhn, MS, PhD, and the study's lead researcher. "It's a near perfect example of the body regulating itself without drugs, many of which have the potential for significant adverse side effects."

Restless leg syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic disorder causing unpleasant sensations and an urge to move the legs when at rest. The sleep loss associated with RLS can cause extreme fatigue, anxiety and depression. According to the National Institute of Health, RLS may affect as many as 10 percent of the U.S. population, with more than nine million experiencing moderate to severe symptoms.

Until recently, potent drugs including opioids, depressants and dopamine agonists have been used to ease symptoms, but each of these is accompanied by negative side effects such as dizziness, nausea, vomiting and the added risk of addiction.

"Restless legs syndrome really erodes quality of life because it causes extreme fatigue for many patients. As an osteopathic physician, it's a challenge to balance the need to restore sleep while preventing additional harm from medication. These results show promise in otherwise healthy individuals for a nonpharmaceutical option that appears to have rather minor, temporary adverse effects for some users," said Rob Danoff, DO, an osteopathic family physician and program at Aria Health Care in Philadelphia.

Adverse effects were reported by seven patients in the study. The effects included pain (1), pins and needles sensation (2), irritability (3), spasm (1) and warm feet (1).

Open access to the full review is available until September 1, 2016: http://jaoa. .

Disclosures: Dr Kuhn worked without compensation through Lake Erie Research Institute (LERI) during the 5 years of the study of the device and is now receiving compensation for that work. She reports no financial interest in its sales. None of the other study authors reported any conflict of interest or financial disclosure relevant to the topic of this study. More details are available in the published article.

About The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association

The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association (JAOA) is the official scientific publication of the American Osteopathic Association. Edited by Robert Orenstein, DO, it is the premier scholarly peer-reviewed publication of the osteopathic medical profession. The JAOA's mission is to advance medicine through the publication of peer-reviewed osteopathic research.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release reports summaries of two types of measures of restless leg syndrome. However, the release would have been better if, in addition to the numerical results for the two scales, it had offered some definition of what the numbers mean in more common terms, such as how many nights per week people lost a lot of sleep because of leg movements. Or, since this treatment is focused on improving sleep, one could have focused on the number of nights with uninterrupted sleep.
And as noted below, the release offers a comparison only to one type of drug, without any reference to numerous alternatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new test can accurately predict within minutes if an individual has Ebola Virus Disease (EVD), according to new research published in The Lancet. The study is the first to show that a point-of-care EVD test (ReEBOV Antigen Rapid Test; Corgenix) is faster than and as sensitive as a conventional laboratory-based molecular method used for clinical testing during the recent outbreak in Sierra Leone.

This new rapid diagnostic test (RDT) could cut back on the lengthy process usually required to confirm if a patient has EVD, help identify case contacts, and ultimately curb the spread of Ebola.

Currently, diagnosis of EVD requires a full vial of venous blood to be shipped to a laboratory with a high level of biosafety and staff expertise for testing by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This method poses substantial risks to the healthcare workers responsible for blood collection, transport, and testing, and efforts to contain the Ebola epidemic in west Africa have been hampered by this slow and complex diagnostic test.

"Laboratory results can sometimes take days to return. Delays like this result not only in the failure to diagnose and treat Ebola-infected patients, but also in individuals without Ebola being admitted to holding units where they may be subsequently infected with the virus," [1] explains Dr Nira Pollock, senior author and Associate Medical Director of the Infectious Diseases Diagnostic Laboratory at the Boston Children's Hospital, USA.

"This new test, on the other hand, is capable of detecting the Ebola virus in just a small drop of blood tested at the bedside, and could help us in the fight against Ebola." [1]

In this study, the researchers compared the diagnostic accuracy of the new RDT against the benchmark RT-PCR test (altona Diagnostics) being used for clinical diagnosis in the field reference laboratory run by Public Health England at Port Loko in Sierra Leone.

106 suspected Ebola patients admitted to two treatment centres in Sierra Leone (run by the Ministry of Health and Sanitation of Sierra Leone and supported by the non-governmental organisation Partners In Health) during February 2015 were tested by both RDT (performed on a fingerstick blood sample at the point-of-care) and by standard RT-PCR (performed on plasma in the laboratory). Both RDT (on whole blood) and RT-PCR (on plasma) were also performed on 284 samples in the laboratory.

The RDT detected all confirmed cases of EVD that were positive by RT-PCR in both point-of-care (28/105 patients) and laboratory testing (45/277 patients), with sensitivity of 100% (identifying all patients with EVD as per the benchmark method), and a specificity of 92% (identifying patients who didn't have EVD).

Surprisingly, the findings also revealed that the standard altona RT-PCR test, under the conditions deployed in the field, was itself an imperfect reference standard. The altona RT-PCR assay failed to detect a small number of EVD cases that tested positive by both RDT and by an alternative RT-PCR test (Trombley), all with relatively low amounts of virus. Both the RDT and altona assays failed to detect a small number of EVD cases that tested positive by the Trombley test, all with very low amounts of virus. The authors caution that given the limitations of the performance of the altona RT-PCR reference test in patients with low levels of the virus in their blood, more research is needed to assess how the new RDT will perform in patients very early in the course of EVD.

According to co-author Dr Jana Broadhurst from Partners In Health, Boston, USA, "This test could have an immediate impact on patient care and infection control by reliably detecting patients well into their illness who are likely to be highly infectious. Earlier test results would improve triage of patients, enabling staff to focus on those most likely to have Ebola, and reducing the opportunity for infection of non-Ebola 'suspects'. Although the RDT requires refrigeration, this is already available in many health centres in endemic areas, particularly those that store vaccines and other medical products." [1]

Writing in a linked Comment, Dr Nahid Bhadelia from Boston University School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center, Boston, USA says, "[This study] validates the accuracy of the ReEBOV RDT in patients who are well into their illness...suggesting it could be used to triage this subset of patients if RT-PCR is not available, particularly in those with a high index of clinical suspicion for a differential diagnosis...the data presented provide crucial information about the point of-care function of this rapid diagnostic test, such as ease of use, quality of samples taken at the bedside, and the concordance with venous samples...the results raise caution regarding the performance of the widely used altona RT-PCR assay, which the authors suggest might have underperformed because of laboratory specific technical and performance factors."

This study was funded by a gift from the Abundance Foundation (Stephen Kahn). Corgenix provided the test kits.

[1] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in text of Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release dedicates two paragraphs to describing the results, including comparing them to standard tests made by two different companies. We were particularly pleased to see reporting on the sensitivity and specificity of the test, as well as descriptions of what those numbers mean. We think those figures are important to include in any discussion of screening or diagnostic testing, but they’re often not provided or reported incompletely.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Coffee, tea, or decaf-no matter what your choice, drinking any of these beverages may reduce your risk of diabetes, according to a new analysis of 18 studies including hundreds of thousands of people.

A 2005 research review concluded that people who drank the most coffee were one-third less likely to develop diabetes than those who drank the least, Dr. Rachel Huxley of The University of Sydney, Australia, and colleagues note. In the years since then, they add, the amount of research on coffee and diabetes risk “has more than doubled,” while other studies have suggested that tea and decaf coffee may also be preventive.

To update the evidence, Huxley and her team analyzed 18 studies on coffee, decaf, and tea and the risk of type 2 diabetes published between 1966 and 2009, including just shy of 458,000 people in all.

Type 2 diabetes, which is often tied to obesity, affects about 8 percent of the U.S. population, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

For every additional cup of coffee a person consumed each day, the study’s authors found, a person’s risk of diabetes was reduced by 7 percent. In the six studies that looked at decaf coffee, the researchers found, people who consumed more than three or four cups a day were at 36 percent lower risk of diabetes. And in seven studies that examined tea drinking and diabetes risk, people who drank more than three or four cups daily were at 18 percent lower diabetes risk.

The current analysis could have overestimated the effect of these beverages on diabetes risk due to statistical issues with the smaller studies, Huxley and her colleagues note. It’s also not possible to say from the current evidence that heavy coffee drinkers (and tea and decaf drinkers) don’t have other characteristics that might protect them against developing diabetes, they add, such as eating a healthier diet.

The fact that the effects were seen with decaf as well as coffee and tea suggest that if the effects are real, they aren’t just due to caffeine, but may be related to other substances found in these beverages, the researchers say, for example magnesium, lignans (estrogen-like chemicals found in plants), or chlorogenic acids, which are antioxidants that slow the release of sugar into the blood after a meal.

Clinical trials are needed to investigate whether these beverages do indeed help prevent diabetes, the researchers say. If the benefits turn out to be real, they add, health care providers might begin advising patients at risk for diabetes not only to exercise and lose weight, but to drink more tea and coffee, too.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION:  Because the story noted the limitations of an observational study like this, and because it quantified the statistical associations from the study, we give it a satisfactory score on this criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A fresh look at the medical evidence shows women who eat more fiber are less likely to get breast cancer.

Chinese researchers found those who ate the most of the healthy plant components were 11 percent less likely to develop breast cancer than women who ate the least.

Their findings don’t prove fiber itself lowers cancer risk, however, because women who consume a lot of it might be healthier overall than those who don’t.

The results “can identify associations but cannot tell us what will happen if people change their behavior,” said John Pierce, a cancer research at the University of California, San Diego, who was not involved in the work.

While earlier research has yielded mixed conclusions on the link between cancer and fiber, it would make scientific sense: According to the Chinese researchers, people who eat high-fiber diets have lower levels of estrogen, which is a risk factor for breast tumors.

So to get more clarity, the researchers combined 10 earlier studies that looked at women’s diets and followed them over seven to 18 years to see who developed cancer.

Of more than 710,000 women, 2.4 percent ended up with breast cancer. And those in the top fifth of fiber intake were 11 percent less likely to do so than women in the bottom fifth.

That was after accounting for differences in risk factors like alcohol drinking, weight, hormone replacement therapy and family members with the disease.

Still, it’s impossible to rule out that big fiber eaters had healthier habits overall that would cut their risk, Jia-Yi Dong of Soochow University in Suzhou and his colleagues write in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

And the potential effect was “very small,” Dr. Eleni Linos of Stanford University, who wasn’t involved in the research, told Reuters Health in an email.

About one in eight American women get breast cancer at some point, with less than a quarter of them dying from it.

Although the connection between breast cancer risk and fiber is a small one, fiber is “something that we know is healthy for you anyway,” said Christina Clarke, a research scientist at the Cancer Prevention Institute of California in Fremont.

Known benefits of a high-fiber diet include lower cholesterol and weight loss. If it turns out to cut cancer risk as well, that would be an extra bonus, Clarke said.

Fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole grains are all high in fiber.

According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 2010 Dietary Guidelines, most Americans don’t get enough fiber. The guidelines recommend that women eat 25 grams of fiber per day and men eat 38 grams, while the average Americans gets just 15 grams a day.

“Increasing dietary fiber intake in the general public is of great public health significance,” the Chinese team concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt, although suggest a minor change in the future.
The story only used relative risk reduction figures. It could have included just a line to explain why it may not be statistically appropriate to pool absolute risk reductions in such a meta-analysis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 3, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new study finds that people with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who haven't done well on other treatments may find relief with Xeljanz (tofacitinib), a drug currently used to treat arthritis.

Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease. It affects about 700,000 Americans, according to the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation (CCF).

The illness causes inflammation, irritation, swelling and sores on the lining of the large intestine. Symptoms include diarrhea with blood or pus and abdominal discomfort, according to CCF.

"There is still a substantial unmet need for new treatments for patients with ulcerative colitis," said study lead author Dr. William Sandborn. He is professor of medicine and chief of the division of gastroenterology at the University of California, San Diego.

Xeljanz targets certain proteins involved in the body's inflammatory and immune responses that other so-called biologic drugs don't, the researchers said.

"Treatment with oral tofacitinib is potentially a new treatment option for patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis, pending review by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," Sandborn said.

The study was funded by Pfizer, Inc., the maker of Xeljanz. Sandborn said he has received research grants from the company and served as a consultant for Pfizer.

Whether Xeljanz should be used as a first treatment is still not clear, said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Because Xeljanz comes as a pill, it could have an advantage for patients, Swaminath said. But so far it has only been tried with patients who have not responded to other treatments, he said.

"How it is used in the real world may be different than how it was used in these studies," Swaminath said. "I am not going out on a limb and say this should be the first choice, because we don't have enough data to say that's the way it should be positioned."

The researchers randomly assigned more than 1,700 people with ulcerative colitis to one of three phase 3 trials.

The first two trials looked at more than 1,100 patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who had failed with conventional treatment or treatment with newer "tumor necrosis factor antagonist" drugs, such as Remicade (infliximab). They received Xeljanz or a placebo twice a day for eight weeks.

In the third trial, nearly 600 patients who responded to Xeljanz were assigned to a maintenance dose (one group with 5 milligrams [mg] and another group with 10 mg) of the drug, or placebo for a year.

In the first trial, nearly 19 percent of the patients taking Xeljanz experienced a remission of their condition in eight weeks. That compared to just 8 percent of patients receiving placebo.

In the second trial, almost 17 percent of those taking Xeljanz had a remission, compared with nearly 4 percent of those taking placebo, the researchers found.

In the third trial, more than 34 percent of patients taking 5 mg of Xeljanz had disease remission after one year. Forty percent of those taking a 10-mg dose of the drug had remission at a year. Only 11 percent of patients on placebo saw a remission.

However, in all of the trials, more patients taking Xeljanz suffered from infections, such as shingles, than those receiving placebo, researchers found.

In addition, five patients taking Xeljanz developed nonmelanoma skin cancer, compared with one patient receiving placebo. Five patients taking the drug experienced heart problems compared with no one on the placebo.

Also, compared with placebo, Xeljanz was associated with an increase in levels of cholesterol.

The report was published May 4 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Dr. Sonia Friedman is an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. She's also the author of an editorial accompanying the study.

"Tofacitinib is a promising new class of medical therapy that has efficacy in ulcerative colitis. It is an oral, small-molecule drug that is different from current biologic therapies, such as infliximab [Remicade], adalimumab [Humira], golimumab [Simponi] and vedolizumab [Entyvio]," Friedman said.

An advantage of Xeljanz is that it is a pill. Other biologic drugs are given by infusion or injection. In addition, patients cannot develop antibodies to Xeljanz as they can with other biologic drugs, Friedman said.

"Tofacitinib may be used in the future as rescue therapy from failure of biologics," she said. "Only future studies will determine whether it can be used as initial therapy for ulcerative colitis and what patients it would help the most."

For more information on ulcerative colitis, visit the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does a nice job here. The NEJM article reported on three trials. Two of the trials involved treating patients for whom conventional drug therapy didn’t work. The story not only tells us how many patients went into remission for each trial (19 percent and 17 percent), but how that compared to people in the trials who went into remission and were taking placebo (8 percent and 4 percent, respectively). The third trial was of people who had gone into remission using Xeljanz. In this trial, patients were given lower, “maintenance” doses of the drug — either 5 or 10 milligrams. In this trial, 11 percent of patients on placebo were in remission after a year, compared to 35 percent for those on the 5 mg dose, and 40 percent for those on the 10 mg dose. Overall, the story provided detail and context in reporting benefits, which is good to see.
We did wish these benefits were included higher up in the article, which instead initially focused mostly on the implications and promise of the drug before delving into the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study has shown how the body's immune system responds to the new shingles vaccine, Shingrix, making it more than 90% effective at protecting against the virus.

The trial included more than 15,000 participants across 18 countries in Europe, North America, Latin America, Asia and Australia. Participants in the trial received two doses of the vaccine, with the doses given two months apart.

Lead researcher Professor Tony Cunningham from the Westmead Institute for Medical Research said the study shows that the vaccine stimulates production of a specific immune memory cell (CD4 T cells), generating a strong and sustained protection against the virus.

"The body has two types of immunity: protein antibodies and white blood cells known as T cells. As the virus circulates around the body, antibodies block it from entering cells. But when the virus does get into cells your T cells try to kill those infected cells.

"Our research shows that the vaccine stimulates your immune system to produce more antibodies and it generates a 24-fold increase in T cells. This is 12 times higher than other less effective shingles vaccines.

The research, published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases, shows that Shingrix offers protection for up to four years, but Professor Cunningham believes it will last much longer.

"The second dose of the vaccine is important to ensure long-term protection," Professor Cunningham said.

"The efficacy is approximately 90% for all age groups--even for those over 70 years of age.

"This is quite remarkable because there are no other vaccines that perform nearly so well for people in their 70s and their 80s. We are seeing results comparable to those of childhood vaccinations.

"What's particularly exciting, though, is that 90% of recipients had an increased immune response sustained across the 3-year duration of the study.

"We anticipate that this protection will actually last much, much longer. We are now measuring the efficacy of the vaccine over the next 10 years and are very optimistic about the results," he said.

Shingrix is different from most other vaccines. Many vaccines are made from a weakened form of the virus, but Shingrix is made from just a single protein--known as glycoprotein E--that comes from the outer shell of the herpes zoster virus.

The vaccine also contains an adjuvant--a substance that helps your body fight off the virus. It is the first shingles vaccine to combine a non-live antigen with a specifically designed adjuvant.

Shingles is a viral infection, caused by the herpes zoster virus--the same virus that causes chickenpox. The incidence of shingles increases as we get older, because the body's natural immunity declines.

"When people reach their 50s and 60s, T cell immunity declines allowing shingles to strike. That's why our adult vaccine is directed specifically at T cell immunity," Professor Cunningham said.

Most Australian adults have been infected with the herpes zoster virus and are at risk of shingles, even if they do not remember having chicken pox. By age 85, approximately 50% of the population will develop shingles. Vaccination is the only way to protect against shingles.

The full paper is published online by the Journal of Infectious Diseases as Editor's choice: https:/

The Shingrix vaccine is developed by GlaxoSmithKline.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The primary benefit being reported here is that “90% of recipients had an increased immune response sustained across the 3-year duration of the study.”  It would have been more helpful if the release had noted the actual incidence of shingles in those vaccinated with the new vaccine versus the old (or no vaccine).
The news release says the study “shows that the vaccine stimulates your immune system to produce more antibodies and it generates a 24-fold increase in T cells. This is 12 times higher than other less effective shingles vaccines.” T cells are white blood cells that kill infected cells.
We did have some concerns with a statement in the release projecting how long the vaccine protects against shingles. The release quotes a researcher saying, “We anticipate that this protection will actually last much, much longer. We are now measuring the efficacy of the vaccine over the next 10 years and are very optimistic about the results.” However, it doesn’t say when and if that will translate into a benefit for patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A daily dose of electricity delivered to a specific part of the brain can lift depression, new research confirms, even for people who’ve already tried multiple antidepressants to no avail.

While there’s evidence that this technique, known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), helps depressed people get better-and the US Food and Drug Administration has approved TMS for this purpose-many skeptics have questioned whether it really works, notes Dr. Mark S. George of the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, the lead author of the new study.

The biggest issue with studies so far, he explained, has been that it’s tough to fake the sound and sensation of the real device in order to run a gold standard clinical trial in which some people get the treatment, and others get a sham treatment, no one knowing which.

But George and his team say they’ve solved that problem by developing a dummy device that clicks in a similar way to the real thing and causes a person’s eye muscles to twitch, just like real a TMS device.

In the May issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry, George and his colleagues report the results of their 190-patient study, the most rigorous investigation of TMS for depression so far. The researchers randomly assigned participants to receive 37.5 minutes of TMS delivered to a part of the brain region that plays a role in emotion, or 37.5 minutes of sham TMS, once a day for three weeks.

After three weeks, 14 percent of patients in the real TMS group had recovered from their depression, compared to 5 percent of the sham TMS group; people who had the real treatment were four times as likely to get better as those who got the fake treatment.

Based on the results, George and his team say, it would be necessary to treat 12 depressed patients with TMS in order to have one patient recover.

Eighty-eight percent of the study participants completed the first phase of the trial. Patients in both groups were equally likely to report side effects, which included headache, discomfort at the TMS site, and eye twitching.

In a second phase of the study, all patients were given the real TMS treatment. Thirty percent of the patients in the second phase recovered from depression.

How long the treatment should last is not yet clear. “It’s very muddy now exactly how long we need to treat patients,” George said. “It looks as if from this trial you at least need to try three weeks and maybe even six weeks before you would give up.”

Patients who got better were prescribed venlafaxine - marketed as Effexor — and a small dose of lithium, noted George, a combination that’s been shown to help people stay well after their depression has remitted. George said he and his colleagues would like to study whether giving people TMS intermittently instead of putting them on antidepressants would produce equally durable effects.

TMS works by producing an electrical current that can pass through the skull and into the target area of the brain. George said he believes the approach works by “resetting” electrical activity and restoring normal mood regulation.

Something similar is likely happening, he added, with electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), or what is sometimes referred to as “electroshock treatment.” Sixty to 70 percent of depressed people who undergo ECT, in which electrodes placed on the front of the brain induce a convulsion while the patient is anesthetized, will recover.

George said he hopes that by better understanding where TMS should be delivered and by figuring out the best dose and duration of treatment, success rates closer to those of ECT might be achieved. “I’m optimistic that it’s pointing us in a path of understanding how to interact with the brain in a non-invasive way to get people well.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The article describes the percentage of patients who benefited from TMS in absolute terms and tells us that 12 patients would need to be treated with TMS to achieve 1 treatment success. These descriptions give readers a realistic idea of how likely a patient will be to benefit from TMS.  
An even clearer approach would have been to say that 13 of 92 (14%) benefited from TMS and that 5 of 98 (5%) benefited from sham treatment. The other critical missed opportunity is to remind readers that these are remission rates in those who failed at least 1 prior treatment. For patients who have never been treated for depression, remission rates are much higher with any first-line treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Take charge of your biological clock,” the invitation urged.

It beckoned women to an evening seminar in Manhattan. There, they received a coupon for the latest in fertility management: a genetic test marketed as a way to help maximize their chances of becoming pregnant.

The hitch: Top reproductive endocrinologists point out that there’s no evidence the $950 DNA test can actually help women conceive. And even the company’s founder and CEO acknowledges the test can’t provide clear and definitive answers on which treatments women should try next if they’re struggling with infertility.

The Fertilome test hit the market at the start of this year and the company behind it, Celmatix, said more than 50 doctors have already ordered it for hundreds of women seeking scientific guidance on questions such as whether they should freeze their eggs for future use, or whether it’s worth it to try another round of in vitro fertilization. The Celmatix CEO, Piraye Yurttas Beim, said her team has heard of a small wave of “Fertilome babies” on the way.

Some reproductive specialists are enthusiastic. But others caution that Fertilome is just the latest genetic test promising more than it can deliver — and, in this case, playing to the fears of women who are anxious about becoming a mother. (Another example: a new $89 test that claims to tell women how their DNA could influence the level of a beneficial fatty acid in their breast milk.)

The Fertilome test, which must be ordered by a doctor, analyzes a woman’s DNA for 49 genetic variants that have been linked to various conditions that can sometimes cause fertility problems. A couple weeks later, the doctor gets back a long report listing the odds that a patient has certain conditions.

For example, she might be 4.4 times more likely than women without a particular genetic variant to have a condition known as primary ovarian insufficiency, characterized by irregular periods and diminished fertility before age 40.

That sounds alarming, and might prompt a younger woman who’s planning to delay pregnancy to freeze her eggs to be sure she has them available down the road. But the report does not explain that the condition is fairly rare — affecting just 1 in 1,000 women by age 30 and 1 in 250 women by age 35 — so the absolute risk is still very small.

And just because women have an elevated genetic risk for a condition doesn’t mean they actually have it.

Many of the other conditions that the test screens for are also quite rare. But the report doesn’t explain the prevalence.

So a patient may see a table showing that her genetic variants make her twice as likely to have a condition known as recurrent pregnancy loss, defined as repeated miscarriages. But the report doesn’t note that just 1 percent of women have that condition in the first place, making the odds still overwhelmingly in her favor. The doctor ordering the test, or a genetic counselor, is supposed to provide that information.

Without the proper context, “some of this can be very misleading and very frightening to patients,” said Dr. John Petrozza, chief of the division of reproductive medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital.

Petrozza said he worries that women might wrongly interpret a long litany of genetic risks to mean that their hopes to start a family are “doomed.” He also said he sees the test as “very costly for what it’s trying to do — and not really giving, at least at this point, what I would consider meaningful information.”

The Fertilome test was eight years in the making. It draws on more than 5,000 studies that have found associations between particular genetic variants and conditions that can cause fertility problems, company spokeswoman Colleen McMillen said.

Beim, the Celmatix CEO, said the test is already bringing “tremendous” value, in part by providing guidance that can act as a “tiebreaker” to help patients and their doctor decide which treatment to prioritize.

“It will help save a lot of heartache and time if we could know from the very beginning that [a given patient] is at risk for a uterine factor, or if it’s more her eggs,” said Dr. Angie Beltsos, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in Chicago who ordered the Fertilome test for one of her patients for the first time last month.

What the test can’t do: provide evidence-backed answers on what patients should try next. Nor can it tell patients whether they’re wired to get pregnant from IVF — or wired to fail it. “We’re not there. We’re not claiming we’re there,” Beim said.

Beim trained as a molecular genetics researcher. As a Ph.D. student at Weill Cornell in the 2000s, she worked on an early project in what’s now called precision medicine: identifying the specific genetic alterations in the tumors of lung cancer patients that seemed to predict whether they would respond to a certain drug.

After shifting her research focus to embryology, Beim found herself frustrated that the fertility field wasn’t benefiting from the same boom in translational genetics that was reshaping oncology. So she started her own company.

Celmatix also sells software, called Polaris, that pulls from the medical histories of hundreds of thousands of women to try to predict which fertility treatments are likely to work in different circumstances.

Fertilome — not to be confused with a line of weed killers and other gardening products with the same name — launched in January with a $1,900 price tag. Insurers don’t cover it; after it became clear that patients were balking at the bill, Celmatix cut the price in half.

Celmatix is mostly marketing the test to reproductive specialists, who are largely using it in the toughest infertility cases, Beim said.

But the company is also beginning to market directly to women — including younger women who aren’t trying to get pregnant yet.

The company has recently started promoting social media ads, like one that asks: “Are you getting the right fertility treatments for your DNA?” Another asserts: “Over 60% of millennial women are open to #eggfreezing. The Fertilome test can help you decide if it is right for you.”

The company’s website also features testimonials from women who say they have used Fertilome to help guide their decisions. There’s Ella, a 30-year-old with dark hair and stylish clothing who decided to freeze her eggs after taking the Fertilome test. Then there’s Maxine, a 27-year-old medical school graduate with short hair and a warm smile who used the test to help her juggle the timing of starting a family and starting her career.

The wrinkle: The images of Ella and Maxine are actually stock photos, available for purchase online.

After questions from STAT, the company added a disclaimer acknowledging that testimonials are not quite as they were promoted from the start: the names, images, and details of patients’ stories have been changed to safeguard their privacy.

Along with its social media outreach, Celmatix has held several after-work events for New York City-area women. It hosted one, on a Wednesday night in April, in its offices on Wall Street.

And on a Tuesday evening earlier this summer, the company partnered with a women’s group to host a conversation about “proactive steps you can take today to reach your future family building goals.” Appetizers, wine, and beer were served — and, in a gesture to the crowd full of women with pregnancy on their minds, non-alcoholic beverages were on the menu, too.

The company is also trying to reach OB-GYNs whose patients aren’t yet trying to get pregnant — or may be just beginning to try. Celmatix held webinars earlier this summer for OB-GYNs, telling them that the test could help “optimize management plans from the very start.”

Dr. Aimee Eyvazzadeh, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in the Bay Area, is among a few doctors who’ve been given vouchers by the company to offer the test for $500. She’s been ordering the Fertilome test for her patients about five times a week.

Eyvazzadeh said the test recently helped her counsel a patient to forgo a third round of IVF, because the patient had a genetic profile that suggested it would be unlikely to work and wasn’t in a financial position to gamble on such slim odds. (A round of IVF can cost $13,000.) That patient is now considering an egg donor.

Another one of Eyvazzadeh’s patients is 31-year-old Tara Smith.

For Smith, who works as a foster parent providing intensive care in Northern California, there’s nothing more important than family. She’s dreamed of having her own baby since she was a child herself.

That’s why Smith and her husband have spent about $70,000 over the past four years trying, without success, to get pregnant. They’ve seen doctors in St. Louis and Las Vegas, taken countless blood tests, and tried two rounds of IVF and several cycles of intrauterine insemination. Smith has long known that she has a condition called polycystic ovary syndrome, which can make it harder to get pregnant, but no one could figure out exactly why none of the treatments were working.

“It’s gut-wrenching. You’re almost like this alien,” Smith said. “Nobody knows what’s going on, and you can’t fix the problem.”

So when Eyvazzadeh suggested that she take the Fertilome test, Smith jumped at the possibility of finally getting answers. Eyvazzadeh walked her through the results last month before showing her the report, so Smith had an idea of what to expect. Still, Smith said, “my heart sank” when she saw her results for the first time.

She was 2.88 times more likely to have endometriosis, a painful disorder of the uterus, than a woman without a certain genetic variant. She was 1.54 times more likely to have primary ovarian insufficiency. She also carried three genetic variants that elevated her risk of having recurrent pregnancy loss. And she had 24 additional genetic variants that are more weakly associated with various conditions that can play a role in fertility problems.

Despite it all, Eyvazzadeh had a plan. Because many of Smith’s genetic variants were involved in immune response regulation, she instructed Smith to focus on minimizing inflammation.

At Eyvazzadeh’s recommendation, Smith spent about $200 buying dietary supplements like fish oils, turmeric, cayenne pepper, resveratrol, and berberine from Amazon and Walmart. Smith also embarked on a new diet, cutting out dairy and red meat. (A 2015 review of the evidence on the optimal diet to promote fertility — and the utility of supplements — found the data “conflicting.”)

They also plan to have Smith get infusions of intralipids — a cocktail of soy bean oil, egg yolks, and other fatty acids — during her third round of IVF, which she’s embarking on now. (Intralipid infusions are increasingly popular, but the practice was found not to help in a 2016 study of older women with a history of miscarriage.)

Smith has mostly positive feelings about her Fertilome test. Having a concrete plan based on what’s in her DNA gives her a new sense of hope. “Now I feel like we’re armed with information,” she said. But at the same time, she said, knowing what may be wrong with her makes her apprehensive about whether she’ll ever get pregnant.

After all, so far, the test has pointed her only to try nutritional tweaks of uncertain value. It doesn’t offer any definitive answers.

And that’s what gives Dr. Valerie Baker pause. A reproductive endocrinologist at Stanford, she recently suggested the test to a patient with longstanding infertility. The patient asked a good question: What would we do differently if we had this genetic analysis?

“I don’t know,” Baker recalled responding. “I probably wouldn’t do anything differently.”

She did not end up ordering the test.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: A primary goal of the story is to drive home the point that benefits are highly uncertain. The text is clear about the intended benefit, to provide genetic information that could inform a woman’s reproductive decisions.  But it also tells the reader, in no uncertain terms, that there is as yet “no evidence” that the test actually accomplishes that. It even busts the company for using fictitious patient anecdotes to sell women on the benefits of the test.
A strong point for the story is its characterization of one woman’s increased risk of a condition known as primary ovarian insufficiency, which the test notes is 4-fold higher than in women without a specific genetic variant.
That sounds alarming, and might prompt a younger woman who’s planning to delay pregnancy to freeze her eggs to be sure she has them available down the road. But the report does not explain that the condition is fairly rare — affecting just 1 in 1,000 women by age 30 and 1 in 250 women by age 35 — so the absolute risk is still very small.
We have a primer on the difference between relative and absolute risk that readers can turn to for more information.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Jeffrey Tice, an internist at the University of California, San Francisco, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study, said: "With hormones, we really were thinking we were preventing a lot of diseases and it was good for the long term. Maybe we were brainwashed by the industry paying people to tell us that in medical school."

Now, other drugs have come into use for hot flashes, but not much is known about their effectiveness or long-term safety. Until recently, there was little interest in studying them rigorously, because hormones worked so well for most women.

"There's a lot of hype around trying things that we haven't proven effective and, sadly, we haven't proven they're safe," said Dr. Heidi D. Nelson, the first author of the journal article and an internist and professor at the Oregon Health and Science University.

The report is based on a review of 43 studies of various nonhormonal drugs being used for hot flashes. Most were originally approved for other purposes. The drugs include the antidepressants Paxil (paroxetine), Effexor (venlafaxine), Prozac (fluoxetine) and Celexa (citalopram), the blood pressure drug Catapres (clonidine), and the seizure drug Neurontin (gabapentin). Some came into use for menopause because women taking them for other reasons told doctors the drugs seemed to diminish their hot flashes.

The researchers also examined studies of nonprescription extracts from soy and red clover, which contain plant estrogens called isoflavones and are marketed as a "natural" treatment for hot flashes.

None of the drugs or extracts are approved by the Food and Drug Administration to treat hot flashes — only hormones are approved for that purpose — but doctors are free to prescribe medicines for any use they see fit, and many recommend the drugs or plant products for hot flashes, based on study findings and their patients' experiences.

The researchers found that on average, antidepressants and Catapres each appeared to reduce hot flashes by about one per day, and Neurontin by about two per day. For women with a lot of hot flashes, that is not a very impressive performance, Dr. Nelson said, but she added that the drugs may also lessen their severity.

Estrogen, by comparison, gets rid of two to three flashes a day, and also makes them milder, Dr. Nelson said. Though hormones cause small increases in the risks for breast cancer and heart disease, a short course may still be the best choice for women with very severe symptoms, she said, though she added that women who have had breast cancer should definitely not take hormones.

All the nonhormonal drugs have side effects. The antidepressants can cause headache, nausea, dry mouth, dizziness and insomnia or sleepiness. Catapres can cause some of the same symptoms and also constipation. Neurontin causes sleepiness, and soy extracts can produce gastrointestinal troubles.

Among the antidepressants, Paxil seemed to have the strongest evidence of benefit. There were only two studies for Effexor, just one of which suggested it might help.

For the other antidepressants, Prozac and Celexa, and for the plant extracts, there was no statistically significant evidence that they worked for hot flashes.

"But I wouldn't want any drug company to get an edge," Dr. Nelson said. "It's just where we are today. It's not the end of the story."

She took a cautious view because she and her colleagues found that there was relatively little reliable data on using the drugs for hot flashes. Of 10 studies on antidepressants, for instance, the researchers judged only two of the studies to be good, and the rest fair or poor. The poor rating often meant a study, even though well conducted, was too small or too short to be conclusive.

"If there were only 20 women in the study, how do we say it's appropriate for all the women in the country?" Dr. Nelson said.

"Now we know what we need," she said. "More bigger studies on more things."

In the meantime, both Dr. Tice and Dr. Nelson said that for women who find their symptoms intolerable and want treatment, they would favor antidepressants over hormones. But Dr. Tice warned that the drugs should not be used long term.

"I wouldn't encourage the mindset of putting women on these drugs thinking they're going to be on them for life," he said, adding that patients should try the drugs for a few months and then try to stop.

"We hate to medicalize a natural process," Dr. Nelson said, but she added that severe symptoms should not be dismissed. "We want to take it seriously, but not everybody needs to be on prescription drugs for it."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: Absolute reduction in number of hot flashes per day is presented for non-hormonal treatments and these are compared to the number of hot flashes with hormone treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers report that nearly half of the cases of prostate cancer among the roughly 5,000 men in the study could be attributed to the five gene regions and a family history, with some men having one or two of the gene variants and others having all five and a family history.

Prostate cancer becomes more common as men age — autopsies of elderly men find that most had prostate cancer, whether they knew it or not. But the men in this study had an average age of about 65, when the disease is less common and more likely to kill.

William B. Isaacs, a professor of urology and oncology at Johns Hopkins University and an author of the new report, said that if research validates what has been found, men may want to get the new genetic test when they are young, 35, say. Those at high risk because of their genetics might then choose to start prostate-cancer screening earlier than the usual age of about 50, using a blood test that looks for proteins secreted by prostate tumors.

“I think that makes sense,” said Dr. Howard Sandler, a professor of radiation oncology at the University of Michigan and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

But others worry that more frequent testing could exacerbate what is already a major problem: most prostate cancers grow so slowly that they would have been harmless if left alone. But since doctors cannot tell which are dangerous, they treat nearly all that they find. And treatment has serious side effects, including, often, impotence and incontinence. Nonetheless, researchers say, the test is a harbinger of things to come.

“It’s the boutique medicine of the future,” said Dr. Peter C. Albertsen, a surgery professor and prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut. “We can know what diseases we will have to face in the rest of our lives.”

That worries him, as it does Dr. Edward P. Gelmann, deputy director of the Comprehensive Cancer Center at Columbia University. “Technology today enables us to find out a huge amount of information,” Dr. Gelmann said. “But how does the public deal with this information? How does it help them make decisions? And if they make a decision, does that lead to a day, a week, a month, of life saved?”

The study, by scientists at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, the Harvard School of Public Health, and Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, will appear in the Feb. 28 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine. It was released online on Wednesday, a journal spokeswoman said, because “it is a very active area of research with a lot of competition.”

Researchers long knew that the disease often runs in families. Though scientists spent years looking for genes, they found none that were reproducibly associated with a marked effect.

With new technology to scan the entire length of a person’s DNA, researchers tried a new approach. They began looking for small variations in tiny DNA regions that were associated with prostate cancer. That resulted in the discovery, by several groups of investigators in Iceland and the United States, of the gene variants, small alterations in gene sequences. Unlike traditional genetic links to disease, the variants are not mutations that destroy a gene’s function. In fact, no one knows what their effect is.

The next step was to ask whether those variants really could predict who had prostate cancer. So Dr. Jianfeng Xu, a professor of epidemiology and cancer biology at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and his colleagues studied a Swedish population of 2,893 men with prostate cancer and 1,781 men who did not have it. That led to their finding that each of the five variants independently predicted prostate cancer risk.

“Each confers a moderate risk,” Dr. Xu said, adding that the effect of having just one of the variants — a 10 or 20 percent increase in a man’s chance of having prostate cancer — was not enough to justify using a single variant for screening. But, he added, because each conferred an independent risk, the risks added up so that the more men had, the greater their risk. Then they found that family history of the cancer added an independent risk. “That was very, very surprising to us,” Dr. Xu said.

The next step, Dr. Isaacs said, is to look in other populations. “We think that can happen almost instantaneously,” he said, explaining how scientists have blood samples and family histories of thousands of men who were tested for prostate cancer.

But some said that if the test leads to more screening, it is not necessarily a good thing. There is already too much prostate-cancer screening, they say, resulting in too much treatment. “To me, it is a nightmare,” Dr. Albertsen said. “We are just feeding off of this cancer phobia.”

What is needed, and what the new test does not provide, is a way to decide which cancers are dangerous and which are not, Dr. Isaacs said. Still, he said the new test could help patients if it was used with caution. “We may be premature with this idea — everyone has a different way of thinking about this — but it should not take five years to know if we are on the right track. All this can happen very rapidly.”

“We have worked with enough families that have a positive family history to know that people are anxious to know their risk of prostate cancer,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did provide some discussion on the conundrum presented by prostate cancer detection – namely that it is really an incomplete piece of information. The real goal is to develop a means of distinguishing between indolent and deadly prostate cancer.  The risk of the former would not warrant treatment likely to render the individual impotent and/or incontinent.  The risk of the latter might be worth the risk, or at least participation in active surveillance to allow for detection of a cancer while it is still localized.  The story did mention this conundrum though it might have spent more time on it.
The benefit of this treatment is an early warning of a pathology that might develop; it is less clear what a man in his 30s would do with this information. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 13, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For men who have prostate cancer that's considered "intermediate risk," radiation plus four months of hormone therapy appears to improve survival, a new study finds.

This combination of treatments, however, was not effective in men with either low-risk prostate cancer or advanced disease, the researchers said. Men with high-risk cancer need long-term hormone therapy.

The hormone therapy is known as androgen deprivation therapy. It's designed to reduce the levels of male hormones (androgens) in the body, since they can stimulate the growth of prostate cancer cells.

"For patients with early, localized cancer of the prostate who were treated with radiation therapy, [by] adding short-term androgen deprivation therapy, we improved their cure rates and increased their chance of living 10 years from 57 percent to 62 percent," said lead researcher Dr. Christopher U. Jones, from Radiological Associates of Sacramento, Calif.

But when the researchers looked closely at those findings, they found that patients with low-risk prostate cancer did not need hormone therapy because the chance they would survive with radiation alone was already almost 99 percent, Jones said.

And while short term hormonal therapy is "not very toxic, there are [still] some toxicities," Jones noted. "We don't want to treat any man unnecessarily with that type of treatment. We really want to make sure -- if we are going to recommend that treatment -- the person really needs it," he said.

On the other hand, hormone therapy plus radiation was most effective in patients with intermediate-risk prostate cancer. "We decreased the risk of dying from prostate cancer in those patients from 10 percent to 3 percent, at 10 years," Jones said.

For patients with high-risk prostate cancer, using hormone therapy for just a short while is not effective, he added. "We know from other studies that short-term androgen deprivation therapy isn't enough. You need to give long-term androgen deprivation therapy in addition to radiation to have the best results," Jones said.

The report was published in the July 14 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

For the study, Jones' team randomly assigned almost 2,000 men with prostate cancer to radiation therapy alone or in combination with four months of hormone therapy. The hormone therapy started two months before radiation.

Side effects of male hormone therapy can include erectile dysfunction (impotence), loss of sex drive, hot flashes, growth of breast tissue, loss of muscle and bone mass, weight gain, nausea, liver problems, fatigue, memory problems and mood swings.

In October 2010, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration asked manufacturers to add a warning that certain drugs used in hormone therapy (including the one used in the study) were linked to a small but increased risk of diabetes, heart attack, stroke and sudden death in men.

In this study, men treated with hormone therapy experienced a much higher percentage of liver damage; toxic effects of radiation treatment were similar in both groups.

Over an average of over nine years of follow-up, 62 percent of the men who had combination therapy were alive, compared with 57 percent of the men who received radiation therapy alone, the researchers found.

Overall, hormone therapy reduced the risk of dying from prostate cancer over 10 years from 8 percent to 4 percent, Jones said.

He noted that the radiation treatments in use today differ from those given in 1994 when the trial began.

"We can give 15 to 20 percent higher doses of radiation now than we could then, and we can do it more safely and more accurately," he said. So, that brings into question how much, if any, hormone therapy is needed, he added.

An ongoing trial among patients with intermediate risk prostate cancer aims to answer that question, Jones said. "We are going to find out if androgen deprivation therapy still applies to patients treated with modern techniques," he said.

"This study, in conjunction with what we know about hormonal therapy, really nails home the conclusion that hormonal therapy should not be used in men with low-risk disease because the risks outweigh any conceivable benefit," commented Dr. Anthony D'Amico, chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and author of an accompanying journal editorial.

D'Amico noted that new studies using up-to-date high-dose radiation also found that the addition of short-term hormone therapy improved outcomes at five years for men with intermediate risk prostate cancer, compared with radiation alone.

"If you are in the low-risk category, stay away from hormone therapy. It does no good. [It] can hurt," D'Amico said. "If you have anything beyond low-risk [prostate cancer], the hormonal therapy helps," he said. "It's just a matter of how long you need it for. It could be four months, six months or longer."

These findings are good news for some men, since the effects of short term of hormone therapy are reversible, D'Amico said. "It's not three years, where men are changed forever," he said.

For more information on prostate cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story provided a clear description of the potential benefit seen in the group of men with intermediate risk prostate cancer who were treatment with male hormone therapy in addition to radiation therapy alone.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Up to half of women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer might be cured, compared to the current 20 per cent survival rate, argues Dr. Steven Narod, senior scientist at Women's College Research Institute, who calls for a new standard of treatment for women with late-stage ovarian cancer.

Based on an analysis of existing evidence, published in an opinion article in the Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology journal on January 20, Dr. Narod argues that to achieve a cure, rather than simply delay progression or reoccurrence of the disease, women should be first treated with aggressive surgery to remove all clinically-detectable cancer cells, followed by targeted chemotherapy to the abdomen (intraperitoneal chemotherapy).

The possibility of a 50 per cent cure rate would be a significant improvement over the current 20 per cent survival rate resulting from more conventional treatment options offered to patients, which consist of a combination of different methods including: chemotherapy before surgery; post-operative chemotherapy delivered intravenously to the whole body (as opposed to localized into the abdomen); and surgery that leaves minimal residual disease in the abdomen, rather than removing all visible cancer cells.

Dr. Narod, who is also a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Breast Cancer, recommends that doctors should consider adopting a standard model of care for all women diagnosed with advanced-stage ovarian cancer:
• Chemotherapy should be offered after the surgery, rather than before. Chemotherapy before surgery might provide a false assurance that there's no more residual cancer, whereas microscopic tumour may remain after the surgery, leading to cancer recurrence and possibly, death.
• The surgery should be aggressive in an attempt to remove all visible signs of the tumour, and to avoid leaving any residual disease. The goal is to have no cancer visible to the naked eye of the surgeon after the surgery.
• Surgery should be followed by intraperitoneal, or localized, chemotherapy delivered to the abdomen. Localized chemotherapy works best if there's no residual cancer after the initial surgery. It is the combined effect of surgery and chemotherapy that works best.

"For decades, women have been treated with a combination of treatment options, resulting in poor prognosis for most women with advanced-stage ovarian cancer, but there are many survivors as well," said Dr. Narod, senior scientist at Women's College Research Institute.

"Women need support to endure surgery and the rigours of intraperitoneal chemotherapy, but should be encouraged to do so whenever possible, considering the potential survival benefits," said Narod. "We should offer all women the possibility of a cure."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The key benefit here is the survival rate and, on this point, the release is fairly clear. It notes that the current survival rate for advanced stage ovarian cancer is 20%, and that adopting a new standard of treatment could increase that survival rate up to 50%. The release would have added clarity by including an explanation of what is meant by “up to 50 percent” survival. It’s a bold claim about a devastating disease so precision is desirable. The reviewer uses 12-year survival as a proxy for cure in the original article but the release equates this to being “cured” of ovarian cancer. Some might debate that long-term survival equates to a cure — we’ll give the benefit of the doubt here and dock points below under the “Unjustifiable Language” criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Not every patient feels that way. Ms. Stewart’s physician, Dr. Andrew G. Kaufman, director of interventional pain management at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J., described a patient who tested a stimulator and experienced “unbelievable” pain relief, yet simply couldn’t adjust to the sensation created by the device and decided not to keep it. “She couldn’t get over the background buzzing,” Dr. Kaufman said.

Still, most patients accept this vibrating version of white noise, says Dr. Richard North, a retired neurosurgery professor at Johns Hopkins who developed several patents related to the technology, although he no longer receives royalties.

“When they first feel the sensation they say, ‘That’s weird,’” said Dr. North, who treats patients at the LifeBridge Health Brain and Spine Institute in Baltimore. “It quickly becomes clear that ‘weird’ is going to be just fine if it replaces the pain.”

Chronic pain is a particularly difficult problem to understand and solve. Pain is normal after an injury or because of a health problem. But sometimes the nerves misfire and continue sending intense pain signals to the brain even after the injury heals. Dr. Vijay B. Vad, a sports medicine specialist at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, compares the problem to a thermostat in a cool room. “If it’s 65 degrees in the house, but the thermostat thinks it’s 50 degrees, the heat keeps running,” Dr. Vad said.

The condition, complex regional pain syndrome, or C.R.P.S., typically develops after a medical procedure or an accident. But even minor injuries, like a sprain from a fall, can cause it. The syndrome may follow 5 percent of all injuries, according to the Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy Association, an advocacy group for people with chronic pain.

Spinal cord stimulation works by implanting an electrode near the spinal cord, inserted through the same place where epidural pain relief is injected for women in labor. Electrical pulses scramble or block the pain signals traveling through the nervous system, preventing them from reaching the brain.

But spinal cord stimulators offer significant relief to only about half the patients who try them. In September, the journal Pain published the largest-ever clinical trial of spinal cord stimulators, comparing their use with conventional pain therapies, including drugs, nerve blocks and physical therapy. The study, which was financed by the implant maker Medtronic, followed 100 patients who had undergone spinal surgery and had developed chronic pain in one or both legs.

Every patient received conventional pain treatment, but half were also given a spinal cord implant. Pain fell by half for 48 percent of the implant patients but only 9 percent of the others.

The implants cost about $20,000, and the procedure, hospital care and follow-up can bring the total bill to about $40,000. In August, the medical journal Neurosurgery showed that spinal cord implants were far cheaper than additional operations to treat pain.

Another concern is that patients who require high doses of stimulation drain the battery quickly, requiring surgery to replace the device. New rechargeable versions of the stimulators have helped resolve that concern.

For some patients, relief is only temporary, and the pain returns. Doctors say simple adjustments to the device may solve that problem.

“Sometimes efficacy wanes over time, but I still believe in them,” said Dr. Kaufman, also an assistant professor of anesthesiology at the New Jersey Medical School. “When drugs don’t work, what else is there?”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story accurately characterizes the results of a 2007 multinational randomized trial showing that the device helped reduce pain by about half in about half of people who received the treatment, compared to only 9% of people receiving conventional medical treatments. The study is the largest of its kind and a fair representation of the literature. A 2004 review, for example, found that spinal cord stimulators provide mild to moderate pain relief in selected individuals for anywhere from 6 months to several years. (Pain 2004;108:137-47)  Still, the story could have probed the absolute reduction in pain.  For instance, halving moderate pain may be less beneficial than halving severe pain.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study published in the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association finds OMT plus antibiotics reduces risk of death for the most severely ill patients

CHICAGO--August 29, 2016-- An analysis of multicenter randomized controlled clinical trial found osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) for pneumonia reduced length of hospital stay in adults 50 to 74 years old and lowered in-hospital mortality rates for patients 75 and older. The study results published in The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association.

The study analyzed 375 patients ages 50 or older who were randomly assigned to three groups, either receiving OMT, a light touch or conventional care only. Differences between treatment groups were evaluated for subgroups of participants based on their age, Pneumonia Severity Index and type of pneumonia. The data were analyzed by intention-to-treat analysis of all participants and by per-protocol analysis of participants who finished the study without missing any protocol treatments.

Key findings by per-protocol analysis of the younger subgroup found that OMT decreased hospital stay by 1.1 days compared to those who received conventional care only. By intention-to-treat analysis of the older subgroup, in-hospital mortality rates were 11 percent lower to the conventional-care only group. OMT also reduced the in-hospital mortality rates of those with the highest severity of illness.

"Osteopathic manipulative therapy was developed in the pre-antibiotic era specifically for the management of pneumonia. While antibiotic therapy is the current standard of care, the emergence of resistant bacteria is a global threat and provides an incentive to explore adjunct treatments that can improve their efficacy," said James Bailey, DO, assistant professor in physical medicine and rehabilitation at Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine. "This study should encourage physicians to use their osteopathic techniques when treating older patients with pneumonia."

Pneumonia is a leading cause of death for elderly patients, with over 90 percent of pneumonia-related deaths among those 65 and older. Previous studies have also shown that OMT can improve the efficacy of antibiotics in pneumonia patients.

Osteopathic manipulative techniques can help treat structural and tissue abnormalities, relieve joint restriction and misalignment, restore muscle and tissue balance and promote the overall movement blood flow throughout the body. When appropriate, it can complement, and in some cases replace, medications or surgery.

Disclosures: The basis for this analysis, The Multicenter Osteopathic Pneumonia Study in the Elderly (MOPSE) clinical trial, was funded by a consortium of foundations including the Foundation for Osteopathic Health Services. Please see the study for full details.

About the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association

The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association (JAOA) is the official scientific publication of the American Osteopathic Association. Edited by Robert Orenstein, DO, it is the premier scholarly peer-reviewed publication of the osteopathic medical profession. The JAOA's mission is to advance medicine through the publication of peer-reviewed osteopathic research.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release briefly but adequately covers the major quantitative findings. For example, the 1.1 reduction in hospital stay mentioned in the release is an absolute reduction. The release would have been greatly strengthened by including more of the results in the narrative that are confined to the graphic. Describing the actual length of stay in each group, which is provided in the graphic, as opposed to just the amount of the reduction would provide some context for how meaningful the benefit it is. (i.e. a 1-day reduction on a 30-day stay being less impressive than a 1-day reduction on a 4-day stay). It also could have given more attention to a comparison of the full manipulative therapy and “light touch” therapy groups. For the mortality data, it wasn’t clear from the text if they are referring to an absolute or relative risk reduction.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- The use of mammograms has dipped since a medical task force made controversial recommendations that women in their 40s may not need to get breast cancer screenings every year, according to one of three small studies to be presented Monday.

The studies related to this topic will be presented at the American Roentgen Ray Society annual meeting. They do not appear in peer-reviewed journals.

The studies suggest that fewer physicians are recommending annual mammograms for women in their 40s, fewer patients in that age group are getting screened and that tumors found through routine mammography are more likely to be detected in early stages of cancer.

The studies examined the impact of the controversial guidelines issued by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal advisory board.

Who decides about mammograms? Inside the task force

In November 2009, the group stated that yearly mammograms should not be automatic at age 40 and that physicians should discuss their risks and benefits with their patients. It recommended routine mammography screenings every two years for women ages 50 to 74.

"The benefit in 40- to 49-year-old women is pretty small," said Dr. Virginia Moyer, chair of the task force, about annual mammograms. "There is a real, but rather modest benefit. There are also risks, and they are greater in younger women than older women."

Mammograms are less effective in detecting growths in younger women, whose breasts may be denser. The screening gets better with older women because breast tissues change over time.

As a result, some women experience false positives, anxiety and unnecessary biopsies because of mammograms, according to data. Roughly 15% of women in their 40s detect breast cancer through mammography.

"The benefit is modest enough it needs to be an individual decision," Moyer said about mammograms for women in their 40s.

This contradicted advice from cancer groups such as the American Cancer Society and Susan G. Komen for the Cure, which told women 40 and older to get screened every year. It sparked immediate outcry from such groups and cancer survivors, who say routine mammograms for women younger than 50 can save lives.

Suspicious growths caught in regular-screening mammograms are more likely to be in early stages and therefore more treatable, said Dr. Donna Plecha, division chief of mammography at University Hospitals at Case Medical Center in Ohio.

She reviewed records of 524 biopsies (samples of suspicious growths in breasts) from women in their 40s during 2008 to 2009 at her hospital.

Of the 359 biopsies from screening mammography patients, 15% had cancer. These cancers were more treatable because they were caught in earlier stages, Plecha said.

Although 85% of those biopsies turned out to be noncancerous, some "may show us the patient is at higher risk of breast cancer," she said.

"I haven't met many patients who don't appreciate us being thorough, to trying to find the cancers at an early stage," Plecha said. "I would still recommend screening mammograms starting at age of 40," because cancers caught earlier would be more curable.

Breast cancer ID'd more accurately by docs who see more scans

Plecha's findings were not surprising to Moyer. It's obvious that annual screenings would catch cancers before they progress, she said.

The study presumes that catching earlier stages for women between the ages of 40-49 would translate into fewer breast cancer deaths.

"The data that we have suggests that 1 in a thousand will benefit from mammograms in the 40-49 age," she said. "There are whole lots of assumptions that are not supported by the data they presented."

The task force did not say don't get mammograms, Moyer said.

"It might make women not want to get the test," she said. "This is a decision that should belong to the woman with appropriate info on hand."

In another study, Dr. Lara Hardesty, section chief of breast imaging at the University of Colorado Hospital, examined survey results from fewer than 50 internists, gynecologists, family practitioners and nurse midwives.

She found that fewer clinicians were recommending annual mammograms after the task force's guidelines were issued.

Before the guidelines, 56% recommended yearly mammograms for women in the 40- to 49-year-old range. After the guidelines, that rate decreased to 20%, and 56% of the clinicians reported they were discussing the risks and benefits of screening with patients. That decrease, Hardesty said, "is a statistically significant difference," but it also showed more doctors were discussing mammograms with patients.

Hardesty also found that there were 205 fewer mammograms among women in their 40s after the guidelines were issued. Among patients 50 and older, mammograms increased slightly from 4,479 patients to 4,498.

It was unclear why mammograms in the 40s decreased while older women's mammograms increased slightly.

Hardesty offered this hypothesis: Older women are used to having annual mammograms because they've done it for years. Meanwhile, younger women may feel as though they don't have to get this screening.

Although the task force concluded that the net benefit of mammography in the 40s is small, Hardesty said: "If you're the one person we find your cancer, it's the world to you."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story states:
“The data that we have suggests that 1 in a thousand will benefit from mammograms in the 40-49 age,” (the USPSTF chair) said. “There are whole lots of assumptions that are not supported by the data they presented.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An analysis of two influential studies of prostate cancer screening concludes that the much-debated test “significantly” reduces deaths from the disease, suggesting that current recommendations against routine PSA screening might be steering men away from a lifesaving procedure.

The analysis, published Monday in Annals of Internal Medicine, drew wildly different reactions, as is often the case with research on PSA screenings. Some experts in cancer screening and statistics said its novel approach was “on shaky ground” and used a “completely unverifiable” methodology that they had “never seen before,” but others praised its “intriguing and innovative approach.” There was one area of agreement, however: “I imagine it’s going to generate some buzz,” said biostatistician Ted Karrison of the University of Chicago.

If the new analysis is correct, one of the influential PSA studies, called PLCO, reduced deaths from prostate cancer by 27 percent to 32 percent, not the zero percent that PLCO researchers themselves found. For a man in the U.S., the risk of dying of prostate cancer is about 2.5 percent. A mortality reduction of 30 percent would lower the death rate to 1.75 percent, said epidemiologist Ruth Etzioni of Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, the study’s senior author.

“If a screening test reduces cancer mortality by 20 percent, it’s considered a successful test,” Etzioni said. “I think the [prostate-cancer] mortality reduction we calculate is a significant benefit. This is a screening test that saves lives.”

Those gains come at some cost to health, though: For every life saved, she estimated, five men will be told they have cancer when in fact their abnormal cells would never grow, spread, or harm them. In other estimates, such “overdiagnoses” outnumber lives saved by 50-to-1.

The new study lands amid another shift in how experts view PSA screening, which measures blood levels of a molecule sometimes associated with prostate cancer. In 2012 the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, whose recommendations help determine that procedures insurance should cover, recommended against routine PSA tests because of their many risks and tiny benefits. Among other drawbacks, the tests lead to overdiagnosis (meaning a biopsy finds malignant cells but they are so innocuous they would never harm, let alone kill, the man) as well as incontinence and impotence from treatment (including of harmless cancers).

In April, however, the task force proposed instead that men aged 55 to 69 discuss PSA’s pros and cons with their doctor and then decide what to do, factoring in that if 1,000 men get regular PSA screening for a decade it will save about one life. (Older and younger men are still advised not to have routine screening.)

The rationale for the re-analysis led by Etzioni is that the PLCO study was a bit of a mess. It assigned half of its nearly 77,000 participants, men ages 55 to 74, to have yearly PSA tests and the other half to not do so. But 46 percent of the men in the no-PSA group had yearly PSAs anyway. As a result, when researchers counted deaths in each group, it wasn’t a clean comparison: Rather than comparing screened to unscreened men, they were comparing assigned-to-screening men to not-assigned-to-screening men.

The finding that assigned-to-screening men were no more likely to avoid death from prostate cancer might therefore have been because their screening behavior wasn’t different enough from the “unscreened” (but in fact partly screened) men’s, not because PSA screening doesn’t save lives.

In an effort to untangle that possibility, Etzioni and 21 co-authors from 10 countries created multiple mathematical models. They all rely on estimates of “lead time,” or how much sooner a cancer is detected because of PSA instead of because symptoms are detected. The models incorporated the records of all the PLCO men and ignored which group they’d been assigned to.

Bottom line: Screened men’s cancers were detected earlier than unscreened men’s, and more frequent screening advanced detection more. That moved some prostate cancers from too-advanced-to-treat to treatable, reducing prostate cancer mortality by 27 percent to 32 percent over 11 years, Etzioni and her colleagues conclude.

Researchers not involved in the study weren’t convinced. “The concern is that men in the no-screening group but who chose to get screened anyway might differ in important ways from men who stayed with no-screening,” Karrison said. They might be more health conscious or conscientious, or have other traits associated with longevity. If so, then those traits, not screening, might be responsible for their lower risk of dying from prostate cancer. Two prominent experts in cancer prevention and statistics agreed, but said they did not want to be publicly identified as criticizing the new analysis because some of its authors are colleagues of theirs.

Dr. Kenneth Lin of Georgetown University Medical Center, a former staffer at the USPSTF, said crediting PSA tests with reducing prostate cancer mortality by around 30 percent was probably an overstatement, especially since mathematical models are only models. An earlier one for the PLCO study concluded that more men died in its screening group than in the don’t-get-screened group. “Models are models,” Lin said. “No matter how sophisticated, they shouldn’t trump data from real people who participated in the randomized trials” — which in PLCO found zero lives saved from PSA screening.

A researcher associated with the Preventive Services Task Force, but who was not permitted to speak to reporters while the group is finalizing its PSA recommendation, said the panel would incorporate the new paper in its analysis. “But honestly,” he said, “I don’t know that this adds a great deal to our understanding.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: There is good depth here discussing the benefits. Early in the story it indicates that “for a man in the U.S., the risk of dying of prostate cancer is about 2.5 percent. A mortality reduction of 30 percent would lower the death rate to 1.75 percent.”  Later this is described in relative terms, saying that more frequent PSA screening “moved some prostate cancers from too-advanced-to-treat to treatable, reducing prostate cancer mortality by 27 percent to 32 percent over 11 years.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heart researchers have long known that plaques in coronary arteries start out as pimplelike bumps but get waxy and hard and filled with calcium as time passes. Calcium shows up as white flecks in CT scans. The hard plaques are not the dangerous ones — it is the softer ones that rupture and cause a heart attack. But the amount of calcium in arteries can give a good idea of the presence or extent of coronary artery disease.

Dr. Krumholz and Dr. Khurram Nasir, a preventive cardiologist at Baptist Health South Florida, who conceived the new study, reasoned that research on heart scans had not been designed to help doctors make treatment decisions they face today.

Current guidelines have vastly increased the number of people who are eligible to take statins. Many people, though, are reluctant to take them. So, the investigators asked, could a scan identify those whose actual risk is lower than what was calculated?

The study subjects were nearly 4,000 men and women ages 45 to 84 and included blacks, whites, Hispanics and Asians who were recruited in 2000 through 2002. According to today’s guidelines, half had risk scores high enough that a statin would be recommended or should be considered. But guidelines then were more conservative, and in accordance with them, the subjects did not take the drugs. All had heart scans, and half had no calcium visible on the scans. The subjects were followed for 10 years.

It turned out that the actual incidence of heart attacks or disabling chest pain in those with zero calcium was half or less than what the risk calculator predicted.

For example, a person who, according to the current risk calculator, has a 12 percent risk of a heart attack in the next decade should take a statin, the guidelines say. But if that person has a calcium score of zero, the actual risk turned out to be 4 percent, below the 7.5 percent threshold for recommending a statin according to the guidelines and below the 5 percent risk for considering a statin.

Dr. Nasir said he has been using the study’s findings in his clinic. First, he asks patients for whom statins are recommended according to the current guidelines if they would want to avoid taking the drugs if they turn out to have a calcium score of zero and an actual risk of less than 5 percent. Most tell him that they would. He then sends them for a scan.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that among study participants, those with a zero calcium score on a heart CT scan had only half the expected number of heart attacks or disabling chest pain over a 10-year period. That’s a relative comparison, which as we frequently note does not provide the full picture regarding benefit. But the story goes on to give readers a better sense of what these numbers mean in absolute terms. It explains the example of a person with a 12 percent risk of a heart attack over a decade based on the risk calculator recommended by the American college of Cardiology and others. That person actually turned out to have only a 4 percent 10-year risk, below the widely-used 7.5 percent risk threshold for recommending a statin.
The story makes clear that the scan does not provide a direct health benefit, but it provides information to people who are trying to decide about whether to start taking cholesterol-reducing statins. To help with that decision, it would have been nice for the story to include some discussion of the benefits associated with statin use, especially the numbers needed to treat (NNT) with a statin in order to save a life.
The story includes only one patient anecdote, a woman who was feeling depressed and had trouble getting out of bed when she took statins, and then decided to stop taking the drugs after having a CT scan that showed zero calcium. We often find fault with stories that introduce readers to only one patient, who claims to have greatly benefited; however, the placement of the anecdote low in the story and the preceding context that included limitations and expert cautions mean this single patient story doesn’t overwhelm the other information.
Link to online Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease (ASCVD) Risk Estimator: http://tools.acc.org/ASCVD-Risk-Estimator/
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A genetically modified poliovirus may help some patients fight a deadly form of brain cancer, researchers report.

The experimental treatment seems to have extended survival in a small group of patients with glioblastoma who faced a grim prognosis because standard treatments had failed, Duke University researchers say.

"I've been doing this for 50 years and I've never seen results like this," says Dr. Darell Bigner, the director emeritus of the The Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at the Duke Cancer Institute, who is helping develop the treatment.

But the researchers and other brain-cancer doctors caution the research is at a very early stage. In the study, only 21 percent of patients experienced a prolonged survival. Much more follow-up research is needed to better assess and hopefully improve the treatment's effectiveness, the researchers say.

"We have to be careful," says Annick Desjardins, a Duke neuro-oncologist who helped conduct the study. "But we have long-term survivors. We are seeing something we don't normally see with patients with glioblastoma."

Dr. David Reardon, clinical director of the Center for Neuro-Oncology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, says the Duke group's results may represent "a good, solid, important step forward" for patients with no alternatives.

"Unfortunately, for most patients this is not going to be the answer yet," says Reardon, who used to work at Duke but wasn't involved in the new research. "My fear is that every patient and family dealing with the devastating disease of glioblastoma is going to think the poliovirus is the cure. Unfortunately, the patients who are benefiting do reflect a relatively small percentage of the population."

The Duke results were published online Tuesday by the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with their presentation at the 22nd International Conference on Brain Tumor Research in Norway.

Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive malignant brain tumor in adults. It's the cancer that killed former Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., and former Vice President Joe Biden's son Beau. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., is fighting glioblastoma.

The Duke researchers decided to try to use a genetically modified version of the poliovirus, which can cause a devastating form of paralysis, because of the virus's ability to infect nervous system cells.

The scientists removed one of the virus's genes to prevent it from causing polio and replaced that gene with one from a harmless virus known as a rhinovirus, which ordinarily causes the common cold.

The engineered virus was then infused directly into tumors in patients' brains with a tube inserted through a hole in the skull. The modified virus retains the ability to infect and kill brain tumor cells, and also appears to trigger the patient's own immune system cells to attack the tumors, the researchers say.

Between 2012 and 2017, the researchers treated 61 patients, trying various doses of the modified virus to determine which was safest and most effective.

There are substantial risks. The treatment can cause a dangerous swelling in the brain that can lead to seizures and other complications, the researchers found. One patient suffered a life-threatening blood clot in the brain that required surgery.

But overall, the median length of survival was 12.5 months for patients treated with poliovirus, compared with 11.3 months for a similar group of patients treated in the past, the researchers report. And starting at two years after treatment, the two groups' survival rate began to diverge, the researchers reported.

After 24 months, 21 percent of the patients treated with the virus had survived compared with 14 percent of the historical comparison group. After three years, 21 percent of the poliovirus treated patients survived, compared with 4 percent of the other group, according to the researchers.

Two patients have survived more than six years, Bigner says. One has survived more than five years.

"You just don't see this percentage of long-term survivors with this disease," Bigner says. "Those that have survived more than two years are in remission, and we expect them to continue to be long-term survivors."

Some other researchers praised the results.

"We're extraordinarily encouraged by what we see with this data," says Mitchel Berger, chairman of neurosurgery at the University of California, San Francisco and director of its center for brain tumors. "It's phenomenal."

But some cancer doctors caution that comparing the outcomes for patients receiving the virus treatment to what would have happened to similar patients in the past could produce misleading conclusions.

The Duke researchers have started a follow-up study combining the treatment with a chemotherapy drug to try to improve the results. They also plan to combine the treatment with other drugs, including some called checkpoint inhibitors, to harness the immune system to fight cancer.

In addition, the researchers are planning to try the approach on children with brain cancer, as well as other types of cancer, including melanoma and breast cancer. "We believe we are going to be able to increase the results even more significantly," Bigner says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job of reporting the scope of the observed benefit, stating that 21% of patients “experienced a prolonged survival” and then breaking down that number with more specifics. For example, it reported that after three years, 21% the treated patients survived versus 4% of a historical control group. But in a small study, why not cite the actual numbers – how many out of how many? – rather than make readers do the math in their heads.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) — Could one hour be all you need to quit smoking, without cravings or side effects?

That’s what Innovative Laser Therapy, a New Haven, Connecticut-based company, advertises on its website. The clinic uses low-level lasers - similar to those sometimes used to treat arthritis-related pain - to target specific acupuncture points on the body related to addiction, metabolism and stress, and claims that most patients can quit smoking after one session.

In that session, the laser is pointed at spots on the face, hands and wrist, with the aim of relieving withdrawal symptoms and preventing cravings.

“When you smoke a cigarette, you artificially tell your brain to release endorphins,” Frank Pinto, the owner of Innovative Laser Therapy, told Reuters Health. Therefore, quitting leads to a quick drop in endorphin levels, he said.

“The laser basically stimulates the nerve endings to tell the brain to release a flood of endorphins” to boost a patient over that initial 3-5 day hump of withdrawal symptoms, he said.

The treatment also targets other points that are thought to suppress appetite — to prevent the weight gain that often comes with quitting smoking — and promote relaxation, according to Innovative Laser Therapy.

But does it work?

There's limited research showing that laser therapy might help some smokers quit. Innovative Laser Therapy cites one study, a 2008 paper published in the Journal of Chinese Medicine, available on their site at link.reuters.com/pus95p. A UK-based team found that smokers that had four laser treatments over two weeks were more likely to quit than smokers that had three treatments. Those in the three treatment group, in turn, had better success rates than a control group that was given fake laser treatments.

After 6 months, 55 percent of the four-treatment group was smoke-free, compared to 19 percent of the three-treatment group and 6 percent of those who were treated with fake lasers.

The authors weren’t able to follow most of the 340 participants for more than 6 months after treatment, so they don’t know if those who stopped smoking started up again, or if they really quit for good. And the journal’s site - which offers lasers and other treatments for sale — does not say whether it is peer-reviewed.

In contrast, a 2000 Singapore study of 330 adolescents found no difference in 3-month quitting rates for participants treated with real or fake laser therapy.

“In scientific terms, this one (UK) study is not enough evidence to recommend (the) laser for smoking cessation,” Dr. Adrian White told Reuters Health by email. Dr. White is a research fellow at Peninsula Medical School in the UK who co-authored a review of laser therapy and similar smoking cessation methods for the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organization that evaluates medical research. “The results conflict with the other study, and they seem ‘too good to be true.’”

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 1 in 5 Americans is a current cigarette smoker, and the majority of them smoke every day. The American Heart Association reports that more than 80 percent of smokers say they want to quit. But many smokers try more than one smoking cessation method or take years of trying before they do quit for good.

Pinto launched Innovative Laser Therapy after he successfully quit smoking with a round of laser therapy from a clinic in Florida. His company charges $350 for a one-time treatment that takes less than an hour, and offers free extra treatments to patients who are still struggling with quitting in the following 6 months. Other companies do a few shorter therapy sessions as part of their regular treatment plan.

Using acupuncture methods to treat addictions such as smoking is not new, White said, but there is still no clear evidence that treatment with needles has any therapeutic effects either.

And while the laser device used by clinics including Innovative Laser Therapy has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for temporary pain relief, the agency has not cleared it to be marketed for smoking cessation.

The UK study found that the side effects of the treatment were similar to some withdrawal symptoms, and the FDA has classified the laser as a “nonsignificant risk” device. Pinto says that the biggest side effect he sees is that “people feel relaxed during the treatment.”

Neil Camera, the president of Laser Therapeutics, Inc., says that FDA approval could be on the horizon. His company, which produces the lasers and supplies them to centers that are running clinical trials on the treatment’s effectiveness, has had an application for approval in to the FDA for three and half years, he said.

But the government organization had only dealt with drugs - not new technology - for smoking cessation, which has slowed down the process, Camera said. “The FDA didn’t know how to handle it, quite frankly,” he told Reuters Health. “That was the biggest drawback.”

Dr. Neil Spielholz, of Nova Southeastern University in Fort Lauderdale, was involved with the initial study submitted to the FDA - the same one that showed the success of laser treatment in UK smokers. The FDA had a couple of problems with that study, he said, including that successful quitting was measured by a smoker’s own reports, and not by more modern methods that calculate the amount of carbon monoxide in someone’s breath. In response, Laser Therapeutics is designing another study to address those comments, he said.

A spokesperson from the FDA confirmed that the agency is aware of the concept of using low level lasers for smoking cessation and had been in discussions with those seeking to get it approved on how they should proceed.

Usually three convincing studies involving large groups of human patients are needed before the FDA decides to approve a treatment.

Pinto says that Innovative Laser Therapy follows up on the success of all of its clients a month after the treatment for clinical evidence that will be part of the package of data presented to the FDA.

“The company (Laser Therapeutics) is going crazy,” Spielholz told Reuters Health. “They want to get this thing approved, obviously.”

But, he said of the initial evidence in favor of the treatment, “this one is only a single study, which of course the people who believe in lasers will jump on ... (but) things have got to be confirmed. One study, no matter how many patients are in it, really needs one or two confirmation studies.”

If future studies do show its effectiveness, laser treatment would have a leg up over conventional methods of smoking cessation, such as medications including Chantix and Zyban, said Spielholz, who continues to work with Laser Therapeutics on getting FDA approval.

The lack of any drugs involved in laser therapy “would be the beauty of this,” he said. “You do not have those side effects of suicidal thoughts and feelings of paranoia that are reported for the drugs,” he said.

Still, Laser Therapeutics’ Camera said, the treatment won’t work on everybody. “The person has to be wanting to quit smoking,” he said. “They can’t be dragged in by a spouse or whatever, because nothing’s going to work then.”

Dr. Martha Daviglus, who studies preventative medicine at Northwestern University, agreed that the most important part of any smoking cessation program was that smokers were ready to quit. After seeing the initial research, she’s hopeful, but cautious, about low-level laser therapy as a way to help people do that.

“There are hundreds of methods to quit smoking,” she said. “We can hope that this is going to be a method that is going to help people.” But, Daviglus said, “We need more research and more evidence.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The alleged benefits are quantified, and, from there, the story takes pains to explain how much evidence supports these claims.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON, DC (Oct. 2, 2017) -- An intensive text messaging program provides some pregnant women help in fighting the urge to light up a smoke, according to a study out today.

"Our findings show that a text messaging program helped some groups of pregnant women quit smoking during pregnancy," says lead author Lorien C. Abroms, ScD, MA, an associate professor of prevention and community health at Milken Institute School of Public Health (Milken Institute SPH) at the George Washington University. "The study's findings suggest a potential new quitting strategy, especially for those later in their pregnancies and older pregnant women."

The researchers recruited pregnant women who were already enrolled in an established text messaging program called Text4baby. Text4baby has been found to have a positive health impact on alcohol consumption during pregnancy--but not smoking. Abroms and her team wanted to find out if a more intensive mobile phone program called Quit4baby would be more effective. To find out, the team recruited nearly 500 pregnant women, who smoked an average of 7 cigarettes per day and wanted more help to quit.

Quit4baby is targeted to smoking cessation and sends more text messages--between 1 and 8 per day aimed at bolstering a pregnant woman's resolve to quit. The messages help educate the women about the health risks associated with smoking and they are interactive--allowing a woman to text back for more help if she is experiencing a craving or goes back to smoking.

After three months, 16 percent of the women who were enrolled in both Text4baby and Quit4baby had quit compared with just 11 percent of women getting just Text4baby. However, the difference between the two groups did not reach statistical significance, the authors say.

The more intensive intervention did seem to help two subgroups quit smoking at least in the short run, Abroms says. The combo of Text4baby and Quit4baby helped women age 26 and older and those in the second and third trimester of pregnancy quit through the delivery date and in some cases beyond. However, the researchers found that the resolve to quit seemed to disappear postpartum as many of these women started smoking again.

Very little help is provided to pregnant smokers who want to quit so the study's findings are important, especially if the strategy can be adjusted to be more effective, Abroms says. Despite the health risks, about 10 percent of women smoke throughout their pregnancy in the United States.

Additional studies must be done to find out if Quit4baby can be paired with other smoking cessation tools in order to provide long-term help for pregnant women who want to kick their smoking habit for good, she says.

The study, "A Randomized Trial of Text Messaging for Smoking Cessation in Pregnant Women," was published October 2 in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine.

*The headline of this release was edited for clarity to match the content in the body of the release.

The research was supported by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, part of the National Institutes of Health. Dr. Abroms has stock in Wellpass Inc. (formerly Voxiva, Inc.) and has licensed Text2quit and Quit4baby to Wellpass.

About Milken Institute School of Public Health at the George Washington University: Established in July 1997 as the School of Public Health and Health Services, Milken Institute School of Public Health is the only school of public health in the nation's capital. Today, more than 1,900 students from 54 U.S. states and territories and more than 50 countries pursue undergraduate, graduate and doctoral-level degrees in public health. The school also offers an online Master of Public Health MPH@GW, an online Executive Master of Health Administration MHA@GW, and an online Master of Science in Management of Health Informatics and Analytics, HealthInformatics@GW, which allow students to pursue their degree from anywhere in the world.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release appropriately describes the outcomes in absolute terms. For example, “16 percent of the women who were enrolled in both Text4baby and Quit4baby had quit compared with just 11 percent of women getting just Text4baby.”
But while the body of the release clarifies that this difference between groups was not statistically significant, the headline and lead sentence gloss over this fact. We’ll address that issue below under the Evidence criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Robots may not help doctors do a better job on some surgeries, according to a new study.

Surgeons treating women with endometriosis - a chronic condition that affects more than 5 million women and adolescent girls in the U.S. - didn’t get better or faster results when they used a robotic system.

With the surgeon alone, “the incision is smaller (and) the manipulations are more controlled,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat, an author on the study and the chair of Obstetrics & Gynecology at Northside Hospital in Atlanta, told Reuters Health.

Because the robot lets the surgeon get a better picture of the inside of the body, the authors had expected that surgeries using the robot would go more smoothly than those without it.

To test this idea, they looked back at 78 minor surgeries that were done on women with endometriosis - half using the assistance of a robot, half without it.

There was no difference in how much blood patients lost, and there were no complications in either group. But robotic surgeries took longer than non-robotic surgeries by about 40 minutes - 3 hours and 11 minutes compared to 2 hours and 29 minutes, on average. Longer surgeries often mean a more tired surgeon and more chances for things to go wrong.

The robot-surgeon team might not have outperformed the surgeon alone because the procedure was a relatively simple one.

Surgical robots do not operate on their own. Rather, surgeons move electronic instruments that are linked to the movement of other instruments inside the body, while they watch a three-dimensional image of what’s going on inside. One robot can cost around $1.5 million.

“We were surprised that (surgery with the robot) did not have better outcomes than (the surgeon alone), as we have always believed if you can see more and see better you can do more and do better,” the authors write.

However, they suggest that more complicated procedures for severe endometriosis, which might require open surgery, would benefit from the help of a robot.

Inexperienced doctors might also take advantage of the robot for surgery if they don’t think they have the skills to do the surgery with only a small cut, Dr. Nezhat said. In this case, the robot could turn what would have to be an open surgery into a simpler one.

Dr. Tommaso Falcone, chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Cleveland Clinic, said this study shows that more technology is not always better. Using a robot for basic surgery, like the kind studied here, would be like using a computer to do addition, he told Reuters Health.

“I just need a calculator to add a few things,” said Falcone, who was not involved in the study. “Yes it’s true that if I’ve got that supercomputer maybe it looks better. But all I need to do is add 5 and 5.”

Especially in a time of concern over rising medical costs, “we should not simply use the highly sophisticated technology just because it’s there,” Falcone said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: There are two possible benefits here. 1. People spend less time in surgery to achieve roughly the same outcome and potentially a better outcome, which, by all accounts, is better. 2. Hospitals and medical groups spend less money on robots and are allowed to devote those health resources elsewhere. Both are not so much quantified as addressed. In order to truly establish the second point, one would need to perform a longer term and larger study to find out whether humans outperform robots on a wider range of surgeries. These $1.5 million machines are not just specific to endometriosis. They are used for hundreds of procedures, and so to decide whether they are worth the money would require more research. Still, the story is measured in its claims.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
October 22, 2015 - A minimally invasive implant procedure is highly effective in reducing pain and disability for patients with sacroiliac joint (SIJ) dysfunction, reports a clinical trial in the November issue of Neurosurgery, official journal of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons, published by Wolters Kluwer.

The randomized controlled trial shows superior outcomes in patients undergoing minimally invasive sacroiliac joint (SIJ) fusion using triangular titanium implants, compared to nonsurgical management, according to the new research overseen by Dr. Daniel J. Cher of SI-BONE, Inc., in San Jose, Calif. (The study was sponsored by SI-BONE, manufacturer of the SIJ implants.)

Good Pain Relief and Other Outcomes with Implant Treatment for SIJ Dysfunction

The study included 148 patients with low back pain caused by confirmed SIJ dysfunction, treated at 19 US spine surgery clinics. The SIJ connects the central (sacrum) and lateral (ilium) bones of the pelvis. SIJ disruption or osteoarthritis is a common pain condition, estimated to cause 15 to 23 percent of cases of chronic low back pain.

Trial subjects had severe SIJ pain, with an average pain score of 82 on a 0-to-100-point scale. Average pain duration was longer than six years, and about two-thirds of subjects were taking opioid (narcotic) medications. Many had previously received many non-surgical SIJ treatments, and many had a history of prior spinal surgery.

Two-thirds of subjects were randomly assigned to undergo minimally invasive SIJ fusion. In this procedure, triangular titanium implants were placed through a small incision to stabilize and fuse the SIJ. Procedures were unilateral in most cases, but some subjects underwent bilateral treatment. The remaining subjects received nonsurgical treatments, such as physical therapy, steroid injections and/or radiofrequency ablation of sacral nerve root lateral branches.

Pain and other outcomes were compared at baseline and at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months. At 6 months, subjects in the nonsurgical group had the option to "cross over" to the implant procedure.

Based on reduction in pain and absence of complications at 6 months, treatment was rated successful in 81 percent of subjects assigned to the SIJ implant procedure, compared to 26 percent with nonsurgical treatment. Average pain score decreased to 30 in the surgical group versus 72 in the nonsurgical group. Seventy-three percent of subjects undergoing the implant procedure had "clinically significant" reduction in disability scores, compared to just 14 percent in the nonsurgical group.

After one year, subjects assigned to SIJ fusion still had significant reductions in pain and disability, as well as improved quality of life. Thirty-five subjects from the nonsurgical group opted to undergo the implant procedure, with similarly good results. There were only a few complications related to the SIJ implant procedure.

Sacroiliac joint dysfunction is a common cause of disabling pain in the lower back, buttocks, or groin. Many different surgical and nonsurgical treatments have been used for this condition, despite a lack of high-quality evidence for their effectiveness.

The minimally invasive SIJ implant approach evaluated in this trial has been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration. The study is the first randomized controlled trial to directly compare the results of surgical and nonsurgical treatment for SIJ dysfunction.

The results show "clinically and statistically important" improvements in clinical outcomes for patients undergoing the SIJ implant procedure, according to Dr. Cher and colleagues, with "profound differences" between the surgical and nonsurgical groups. The implant procedure is minimally invasive, has few complications, and produces significant and lasting improvements in pain, disability, and quality of life.

The authors note some important limitations of the trial, including the lack of long-term outcomes in the nonsurgical group due to the high crossover rate. They plan further analyses, including two-year follow-up CT scans and a cost-effectiveness comparison of SIJ fusion versus nonsurgical treatment.

Click here to read "Randomized Controlled Trial of Minimally Invasive Sacroiliac Joint Fusion Using Triangular Titanium Implants vs Nonsurgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint Dysfunction: 12-Month Outcomes."

Article: "Randomized Controlled Trial of Minimally Invasive Sacroiliac Joint Fusion Using Triangular Titanium Implants vs Nonsurgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint Dysfunction: 12-Month Outcomes" (doi: 10.1227/NEU.0000000000000988)

Neurosurgery, the Official Journal of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons, is your most complete window to the contemporary field of neurosurgery. Members of the Congress and non-member subscribers receive 3,000 pages per year packed with the very latest science, technology, and medicine, not to mention full-text online access to the world's most complete, up-to-the-minute neurosurgery resource. For professionals aware of the rapid pace of developments in the field, Neurosurgery is nothing short of indispensable.

Wolters Kluwer is a global leader in professional information services. Professionals in the areas of legal, business, tax, accounting, finance, audit, risk, compliance and healthcare rely on Wolters Kluwer's market leading information-enabled tools and software solutions to manage their business efficiently, deliver results to their clients, and succeed in an ever more dynamic world.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2014 annual revenues of €3.7 billion. The group serves customers in over 170 countries, and employs over 19,000 people worldwide. The company is headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands. Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on NYSE Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release cited the primary outcome of the implant procedure in terms of an absolute percentage.
Using reduction in pain and absence of complications at 6 months as the primary outcome, “treatment was rated successful in 81 percent of subjects assigned to the SIJ implant procedure, compared to 26 percent with nonsurgical treatment,” according to the release. In addition, the average pain score decreased to 30 in the surgical group versus 72 in the nonsurgical group. “Seventy-three percent of subjects undergoing the implant procedure had “clinically significant” reduction in disability scores, compared to just 14 percent in the nonsurgical group.”
We thought that the release’s implication that it is easy to figure out who has chronic pain due to SI joint inflammation was inadequate. In practice, it is very difficult to diagnose patients with sacroiliitis and it’s often mistaken for other types of back pain, as the study itself indicates.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration has approved a new treatment that could help millions of older adults who are nearly blinded by macular degeneration. It’s a miniature telescope implanted directly into the eye that magnifies images to more than twice their size.

Findings from the clinical trials show that the telescope does improve vision for the majority of patients. Still, there are some concerns about corneal damage, since the telescope is relatively large inside the eye. And the population who might benefit from the new device is somewhat limited. The treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery. And for those who catch the disease early on, there may be better options.

But for 80-year-old Marian Orr, the implanted telescope was just what she needed. Orr has a big family: five children, eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. That means lots of graduations, weddings and school events. In other words, lots to see. So when Orr's vision began to decline in her mid 70s, she got worried. Both her father and uncle went blind in their 60s, and she knew macular degeneration was often inherited.

Orr says her sight gradually diminished. It got to the point "where I couldn't see. If I looked at you straight on, I couldn't see your face, could only see your head," she says. "I couldn't see the eyes and the nose. I could just see the round head that was all, sort of like a halo was all over it."

This blurred vision is pretty typical of macular degeneration.

Orr couldn't see things in a store. Her daughter took her grocery shopping. Orr couldn't identify pots, pans and dishes in her kitchen. And the outdoors became an unfamiliar, startling place.

So when Orr's cousin read about an experimental treatment for macular degeneration, Orr quickly got in touch with one of the researchers, had some basic tests, and before she knew it, she was one of more than 200 patients to have an experimental miniature telescope implanted in her eye.

Dr. Kathryn A. Colby, ophthalmic surgeon at Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston and assistant professor of ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, calls the pea-sized technology a true "breakthrough" that could help millions of patients who, until now, have had no treatment options. Colby was one of the principal investigators in the clinical trials of the miniature telescopes. They were conducted at 28 leading ophthalmic centers and included 219 patients with end-stage, age-related macular degeneration. She was not Orr's doctor.

What happens with age-related macular degeneration is that the center of the retina deteriorates, and people gradually lose sight. Colby says if you think of the eye as an old-style camera with film, then the retina is the film. Over years of wear and tear, it degenerates and weakens and no longer transmits full images to the brain. That's why Orr saw blank spots where people's noses and eyes should be in their faces, sort of like "holes in the film," says Colby.

Colby says that by magnifying the image, the telescope allows the part of the vision that's missing to become smaller. And so the "blanks" in the image appear to fill up, presenting the individual with a nearly complete image.

But, like all telescopes, when vision is narrowly focused, the peripheral view gets lost. This is why the telescope is implanted in only one eye. The other eye is used for peripheral vision.

Colby says that's also why patients need to learn to use the implanted telescope eye for near activities. For example, if they're looking to see what time it is on a clock, they use the eye with the implanted telescope. But if they're scanning the room to see exactly where the clock is, they use the other eye, which also has end-stage macular degeneration.

After surgery, patients do a variety of eye exercises to train their eyes to work together. It wasn't hard for Orr, who was used to wearing contacts, one for distance and one for close-up. For her, the tiny new eye telescope has put the "bustle" back into her life.

"I'm very active in my church. And I am a lunch buddy at one of the schools nearby," she says. Orr has lunch every week with the children in the first and second grades. She reads a lot, even books with regular-sized print, which her daughter gives her. She can read the newspaper and watch TV. "I'm busy," she says. "That's for sure!"

Practically all the patients in the telescope study with Orr had their vision improve. And 75 percent of them, like Orr, had major improvement. But because the telescope is relatively large, patients risk damage to the cornea. In the study, 10 out of 219 patients had corneal problems. Five required a corneal transplant. As a result, the Food and Drug Administration plans to monitor safety for at least five years for the next set of patients who receive the telescope.

Despite its terrific potential, the new eye telescope isn't for everyone. Dr. George Williams is an ophthalmologist and retinal surgeon associated with the American Academy of Ophthalmology. He sees lots of patients who might qualify for the eye telescope.

But he also sees a lot of patients who cannot be candidates. For one, the treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery.

"In order to implant this device, we need to remove the natural lens, or the cataract, and then use a portion of the natural lens to position and support the telescope," says Williams.

Cataract surgery removes the natural lens and, in most cases, replaces it with an artificial lens, which means there is no foundation for the telescope.

And for patients who are in the early stages of macular degeneration, Williams says that medications approved just six years ago are effective and a lot less invasive than the telescope. The drugs are injected directly into the eye on a monthly basis. And with this treatment, doctors are able to prevent severe visual loss in over 90 percent of patients. In nearly half of all patients, visual improvement is significant.

So the take-home message: If you're over 60 and you begin to experience visual loss, get yourself to an eye specialist as soon as possible to see if you can be treated with medication to stabilize and even reverse the vision loss you've experienced. If that happens, Williams says, then patients may never get to the point where they need a telescope in their eye.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story doesn’t spend a lot of time with the numbers, but it does a pretty good job capturing the potential benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. – Sept. 28, 2016 – Hot flashes – the bane of existence for many women during menopause – can be reduced in frequency by almost half for about 50 percent of women over eight weeks of acupuncture treatment, according to scientists at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center.

In a study published in the Sept. 28 issue of the journal Menopause, scientists reported that about half the women in the study reduced the frequency of hot flashes, while half did not.

“Women bothered by hot flashes and night sweats may want to give acupuncture a try as a relatively low-cost, low-risk treatment,” said Nancy Avis, Ph.D., lead author of the study and professor of Public Health Sciences at Wake Forest School of Medicine, a part of Wake Forest Baptist. “Women will know pretty quickly if acupuncture will work for them. Women who had a reduction in their hot flashes saw a benefit beginning after about three to four weeks of weekly treatments.”

The National Institutes of Health-funded study was designed to examine different patterns of responses to acupuncture. Participants included 209 perimenopausal and postmenopausal women ages 45 to 60 who had on average at least four hot flashes or night sweats per day. Women were randomized to receive up to 20 acupuncture treatments within six months or to a control group.

Of the 170 women who received acupuncture, a small group of women (11.9 percent) had an 85 percent reduction in hot flashes by the eighth week of the study, Avis said. Forty-seven percent of the study group reported a 47 percent reduction over this same time frame. However, 37 percent showed only a minimal reduction of 9.6 percent in frequency of hot flashes, while 4 percent reported a 100 percent increase in hot flashes. “We had hoped to identify some of the characteristics of the women who benefitted from acupuncture, but like so many treatments, we could not really tell ahead of time who would benefit,” Avis said. Funding for the study was provided by grant R01AT005854 from the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, at NIH.

Co-authors include: Beverly Levine, Ph.D., Scott Isom, M.S., and Timothy Morgan, Ph.D., of Wake Forest Baptist; and Remy R. Coeytaux, M.D., Ph.D., of Duke University School of Medicine.

Disclosure: Coeytaux has a financial interest in an organization involved in recruiting study subjects and administering acupuncture treatments at one of the two study sites. His spouse is the primary shareholder of Chapel Hill Doctors, which is an organization that was subcontracted by Wake Forest School of Medicine as a site for subject recruitment and treatment.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The release does a nice job here, breaking down the results in a detailed, quantified way: “Of the 170 women who received acupuncture, a small group of women (11.9 percent) had an 85 percent reduction in hot flashes by the eighth week of the study, Avis said. Forty-seven percent of the study group reported a 47 percent reduction over this same time frame. However, 37 percent showed only a minimal reduction of 9.6 percent in frequency of hot flashes, while 4 percent reported a 100 percent increase in hot flashes.”
What would have made the release stronger would have been to note that 79.5 percent of the control group — who received no acupuncture — saw a 10 percent decline in hot flash frequency. That casts the 37 percent of the acupuncture group who had a reduction of 9.6 percent in a different light. i.e., it indicates that any reduction they saw may not have been tied to the acupuncture at all.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 4, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Among men under 65 with early stage prostate cancer, those who have the prostate gland removed are less likely to die than those who adopt a "watchful waiting" approach, according to a new long-term study out of Europe.

But the findings are not likely to be practice-changing, said Dr. Richard E. Greenberg, chief of urologic oncology at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, who was not involved with the study.

"This is relatively early stage disease, and it shows what we would expect it to show: that those who have more years [to live] have better survival if treated aggressively," he said.

Men with prostate cancer face a confusing maze of options today, including not only surgery but hormone therapy, different kinds of radiation therapy and even simply foregoing medical treatment while monitoring the cancer closely ("watchful waiting," also known as "active surveillance").

"Watchful waiting" is often recommended when a man is not expected to die of the cancer and would like to avoid the risk of the debilitating side effects associated with prostate cancer treatment. These may include: incontinence and erectile dysfunction (surgery); erectile dysfunction and secondary cancers (radiation therapy); nausea, breast growth, liver problems (hormonal therapy); and weakness, hair loss, fluid retention (chemotherapy).

The data presented in the May 5 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine is a 15-year follow-up of a study for which three-years of follow-up had previously been reported.

The earlier study also found that undergoing a radical prostatectomy lowered the risk of the cancer spreading, as well as the death rate from prostate cancer or any other cause.

The researchers, Drs. Anna Bill-Axelson and Lars Holmberg of University Hospital, Uppsala, and colleagues, enrolled nearly 700 men with early prostate cancer under the age of 75 who were randomly selected either to undergo a radical prostatectomy or to stay in "watchful waiting" mode.

After an average follow-up of about 13 years, 14.6 percent of the men who had undergone surgery had died, versus 20.7 percent in the watchful waiting group, a 38 percent reduced risk.

The benefit was primarily seen among men younger than 65 and the authors estimated that seven men under the age of 65 and 8 over the age of 65 would need to be treated to save one life.

There was also a benefit in men whose tumors had low-risk characteristics.

Men whose cancer had moved outside of the prostate gland and who underwent removal of the prostate had a seven times higher risk of dying than men whose tumors hadn't spread.

Radical prostatectomy can come with a price -- including erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence and even bowel incontinence -- although these effects are not as common as techniques improve. A nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy, for example, may be able to prevent erectile dysfunction.

Also, the men in this study were diagnosed only after they had symptoms, unlike the majority of men in the United States, Greenberg said.

"The advantage of screening is that men are more likely to be cured of cancer but they also have a greater chance of not succumbing to the consequences of the surgical complications, whether [those] be erectile dysfunction or urinary incontinence," Greenberg said.

Also, he said, erectile dysfunction can also be a factor of aging and can be treated in most cases.

But much remains to be known about how best to treat different types of prostate cancer.

"The management of early stage prostate cancer continues to require further randomized controlled studies, which are underway, to determine the true benefit of treatment versus expectant management," said Dr. Marc Danziger, an attending urologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, who was not involved with the study.

"Currently, the potential benefit and side effects of treatment needs to be addressed on an individual basis in relation to the risk stratification of disease, patient desires, health status and risk tolerance," Danziger added.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer treatments.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: While describing some of the differences observed in general terms without quantification, the story provided absolute percentage of men dying from prostate cancer in the two study groups.
The story then went on to explain that the difference was in the men who were less 65 years of age at the time of diagnosis.  The story would have been better if it had more clearly explained this important caveat about the benefit seen.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 8, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Deep brain stimulation, a technique used to treat Parkinson's disease and certain psychiatric disorders, appears to provide some memory-enhancing benefits, researchers report.

Using electrical impulses to stimulate a part of the brain critical for memory function significantly improved patients' navigational ability, reflecting improved spatial memory, the small study from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) suggests.

Although the results are still preliminary, the method may potentially hold promise for boosting memory in patients with early Alzheimer's disease, the researchers said.

"The thing to bear in mind is that it's a first, important step," said Suzanne Haber, a brain researcher and professor of pharmacology and physiology at University of Rochester Medical Center in New York, who wasn't involved in the study. "I think it was exciting that they were really able to show that stimulating that area was important for a certain kind of learning. It raises more questions, and many more experiments that can be done."

Seven patients awaiting possible surgery for the seizure disorder epilepsy had electrodes implanted in their brains to pinpoint the origin of their convulsions. The researchers followed them and found they were better able to recognize landmarks and to navigate routes more quickly in a video game featuring a taxi cab, virtual passengers and a cyber city. Patients played the role of cab drivers who picked up passengers and delivered them to one of six requested shops in the city.

Stimulation of the entorhinal cortex -- a region considered crucial to transforming daily experience into lasting memories -- produced the improvement, the researchers said.

The study is published Feb. 9 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

During the video game task, participants learned their way around a virtual town with and without five-second periods of deep brain stimulation, and were tested for their ability to reach predetermined landmarks. Six patients showed a 64 percent reduction in "excess path length" -- the ideal path between destinations, which indicated better performance -- for locations that had been learned during periods of deep brain stimulation.

For five patients, navigation to each of the three stores learned during stimulation was faster and shorter than navigation to the three stores learned without stimulation, indicating a consistent effect, the study said. Stimulating the hippocampus -- a brain region next to the entorhinal cortex which helps form and store memories -- produced no effect during this experiment, however.

"Critically, it was the stimulation at the gateway into the hippocampus, and not the hippocampus itself, that proved effective," senior study author Dr. Itzhak Fried, a professor of neurosurgery at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, said in a university news release.

"Our preliminary results provide evidence supporting a possible mechanism for enhancing memory, particularly as people age or suffer from early dementia. At the same time, we studied a small sample of patients, so our results should be interpreted with caution," Fried added.

Currently, deep brain stimulation is used to control the tremors associated with Parkinson's, symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder and some other psychiatric conditions, including depression.

Haber noted that the brain damage that occurs with epilepsy, which can produce memory problems, is different than that resulting from Alzheimer's disease, in which the formation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are believed to contribute to nerve cell deterioration. So it's difficult to generalize this study's results to other diseases that affect memory, she said, and the research didn't show if effects of temporary deep brain stimulation last beyond the study period.

"In these types of studies you think of things like this," Haber said, "but how real it is, is something we're going to have to see. I think just trying to work out that there is some similarity in very simple learning [processes in the brain] is important."

To learn more about deep brain stimulation, visit the American Association of Neurological Surgeons.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story reports that the test looked only at a simulation of learning how to navigate a virtual city. It points out that this test does not prove that electrical brain stimulation can overcome memory problems caused by Alzheimer’s disease or other types of dementia. An independent source quoted in the story points out the experiment did not show if the effects last.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATLANTA (Reuters) - A noninvasive procedure that freezes and kills problem-causing heart tissue was nearly 10 times better at eliminating a potentially serious heart rhythm disorder than conventional anti-arrhythmic drugs, researchers said on Monday.

A clinical trial of Medtronic Inc’s (MDT.N) cryoablation system looked at 245 patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, a condition marked by intermittent episodes of abnormal heart rhythm that causes the upper chambers of the heart to quiver.

A small pilot study funded by St. Jude Medical Inc STJ.N compared the two therapies in a sicker population of patients and also found that the procedure worked better than drugs.

Atrial fibrillation is the most common heart disorder, affecting 2.2 million Americans and 10 million people worldwide. It significantly raises the risk of stroke.

Patients in the Medtronic-sponsored trial who underwent the cryoablation procedure — which involves using a catheter to freeze away the heart tissue where the problem originates — was just as safe as drugs used to treat the condition and far more effective, meeting the study’s primary goal of eliminating atrial fibrillation one year after the procedure.

Dubbed Stop-af, the Medtronic trial showed that almost 70 percent of patients who had cryoablation remained free of the condition after one year, compared with just 7 percent of patients who received drug therapy, according to data presented at the American College of Cardiology meeting in Atlanta.

“This is the best data we have at this point in support of cryoablation (to treat atrial fibrillation),” said Dr. Douglas Packer of Mayo Clinic, the lead investigator of the study.

Over 3 percent of patients treated by cryoablation experienced a serious condition — a narrowing of the pulmonary vein in 7 out of 228 patients, one of whom required another procedure to widen the vein.

Damage or irritation to the nerve that controls the diaphragm was reported in 11 percent of the cryoablation procedures, but none of the cases was considered serious, with 98 percent resolved by the 12-month follow-up.

Complications related to the atrial fibrillation itself were also monitored. During the follow-up period, 97 percent of patients who got the procedure and 92 percent of the drug therapy patients did not suffer heart attack, stroke or death.

Less than 1 percent of patients treated with cryoablation were hospitalized for a recurrence of the disease, compared with 6 percent in the drug group.

Patients in the pilot study had advanced atrial fibrillation and tended to have other medical problems, such as high blood pressure, diabetes or coronary artery disease,

Packer, who also led the pilot study, dubbed Cabana, acknowledged that the main limitation of this study was its small size, but said it lays the foundation for a larger one.

He said the larger study, which will include 180 centers, is currently enrolling patients.

Anti-arrhythmic drugs eliminate atrial fibrillation in about half of all patients but can have adverse side effects.

Cryoablation is an alternative that is growing in popularity. Over the past decade, more patients have been referred for ablation procedures when drugs proved ineffective.

Catheter ablation involves inserting a thin tube into a blood vessel, usually through a site in the upper leg or neck, and then threading it though the body until it reaches the heart. When it reaches the area of the heart that causes abnormal rhythms, the tissue is ablated, or destroyed.

The procedure has been used to treat arrhythmias for years. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration initially cleared ablation catheters to treat arrhythmias, such as atrial flutter, but not atrial fibrillation.

Only Johnson & Johnson (JNJ.N) has an ablation device approved by U.S. health regulators specifically to treat atrial fibrillation.

The Medtronic device, which the company added to its portfolio with the 2008 acquisition of CryoCath, has been approved in Europe and Australia.

Medtronic shares were up 3.7 percent to $45.55 in late-morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION:  The story did provide insight about the difference in heart attack, stroke and death in the groups taking medication alone or those who had received treatment with this device.  However, since the story did note that there is currently a device on the market, it would have been helpful to readers to provide information about treatment with the other device affects the rate at which these things occur.  A comparison of effectiveness would provide insight as to the relative merit for this new device.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 2, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new treatment might open the door for more patients with advanced kidney disease to get a transplant, a preliminary study suggests.

Of the 100,000-plus Americans waiting for a donor kidney, about one-third are "sensitized," said Dr. Robert Montgomery, director of the Transplant Institute at NYU Langone in New York City.

Those patients face a tough situation: They harbor immune system antibodies that are primed to attack a donor organ.

The antibodies can form when a person is exposed to foreign tissue, Montgomery explained. So a patient who's had a prior kidney transplant may be highly sensitized -- meaning they have a large number of the offending antibodies.

It can also happen to patients who've had blood transfusion or ever been pregnant, Montgomery said.

It's almost impossible to find a compatible donor for those patients. But they might be able to receive a kidney from an incompatible donor if they first undergo an extensive "desensitization" process.

That involves various treatments -- including IV drugs called immune globulin and rituximab -- that try to quash the antibodies that would attack the donor organ.

Now the new research suggests a simple approach -- an infusion of a particular enzyme hours before the transplant -- could offer a better alternative.

Researchers found that the treatment -- dubbed IdeS -- quickly wiped out the dangerous antibodies, allowing all but one of 25 patients to have a successful transplant.

The findings were published in the Aug. 2 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. Funding for the study came from the company developing IdeS -- Hansa Medical.

Montgomery, who was not involved in the study, said he's "never seen anything like it."

"When you give this, all of the antibodies are gone," Montgomery said. "I'm hopeful that this will turn out to be a game-changer."

However, he stressed, many questions remain.

Critically, the enzyme does not banish the antibodies forever. They come back, Montgomery said -- and the results of that comeback vary from patient to patient.

In the study, 10 patients had an episode of antibody-mediated rejection anywhere from two weeks to five months after their transplant. That means antibodies started to attack the new kidney.

Those patients were all successfully treated with standard anti-rejection drugs, according to the researchers.

Still, it's not yet clear how the patients will fare in the long term, said Dr. Julie Ingelfinger, a professor at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Ingelfinger, who wrote an editorial published with the study, echoed Montgomery's cautious optimism.

If larger, longer studies bolster the current findings, she said, "this could potentially be practice-changing."

"But," Ingelfinger stressed, "only time will tell."

Lead researcher Dr. Stanley Jordan agreed that more work is necessary.

But the findings mark another step forward for patients like these, according to Jordan, who is medical director of the kidney transplant program at Cedars-Sinai, in Los Angeles.

Traditionally, highly sensitized patients in need of a kidney have languished on waiting lists because it's so hard to find a compatible donor.

But in the past 15 years or so, desensitization has emerged as an alternative.

Last year, a landmark study proved that patients who receive transplants after desensitization live significantly longer than those who stay on dialysis.

"The outcomes have been good," Jordan said.

But, he added, there's clearly room for improvement.

Ingelfinger agreed. "The desensitization protocols now in use are time-consuming, and they don't always work," she said, noting that they can leave dangerous antibodies behind.

Desensitization adds about $20,000 to $30,000 to the cost of the transplant, according to the University of Wisconsin's transplant center.

The new approach is quite different, Ingelfinger said.

Patients receive one infusion of an enzyme called IdeS four to six hours before the transplant.

The enzyme is derived from a strain of Streptococcus bacteria, and it essentially chops up the antibodies that would attack the organ.

Jordan acknowledged that the source "sounds scary," but stressed that patients do not receive the bacteria itself -- but an engineered version of the enzyme.

In all, 25 U.S. and Swedish patients received an infusion of IdeS before their kidney transplant. All but one had a successful transplant, and none had detectable antibodies immediately afterward.

IdeS patients still received additional treatment -- including a week of immune globulin and rituximab infusions.

And as with all transplants, they needed standard anti-rejection drugs.

Because IdeS so readily banishes the offending antibodies, it might make transplants feasible for even the most highly sensitized patients, Montgomery said.

But the "$65,000 question" remains, he said: Can it extend the survival of the donor kidney and, ultimately, patients' lives?

IdeS is still experimental, and the only way patients could receive it is through a clinical trial. It will be "a few years" before it could be more widely available, Montgomery said.

The National Kidney Foundation has more on kidney transplantation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story does an adequate job of noting the actual numbers of patients in the study group, the absolute number that were able to have a successful transplant and the absolute number who later had a rejection episode that required standard anti-rejection therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 11, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Colonoscopy can save lives, but experts agree that testing rates remain too low. Now, researchers say a special scoring system might point to those people at highest risk for colon cancer, who may need the test the most.

The system might also make colon cancer screening more efficient and boost the number of people who get checked for the disease, said a team led by Dr. Thomas Imperiale of Indiana University Medical Center, in Indianapolis.

One expert said more efforts are needed to get people to undergo colonoscopy, which is currently recommended once every 10 years beginning at age 50.

"Five percent of the U.S. population will be diagnosed with colon cancer within their lifetimes," said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. He was not involved in the new research.

Swaminath noted that one study published in 2012 found that "colonoscopy reduced the risk of death from colon cancer by 53 percent, by removing polyps. No other procedure is available to remove polyps from anywhere in the colon."

And while some areas of the United States have rates of compliance with colonoscopy guidelines of 75 percent or more, "many areas have poor colon cancer screening rates," he added.

Imperiale's team noted that not all people deemed to be at "average risk" for colon cancer face the same risk of the disease, and so some might benefit more from invasive colonoscopy than others.

In the new study, the Indiana researchers looked at more than 4,400 Americans who were scheduled to undergo their first screening colonoscopy. They calculated a clinical "score" for each of these patients, based on their health information, and the five most common risk factors for colon cancer: age, sex, waist size, smoking and family history.

Then they looked at the results of each patient's colonoscopy. The study found that patients classified under the scoring system as low-risk did, in fact, have far fewer advanced abnormal growths that might develop into cancer, compared to patients classified as high-risk.

So, patients scoring at the lower end of risk for colon cancer might be able to have less invasive screening tests (such as the fecal occult blood test), while those at higher risk would require a colonoscopy, Imperiale's team concluded.

However, Swaminath wasn't fully sold on the notion.

He believes that the scoring system "was only modestly able to separate people within the risk groups." Swaminath pointed out that even the new study found that "low- to intermediate-risk patients still have a risk between of between 1.9 percent to 9.9 percent of harboring a polyp that can develop into cancer."

For now, he said, the data from this study is not strong enough to spur any changes in current screening recommendations.

Dr. Jules Garbus is co-chief of colon and rectal surgery at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y. He seemed more supportive of the new scoring system.

"A risk stratification tool is critical in helping physicians make appropriate screening recommendations for patients," Garbus said. "While high-risk patients may ultimately require a screening colonoscopy, many average- and low-risk patients could undergo less invasive screening procedures. This can improve patient compliance with screening, as well as address escalating health care cost issues.

The study is published Aug. 10 in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about colorectal cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately quantify the benefits of the treatment/test/product/procedure?
EXPLANATION: The story cites a study that credits colonoscopy with reducing the risk of death from colon cancer by about 50 percent, by removing polyps. It would have been helpful for the story to explain what that relative reduction in risk means in absolute terms (e.g. did the rate of cancer death go from 50% to 25% or from 2% to around 1%?)
The story also notes that the study found that patients with a low to intermediate risk score “still have a risk between of between 1.9 percent to 9.9 percent of harboring a polyp that can develop into cancer.”
We’ll give credit here for the story’s provision of these key statistics, which do give a sense as how well the test accurately identifies truly low-risk individuals. However, we’d note that the benefit here should ideally refer to the ability of the algorithm to classify people at all risk levels (including high-risk), and therefore target the highest-risk patients for colonoscopy. The story doesn’t really get into discussion of the predictive power of the test, referred to as a likelihood ratio, which is in the study manuscript. However, this is a difficult concept for most health care providers and patients, and we think it’s understandable that the story did not include a full discussion of this topic.
<|endoftext|>
