<|startoftext|>
AURORA, Colo. (Nov. 16, 2016) - Researchers at the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus have found that high doses of vitamin D reduce the incidence of acute respiratory illness (ARI) in older, long-term care residents.

The findings of the clinical trial, published today in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, could help reduce one of the leading causes of serious illness, debilitation and death among patients in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities.

"After studying these patients for a year, we found a 40 percent reduction in acute respiratory illness among those who took higher doses of vitamin D," said the study's lead author, Adit Ginde, MD, MPH, professor of emergency medicine at the University of Colorado School of Medicine. "Vitamin D can improve the immune system's ability to fight infections because it bolsters the first line of defense of the immune system."

Ginde said in older people that first line of defense is often impaired. But vitamin D can reinforce it and prevent illnesses like pneumonia, influenza and bronchitis.

It may also prevent infections and exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) like emphysema.

At the same time, Ginde found that those who received higher doses of vitamin D also saw an increase in falls. The falls were lower in those given smaller doses rather than higher monthly doses of vitamin D.

The clinical trial, the first to examine vitamin D's impact on respiratory infections in nursing home residents, looked at 107 patients with an average age of 84 over a 12 month period. Of those, 55 received high doses of vitamin D or 100,000 units monthly (averaging 3,300-4,300 units daily). And 52 received lower doses averaging between 400-1,000 units daily. Those with higher doses saw ARIs cut nearly in half. They also had over double the incidence of falls, the study said.

"This finding requires a confirmatory trial, including whether high daily doses of vitamin D, rather than high monthly doses, makes patients less likely to fall," Ginde said.

But Ginde said the primary finding that vitamin D can reduce ARI is a major step forward in treating these dangerous infections.

"This is a potentially life-saving discovery," Ginde said. "There is very little in a doctor's arsenal to battle ARI, especially since most are viral infections where antibiotics don't work. But vitamin D seems able to potentially prevent these infections."

He cautioned that the study is not definitive proof that vitamin D can prevent ARI but it suggests that it can and at little risk to the patient.

"If our results are confirmed by a larger trial, high dose vitamin D, ideally using daily dosing to minimize fall risk, has the potential for substantial public health benefit through ARI prevention for the large and growing population of long term care residents," Ginde said.

The study co-authors include Patrick Blatchford, PhD, Keith Breese, MA, Lida Zarrabi, MPH, Sunny Linnebur, PharmD, Jeffrey Wallace, MD, MPH and Robert Schwartz, MD. All are from the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the higher doses of vitamin D also had unintended side effects. It reports that the number of falls in the high dose group was significantly increased, although according to the study, the number of hip fractures was not different in the two groups.
The release meets our standard here, but the finding of more falls should arguably have received more emphasis. Falls might lead to more hip fractures, which could cancel out any “lifesaving” benefits from reduced rates of respiratory infection. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Oct. 14, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- A multiple sclerosis drug usually reserved for people in the late stages of the disease seems to offer long-term remission in newly diagnosed patients, researchers report.

Because of serious side effects, the drug -- Lemtrada (alemtuzumab) -- is approved in the United States only for patients who have failed other treatments. But the authors of a new study believe giving it early may slow and even reverse some disease-related disability.

"The expectation in MS has always been to try to slow down the progression of the disease. Now we can tell our patients that a significant number can actually improve by reversing their disability," said lead researcher Dr. Gavin Giovannoni. He is a neurology professor at Queen Mary University of London in England.

The treatment is not without its downsides, however. Because of the potential for side effects, people who received this treatment have to undergo monthly blood and urine tests for four years after the last dose, Giovannoni said.

Giovannoni described Lemtrada as an immune system "rebooter." First, it depletes the immune system, then it allows it to recover, he explained.

During the time when the immune system is depleted, there is a risk of infection over eight to 12 weeks, including herpes infections, he said.

Also, when the immune system rebuilds itself, "a significant number of people, about 40 percent, will develop another autoimmune disease," Giovannoni said. These include Graves' disease (a thyroid disorder) and a bleeding/bruising disorder called idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), which occurs in about 2 percent of patients, he noted.

"But these diseases can be treated, so it's not like MS. It's kind of trading in your MS for another autoimmune disease," Giovannoni said.

Still, one MS specialist who reviewed the new study said patients need to be cautious about taking the drug.

Lemtrada is not for every patient with MS and the decision to use it should be carefully considered, said Dr. Dhanashri Miskin, an attending neurologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"Although the safety profile is generally manageable for the right patient, risks probably outweigh benefits in patients with mild or early stage disease," Miskin said.

The decision to start Lemtrada should be made in the context of the risks, including infusion-associated reactions, infections, and autoimmune adverse events, she said. "Although alemtuzumab [Lemtrada] treatment is associated with safety risks, those risks are manageable in most patients," Miskin said.

The new trial of more than 600 patients with relapsing-remitting MS was funded by Sanofi Genzyme and Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, the drug's makers.

MS occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks the protective sheath around nerve fibers in the brain and spinal cord. People can suffer muscle weakness, numbness, vision problems and difficulty with balance and coordination. Relapsing-remitting MS is the most common type, with symptoms suddenly worsening and then going into remission.

For this study, Giovannoni and colleagues treated 628 patients with relapsing-remitting MS who had not responded to at least one other MS drug. Lemtrada was given to 426 patients, while 202 received another drug, interferon beta-1a.

The researchers assessed disability levels at the start of the study and every three months for two years. By the study's end, nearly 28 percent of those given Lemtrada had improved by at least one point on a 10-point disability test, versus about 15 percent of those receiving interferon, the researchers found.

Moreover, patients receiving Lemtrada were 2.5 times more likely to have their thinking skills improve compared to those given interferon. And they were more than twice as likely to see improvement in their ability to move without tremor or clumsiness, the findings showed.

The findings held after researchers adjusted the results to make sure the gains weren't led by those recovering from relapses.

Giovannoni believes the drug could offer real relief from MS symptoms. Not only does alemtuzumab improve disability, but most patients go into long-term remission of at least five to eight years, he said.

"Some patients have been going 12 years without any evidence of disease activity," he said.

According to Bruce Bebo, executive vice president for research at the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, "Restoring lost function is a significant unmet need for people living with MS."

This study examines previous findings related to the reversal of some disability in those receiving alemtuzumab, he said. "I am encouraged by these results and urge others to pursue potentially restorative approaches to treatment," Bebo said.

Giovannoni pointed out that most of the drug's benefits are obtained early in the disease. "If you really want this drug to have a big impact, you should use it as early as possible. In the European Union, it's recommended for early use," he noted.

The report was published online Oct. 12 in the journal Neurology.

For more about multiple sclerosis, visit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions the risk of infections (including herpes), the need for monthly blood and urine tests for four years after the last dose, the risk of developing “another autoimmune disease,” such as Graves’ disease (a thyroid disorder) and a bleeding/bruising disorder called idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.
We’d have preferred to see a statement that long-term harms have not been determined, but this is otherwise a satisfactory description of the harms.
Also, the drug was initially refused approval by the FDA for safety reasons, a very revealing fact that would have provided patients with some context on how serious the side effects are.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - When the results of a test wouldn’t change how doctors manage a patient’s care, most say it’s not worth doing. But new tests for breast cancer risk mutations beyond the well-known BRCA genes would offer actionable information for many women and their doctors, a new study finds.

The BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations put women at high risk for breast, ovarian and other cancers, but mutations of other genes are believed to confer extra risk as well.

Earlier this year, 17 genetic experts argued against testing for a wider panel of breast cancer-related gene mutations until they are proven to be valid and useful in clinical practice (see Reuters story of May 27, 2015 here: reut.rs/1TvOoDf).

“There’s a lot of controversy even among experts,” said the senior author of the new study, Dr. Leif W. Ellisen of Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center in Boston.

For 15 years, at-risk women have only been tested for BRCA1 and 2, but many companies now offer multi-gene panels for 20, 25 or 30 other genes, Ellisen told Reuters Health.

“Are patients better off getting these much broader tests?” he said. “Does it actually change what you would tell them to do in terms of screening, prevention, or risk management?”

According to the new results, at least for some women, it would change their clinical management, he said.

Several of the authors of the new paper disclosed that they receive research funding, consult for or are employed by genetic testing companies like Myriad Genetics and Invitae Corporation.

Between 2001 and 2014, the study team did panel tests for 25 or 29 genes on 1,046 women who were referred for hereditary breast or ovarian cancer gene testing, but had tested negative for BRCA mutations. Most of the women had a personal history of breast or ovarian cancer already.

The researchers found that 40 women, or 4 percent of the total group, did have potentially harmful mutations in other genes. Of those 40 women, 26 had mutations carrying low to moderate risk of breast or ovarian cancer, eight had mutations associated with Lynch syndrome, which increases colon and ovarian cancer risk, and three had high-risk breast cancer genes.

Including another 23 patients who were referred into the study at a late stage, there were 63 women positive for non-BRCA mutations. Of those, the researchers decided that 33 would have been considered for additional screening or prevention measures based on their results. And for many, family testing would be recommended for first-degree relatives, according to the report in JAMA Oncology.

Even among all appropriate candidates who are sent for genetic testing, only nine percent will test positive for the BRCA mutations, so an additional four percent who have non-BRCA mutations is a significant number, Ellisen said.

Often these additional women do not have a high risk of breast or ovarian cancer, but some do have a high risk of colon or uterine cancer, and would be referred for additional screening, he said.

Multigene testing is not more expensive than testing for the BRCA mutations alone, he said.

Though these results indicate that additional genetic screening is clinically useful, some genetic test results will be uncertain, and it can be psychologically difficult for patients to deal with this uncertainty, Ellisen said.

“We do not advocate for broad population-based screening,” he said. “The interpretation of these tests is not a simple color-by-numbers thing.” The vast majority of uncertain genes will be benign, but a misinterpretation could lead a patient to a drastic, unnecessary surgical procedure, he said.

“Many cancer genetics experts have again urged caution, characterizing the use of multigene testing in the clinical setting as premature,” Dr. Elizabeth M. Swisher of the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle writes in a commentary accompanying the new paper.

“Yet thousands of women and their physicians are ignoring this advice, ordering a wide selection of multiplex tests daily,” Swisher writes. “The train has left the station and is unlikely to return,” so it is important to assess how useful this additional testing can be, she concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Potential harms, including having uncertain results leading to psychological difficulties, were mentioned in a quote from the lead author, who also discussed the complexity of interpreting the results. The article also quoted him as saying that misinterpretation could potentially lead to “a drastic, unnecessary surgical procedure”.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For years, research has shown that babies born by cesarean section are more likely to develop health problems. Now, a groundbreaking study suggests that not all C-sections are equally risky.

The research looked at all full-term, firstborn births in Scotland over a 15-year period and tracked the babies’ long-term health. It is one of the largest and longest studies to explore how planned C-sections differ from other deliveries.

Surprisingly, the data showed more health problems among babies born by planned C-section than among those delivered by emergency C-section or vaginal birth, even though the planned surgery is done under more controlled conditions. The finding suggests that the arduous experience of labor — that exhausting, sweaty, utterly unpredictable yet often strangely exhilarating process — may give children a healthy start, even when it’s interrupted by a surgical birth.

The new findings, published in JAMA this month, are important because the number of babies born by C-section has increased tremendously. In the United States, nearly one in three babies are born by C-section. Cesarean births that had no medical indication increased, to 5.5 percent of low-risk women in 2001, up from 3.3 percent of such women in 1991.

Dr. Mairead Black, the University of Aberdeen obstetrician who led the study, said that as cesarean births had increased in Scotland and worldwide, the researchers wondered what, if anything, children born by C-section “are missing out on.”

“Our thinking was: If a baby is born naturally, it comes into contact with bacteria from the mother, which might help with immune system development,” Dr. Black said.

Even attempted labor may provide some exposure to bacteria, she said. But babies delivered by a planned C-section, which is usually scheduled to take place well before the first pang of labor, may miss out entirely.

“When you don’t wait for labor to begin on its own, you cut short all kinds of physiological changes and preparations for birth that are taking place toward the end of pregnancy,” said Carol Sakala, the director of the nonprofit Childbirth Connection programs at the National Partnership for Women & Families. “What is the effect of cutting off those processes so casually on such a large scale?”

Studies have consistently found that children born by C-section are at higher risk for health problems like obesity and allergies. C-section birth has also been associated with a higher risk for Type 1 diabetes.

The Scottish study took advantage of the small country’s rich trove of linked birth and medical databases to track the long-term health of 321,287 babies. Nearly 4 percent were born by planned C-section and 17 percent were delivered by emergency surgery. The remaining 252,917 were vaginal births.

The researchers compared a range of health outcomes among the babies, including asthma, irritable bowel syndrome, obesity, Type 1 diabetes, early death and cancer.

Over all, the differences between a scheduled C-section and an emergency C-section were slight. However, the data do begin to shed light on why babies born through vaginal birth may have fewer health risks than babies born by C-section.

The biggest difference between babies born by scheduled and unscheduled C-section appeared in risk for Type 1 diabetes. The results showed that babies born by planned C-section had a 35 percent higher risk of Type 1 diabetes compared with babies born by emergency C-section, after adjusting for differences among the mothers.

All of the babies born by C-section were slightly more likely to use an asthma inhaler at age 5: 10.3 percent of planned C-section babies and 10.19 percent of unscheduled C-section babies wound up using an inhaler, compared with 9.6 percent of vaginally born babies. Asthma hospitalization rates were also higher for babies born by planned C-section with a statistically significant increase of 22 percent over vaginally born babies.

Although all of the C-section babies were more likely to be obese at age 5, the differences were not statistically significant after adjusting for differences among the mothers. There were no significant differences in cancer and irritable bowel disease among any of the types of births.

No one knows exactly why labor may be protective, but the spontaneous onset of labor prompts fluid to clear from a baby’s lungs, said Dr. Aaron Caughey, who helped draw up 2014 guidelines for the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists that urged providers to let women spend more time in labor and avoid an unnecessary C-section.

The step is just one of a cascade of physiological changes that take place in mother and baby during the labor process, including surges in stress hormones and reproductive hormones like oxytocin that may help the fetus adapt during labor, preserve blood flow to the organs, and keep the baby alert and prepared for breast-feeding.

During labor, a newborn absorbs maternal microbes into its mouth and gastrointestinal tract, said Dr. Josef Neu, a neonatologist at the University of Florida who has written about C-section babies and the hygiene hypothesis.

The theory is that maternal microbes “train” the infant’s immune system, so it doesn’t overreact or become destructive and precipitate autoimmune disorders like Type 1 diabetes.

“It’s an education process that says, ‘Calm down, you’re going to be seeing this antigen again, you don’t have to be so aggressive,’” Dr. Neu said.

Dr. Neu said the broad-spectrum antibiotics prescribed to the mother before a surgical delivery were another concern; the antibiotics can be transmitted to the baby through breast milk if not before birth, decreasing the diversity of natural bacteria.

The findings are a reminder that although C-sections are appropriate in some circumstances, they are a poor substitute for labor.

Childbirth and labor are “a physiological process that we’ve evolved to over millions of years,” Dr. Caughey said. “It’s been really well-designed by evolution.”
• Does Frequent Sex Prime the Immune System for Pregnancy?



 For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story is a comparison of harms and it did a reasonable job of describing relatively slight differences between the study groups: planned C-sections, unplanned C-sections and vaginal deliveries.
The headline overstates what the story describes carefully. In the excerpt below, italics by editor.
“Over all, the differences between a scheduled C-section and an emergency C-section were slight. However, the data do begin to shed light on why babies born through vaginal birth may have fewer health risks than babies born by C-section.
The biggest difference between babies born by scheduled and unscheduled C-section appeared in risk for Type 1 diabetes. The results showed that babies born by planned C-section had a 35 percent higher risk of Type 1 diabetes compared with babies born by emergency C-section, after adjusting for differences among the mothers.”
As noted above, the risk sounds much higher when given in relative terms, but since we’ve already docked points for that concern above,we’ll award a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
What's New The Pill. The Ring. The Sponge. They're all temporary means of birth control -- devices you have to keep ingesting or inserting. Even the IUD can't stay in place for more than 10 years.

The only once-and-be-done-with-it option for women has been tubal ligation ("tying the tubes") -- surgery that renders a woman sterile. Now a procedure called Essure, recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration, gives women an alternative. The nonsurgical approach uses a hysteroscope -- a camera-tipped instrument -- to thread two small wires through the vagina, cervix and uterus and into the fallopian tubes. The wires, composed of polyester fibers and metals, cause inflammation and, over time, scar tissue that blocks the fallopian tubes, preventing sperm from reaching eggs. Women can undergo the procedure in 35 minutes in their doctor's office, under local anesthesia; they are advised to rest for 24 to 48 hours before resuming normal activity. Essure is 99.8 percent effective in preventing pregnancy -- a rate similar to that of tubal ligation, according to the manufacturer, Conceptus Inc. of Mountain View, Calif.

Pros and Cons Ellen Whitaker, a gynecologist at the Washington Hospital Center, says "the biggest advantage" of Essure is that it involves no incisions or general anesthesia, which both carry risks. By going through the vagina, she says, you "avoid all the organs in the abdomen." In a tubal ligation, she says, "there's always the possibility of bowel injury, bladder injury . . . which can be very serious."

The biggest drawback, Whitaker says, is the need for X-rays three months after the procedure to confirm the fallopian tubes are blocked. Until then, the patient must use another form of birth control.

Side effects may include pain, cramps and mild bleeding or spotting. There is the risk of infection or a puncture of the vagina or uterus while inserting the hysteroscope. As with tubal ligation, there is also an increased risk of ectopic pregnancy -- a pregnancy that develops outside the uterus.

One for the Guys Men, too, have an option for a faster, less painful procedure than vasectomy to tie the vas deferens -- the tubes that carry sperm from the testicles to the penis. In the increasingly popular "no-scalpel vasectomy," a doctor uses an instrument called a dissecting forceps to poke a very small hole in the skin of the testicles to reach the vas deferens. There is very little bleeding, and no stitches are needed to close the tiny openings (one on each side). The procedure is very effective (there is less than a 1 percent chance the man's partner will get pregnant) and takes about 10 minutes to perform in the doctor's office.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the possible harms of Essure. The story should have pointed out that, because the procedure is new, long-term safety is not known.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If you're loading up on vitamin C and zinc to stave off the sniffles, you should try an earlier bedtime instead. People who regularly sleep six hours or less each night are four times more likely to get a cold than people who sleep just an hour longer, a new study finds.

"It's almost alarming how strong the effects are," says Aric Prather, an assistant professor in the department of psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco and lead author of the study, published Monday in the journal Sleep.

The study provides more evidence of the link between healthy sleeping habits — which experts say means at least seven hours of sleep each night — and overall good health.

To conduct the study, the researchers asked 164 healthy participants with an average age of 30 to wear a wrist actigraph — a device that monitors sleep — for one week to establish their baseline sleep habits. Later, they sequestered the participants in a hotel and, using nasal drops, dosed each of them with a rhinovirus— aka the common cold bug.

The found the chronic poor sleepers became sick more often: those who slept for five hours or less each night were 4.5 times more likely to catch the cold than people who slept seven hours or more. Participants who slept for six hours each night did only slightly better -- they were 4.2 times more likely to develop a cold than the seven-hour-a-night folks.

In fact, sleep was more important than any other factor, including age, stress or income level, in predicting who would get sick after being exposure to the cold virus, the researchers say.

"Sleep is part of our own nature's defense against illness," says Dr. M. Safwan Badr, former president of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine and chief of the division of pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine at Wayne State University School of Medicine in Detroit. He calls the study's results "powerful."

The study is unique because it used objective measures to show that poor sleep habits make people more vulnerable to a cold virus, says Badr, who was not involved in the research. The actigraphy measured sleep in a much more accurate way than information researchers get from self-reports, he says. Furthermore, the researchers actually gave the subjects the virus, assuring that everyone was exposed to the same bug.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story cites the increased risk of getting a cold with not enough sleep — with the attendant sometimes debilitating symptoms that are all-too-familiar to many. But mainly the story is advocating for more sleep — and could there be risks to getting more sleep or trying to stay in bed for 8 hours if you’re only hardwired to sleep for 6 hours? That’s unclear, but the story could have clarified that although more sleep is associated with fewer colds, that doesn’t necessarily mean that increasing your amount of sleep will reduce the number of colds you get. Proving that would require a different study. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings add to confusion over whether taking aspirin, ibuprofen or related painkillers reduces the risk of developing melanoma.

Animal experiments have suggested that the class of painkillers known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) could play a role in preventing melanoma, but a large 2008 study failed to find any evidence to support this possibility.

Now, a smaller study that asked people with melanoma and those without the disease to recall their use of NSAIDs has found that taking these drugs - particularly aspirin - at least once a week for more than 5 years may have offered some protection against the deadly disease.

The findings are interesting, but should not lead people to conclude that popping a few painkillers will reduce their risk of skin cancer, cautioned Dr. Maryam Asgari of Kaiser Permanente Northern California and the University of California San Francisco, who co-authored the 2008 study.

NSAIDs - which include aspirin, naproxen (marketed as Aleve), and ibuprofen (Advil) — have side effects, she noted, such as stomach bleeding. People with a family history of melanoma are better off wearing sunscreen and getting regular skin checks from a dermatologist, Asgari recommended.

“I think it’s just too early” to say NSAIDs offer any protection, she said. “I think the jury is still out.”

There’s reason to hope NSAIDs might offer some protection against this type of cancer, however - earlier this year, a review found that people who use painkillers such as ibuprofen on a regular basis may be less likely to get bladder cancer. Other research has consistently supported the benefits of NSAIDs in preventing colorectal cancer, and provided some evidence they may work for breast, esophagus, and stomach cancers, as well.

Melanoma is the most lethal form of skin cancer, killing almost 9,000 people in the U.S. last year, according to the National Cancer Institute.

To investigate whether NSAIDs offer any protection, Dr. Clara Curiel-Lewandrowski of Harvard Medical School and the University of Arizona asked 400 people diagnosed with melanoma and 600 similar people without the disease to recall their use of the painkillers.

The researchers found that people without cancer had a longer history of taking NSAIDs than people who eventually developed melanoma. Specifically, more than 40 percent of people who were cancer-free said they’d been taking NSAIDs at least once per week for more than 5 years, versus only 28 percent of those who developed melanoma. Overall, regular use of NSAIDs for more than 5 years appeared to reduce the risk of developing cancer by more than 40 percent, the authors report in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.

Unfortunately, the technique — comparing people with melanoma to those without - is fraught with potential problems, said Asgari. For one, you have to get the comparison right, she noted; there’s always a concern that people without cancer who agree to participate in the study may be more health conscious to begin with, and it’s this that protects them from cancer, not their use of NSAIDs. “Did you somehow get a biased sample of people, and is that why you’re seeing this difference?”

Her 2008 study analyzed data from nearly 64,000 people who were melanoma-free at the beginning of the investigation, then followed them for a few years to see who developed the disease. She and her colleagues found no evidence that taking NSAIDs had any effect on risk of developing the deadly skin cancer.

As a result, “I wouldn’t recommend (taking NSAIDs to reduce melanoma) just based on this” new study, Asgari noted.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story stated: “NSAIDs – which include aspirin, naproxen (marketed as Aleve), and ibuprofen (Advil) — have side effects, she noted, such as stomach bleeding.”  It didn’t note whether study looked at side effects in those taking them for five years. Still, we’ll rule this satisfactory for remembering to include some mention of potential harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking extra vitamin D and calcium doesn’t seem to prevent bone-thinning in older men, according to Australian researchers.

However, exercise did boost bone mineral density, a proxy for bone strength, their report shows.

Despite the findings, people still need to get enough calcium and vitamin D to reduce the risk of osteoporosis, or bone thinning, said Dr. Mone Zaidi, an osteoporosis researcher at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, who was not involved in the study.

“It’s like the four legs of the stool: vitamin D and calcium, exercise, medications if a person is losing bone, and the fourth leg is telling people how to prevent fractures,” Zaidi said.

More than 40 million people in the US are affected by osteoporosis. It’s most common in older women, but about seven percent of white men and five percent of black men are affected, according to the American College of Physicians.

In the new study, published in the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, Robin M. Daly from the University of Melbourne, Australia and colleagues randomly assigned men aged 59 to 70 to an exercise program, drinking milk fortified with calcium and vitamin D, doing both, or doing nothing.

They measured the men’s bone density before and after the study, which took place over 18 months, but they didn’t look at fractures.

At the end of the study, men who exercised had higher bone density than those who had supplemented their diet with 1000 milligrams of calcium and 800 international units (IU) of vitamin D per day.

Adding the supplements to the exercise program provided no extra benefit, hinting that the men already had enough vitamin D and calcium in their diets to be able to boost their bone strength through exercise alone.

The recommended daily intake of vitamin D is 600 IU in adults up to age 70, and 800 IU for older people, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH). A 6-month supply of vitamin D supplements can be bought for less than $10, and many multivitamins contain the recommended daily dose of vitamin D.

As for calcium, the NIH advises 1,000 mg per day for men ages19-70, and then 1,200 mg per day for men older than 70.

To build bone density, weight-bearing exercise is needed, such as running or weight-lifting, according to the NIH.

In animal studies, a lack of vitamin D has been linked to several diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and some types of cancer. However, there isn’t enough data to say if vitamin D can help treat or prevent these diseases, Zaidi said.

To reduce the risk of bone weakening, the NIH recommends not smoking, drinking less alcohol and exercising more.

Zaidi said that both vitamin D and calcium are extremely important for human health, so people should follow the previous vitamin D and calcium recommendations.

“You’ve got to have it to build a wall,” he said. “Adding more might not strengthen the wall, but you have to take enough to keep the wall strong. Otherwise it might fall apart.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/i4tDqs The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, online January 5, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: In a sense, the story was all about a finding that might help people avoid the “harm” of thinking that supplements do more for them than they actually do.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EAST HANOVER, N.J., June 22, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- A new analysis published today in JAMA Cardiology has found that timely and broad adoption of Entresto® (sacubitril/valsartan) by all eligible heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) could prevent or postpone more than 28,000 deaths each year in the US alone.1 This analysis, based on an application of the results of PARADIGM-HF to published heart failure statistics, is the first to quantify the possible impact of Entresto's potential benefit in reducing death.1

Heart failure is a chronic condition that contributes to more than 300,000 deaths in the US every year.4 About half of people with heart failure have HFrEF.5 This new analysis estimates that as many as 28,484 deaths in HFrEF patients annually could be prevented or postponed with optimal use of Entresto (with sensitivity analyses demonstrating a range of 18,230 to 41,017).1

Further, the study suggests that delaying routine use of Entresto in clinical practice could have a substantial negative effect on patients, given the expected risk-benefit profile, as it could result in failure to prevent tens of thousands of deaths.1 These findings demonstrate the significant survival benefits Entresto could offer to those living with HFrEF, if patients in the group defined by the authors were given access to treatment.1 The study authors stated that nearly 84% of HFrEF patients – 2.2 million people – may be candidates for treatment with Entresto.1

Heart failure is a life-threatening condition and despite available medicines, about half of patients diagnosed with heart failure die within 5 years.4,6,7 According to the study authors, these findings may substantially impact the national health of the HFrEF population, offering significant clinical benefit in preventing or postponing death when applied in clinical practice.1

"This expert analysis adds to the already compelling case for the treatment of heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction with Entresto," said Fabrice Chouraqui, president of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. "In addition to survival benefits, the study also recognizes other treatment effects of Entresto, particularly in reducing HF hospitalizations.1 Coupled with the recent Class I recommendation, the strongest endorsement, in the focused update to the US HF Guideline,2 these findings underscore the potential of Entresto as a standard therapy for chronic HFrEF patients."

In a separate analysis published in the same issue of JAMA Cardiology, researchers used data from the PARADIGM-HF trial to model the health consequences and cost-effectiveness of Entresto over a 30-year time period.3 They compared Entresto to the ACE-inhibitor enalapril and found Entresto was associated with more than a year longer average survival time, and that it was cost-effective compared to enalapril when these medications were used with other standard of care therapies.3 For every 1,000 patients treated with Entresto vs. enalapril, potentially 59.7 HF hospital admissions could be averted per each year alive in the model.3 In addition, Entresto increased life expectancy at an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio consistent with other high-value widely accepted cardiovascular interventions such as implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) and cholesterol-lowering statins before they became generic.3

About Heart Failure

Heart failure is a debilitating and life-threatening condition, which impacts nearly 6 million Americans and is the leading cause of hospitalization among Americans over the age of 65.4,8 About half of people with heart failure have heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF).5 Reduced ejection fraction means the heart does not contract with enough force, so less blood is pumped out.9 Heart failure presents a major and growing health-economic burden that currently exceeds $30 billion in the United States, which accounts for both direct and indirect costs.10

About Entresto

Entresto is a twice-a-day medicine that reduces the strain on the failing heart. It does this by enhancing the protective neurohormonal systems (Natriuretic Peptide system) while simultaneously inhibiting the harmful effects of the overactive renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).11 Other heart failure medicines only block the harmful effects of the overactive RAAS.12 Entresto contains the neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril, and the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) valsartan.11

Entresto is indicated in the US to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and hospitalization for heart failure in patients with chronic heart failure (NYHA Class II-IV) and reduced ejection fraction.11 Entresto is usually administered in conjunction with other heart failure therapies, in place of an Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB).11 Entresto film-coated tablets are available in three dosage strengths: 24/26 mg, 49/51 mg, and 97/103 mg (sacubitril/valsartan).11 These doses are referred to as 50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg in the clinical trial literature including the New England Journal of Medicine publication of the results of PARADIGM-HF. The target treatment dose of Entresto is 97/103 mg twice daily.11

Novartis is committed to providing patients with affordable access and resources through Entresto Central. For more information, please call 1-888-ENTRESTO or visit www.entresto.com.

IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION 

Entresto can harm or cause death to an unborn baby. Patients should talk to their doctor about other ways to treat heart failure if they plan to become pregnant. If a patient gets pregnant while taking Entresto, she should tell her doctor right away.

Patients are not to take Entresto if they are allergic to sacubitril or valsartan or any of the ingredients in Entresto; have had an allergic reaction including swelling of the face, lips, tongue, throat or trouble breathing while taking a type of medicine called angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB); or take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto for at least 36 hours before or after they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients should talk with their doctor or pharmacist before taking Entresto if they are not sure if they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto if they have diabetes and take a medicine that contains aliskiren.

Before they take Entresto, patients should tell their doctor about all of their medical conditions, including if they have kidney or liver problems; are pregnant or plan to become pregnant; are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Patients should either take Entresto or breastfeed. They should not do both.

Patients should tell their doctor about all the medicines they take, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. They should especially tell their doctor if they take potassium supplements or a salt substitute; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); lithium; or other medicines for high blood pressure or heart problems such as an ACE inhibitor, ARB, or aliskiren.

Entresto may cause serious side effects including serious allergic reactions causing swelling of the face, lips, tongue, and throat (angioedema) that may cause trouble breathing and death. Patients are to get emergency medical help right away if they have symptoms of angioedema or trouble breathing. Patients are not to take Entresto again if they have had angioedema while taking Entresto. People who are black or who have had angioedema may have a higher risk of having angioedema if they take Entresto. Entresto may cause low blood pressure (hypotension). Patients are to call their doctor if they become dizzy or lightheaded, or they develop extreme fatigue. Entresto may cause kidney problems or an increased amount of potassium in the blood.

The most common side effects were low blood pressure, high potassium, cough, dizziness, and kidney problems.

Please see full Prescribing Information, including Boxed WARNING available at http://www.pharma.us.novartis.com/product/pi/pdf/entresto.pdf.

Patients are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch, or call 1-800-FDA-1088.

Disclaimer 

The foregoing release contains forward-looking statements that can be identified by words such as "could," "potential," "call for," "accelerate," "possible," "suggests," "expected," "may," "compelling," "endorsement," "potentially," "growing," "committed," or similar terms, or by express or implied discussions regarding potential new indications or labeling for Entresto, or regarding potential future revenues from Entresto. You should not place undue reliance on these statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of management regarding future events, and are subject to significant known and unknown risks and uncertainties. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. There can be no guarantee that Entresto will be submitted or approved for any additional indications or labeling in any market, or at any particular time. Nor can there be any guarantee that Entresto will be commercially successful in the future. In particular, management's expectations regarding Entresto could be affected by, among other things, the uncertainties inherent in research and development, including unexpected clinical trial results and additional analysis of existing clinical data; unexpected regulatory actions or delays or government regulation generally; the company's ability to obtain or maintain proprietary intellectual property protection; general economic and industry conditions; global trends toward health care cost containment, including ongoing pricing pressures; unexpected safety, quality or manufacturing issues, and other risks and factors referred to in Novartis AG's current Form 20-F on file with the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Novartis is providing the information in this press release as of this date and does not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statements contained in this press release as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.

About Novartis

Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation researches, develops, manufactures and markets innovative medicines aimed at improving patients' lives. We offer a broad range of medicines for cancer, cardiovascular disease, endocrine disease, inflammatory disease, infectious disease, neurological disease, organ transplantation, respiratory disease, eye and ear care and skin conditions. The company's mission is to improve people's lives by pioneering novel healthcare solutions.

Located in East Hanover, NJ Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation is an affiliate of Novartis AG, which provides innovative healthcare solutions that address the evolving needs of patients and societies. Headquartered in Basel, Switzerland, Novartis offers a diversified portfolio to best meet these needs: innovative medicines, eye care and cost-saving generic pharmaceuticals. Novartis is the only global company with leading positions in these areas. In 2015, the Group achieved net sales of USD 49.4 billion, while R&D throughout the Group amounted to approximately USD 8.9 billion (USD 8.7 billion excluding impairment and amortization charges). Novartis Group companies employ approximately 118,000 full-time-equivalent associates. Novartis products are available in more than 180 countries around the world. For more information, please visit http://www.novartis.com

Novartis is on Twitter. Sign up to follow @Novartis at http://twitter.com/novartis.
• Fonarow GC, Hernandez AF, Solomon SD, et al. Potential Mortality Reduction with Optimal Implementation of Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor Therapy in Heart Failure. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-4. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1724
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey Jr DE, Colvin MM, Drazner, MH, Filippatos G, Fonarow GC, Givertz MM, Hollenberg SM, Lindenfeld J, Masoudi FA, McBride, PE, Peterson PN, Stevenson LW, Westlake C, 2016 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update on New Pharmacological Therapy for Heart Failure: An Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure, Journal of the American College of Cardiology (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.05.011.
• Gaziano TA, Fonarow GC, et al. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Sacubitril/Valsartan versus Enalapril in Heart Failure Patients with Reduced Ejection Fraction in . JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-7. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1747
• Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2016 Update: A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;133;e38-e360. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000350.
• Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:251–259.
• Roger VL, Weston SA, Redfield MM, et al. Trends in heart failure incidence and survival community-based population. JAMA. 2004;292:344-350
• Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG, et al. Long term trends in the incidence and survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(18):1397-1422.
• Weir LM, Pfuntner A, Maeda J, et al. HCUP facts and figures: statistics on hospital-based care in , 2009. : Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2011.
• Heidenreich PA, Albert NM, , et al. Forecasting the impact of heart failure in : a policy statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:606-619.
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240-e327.

For questions about the site or required registration, please contact: journalisthelp@thenewsmarket.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release includes extensive information on harms, including this summary of side effects: “Entresto may cause serious side effects including serious allergic reactions causing swelling of the face, lips, tongue, and throat (angioedema) that may cause trouble breathing and death.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Exposing sleeping people to a series of short flashing lights at night might help them adjust more quickly to time zone changes, according to a new U.S. study.

In experiments, the technique – which is based on the way non-visual parts of the brain respond to light – was much more effective than sustained bright light similar to that from devices sometimes used to combat sleep disorders or seasonal depression.

“Jet lag itself is really a nuisance syndrome as it is self-resolving,” said senior author Jamie Zeitzer, assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the Stanford University School of Medicine in California.

Zeitzer was on the committee that removed jet lag as a “disease” from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), the guide that psychiatrists use to diagnose mental illnesses.

“However, the treatments that are developed for jet lag can be used for less prevalent, though far more significant societal problems including delayed sleep in teens (in whom we have an ongoing clinical trial using the flash technique) and shift workers who try to flip between a night time schedule for work and a day time schedule for leisure,” he told Reuters Health by email.

The study included 39 people, 31 of whom were exposed to a series of two-millisecond light flashes with changing intervals while sleeping, and eight of whom were exposed to 60 minutes of continuous bright light.

A series of flashes similar to a camera flash delivered every 10 seconds over a 60-minute period delayed sleepiness by two hours, compared to a 36-minute delay for those exposed to continuous light for an hour, according to the results published in the Journal of Clinical Investigation.

“In essence, using the night before you traveled from California to N.Y. would move your circadian system two-thirds of the way there before you even left,” Zeitzer said.

Arriving in New York, you would be synced to the local time after one day, he said.

“The circadian clock is the central conductor of the many clocks that are found in nearly all tissues of your body,” Zeitzer said. “This clock remains synchronized with the external day through regular exposure to light.”

Nighttime flashes change the timing of the circadian clock, he said.

“For moving your system to a later time, such as would be necessary when traveling East-to-West, light during the first few hours of the night is ideal,” he said. “For moving your system to an earlier time, such as would be necessary when traveling West-to-East, light during the last few hours of the night is ideal.”

The night flashes require special technology and equipment, beyond just a smartphone, which are still in development, Zeitzer said.

In a previous study, the short flashes of light at night did not interrupt sleep or reduce its quality, he added.

“This is one of the real advantages of this system - you can change circadian timing while you sleep, without interfering with sleep,” he said.

Mistiming light therapy can make jet lag worse, cautioned Anna Wirz-Justice, professor emeritus at the Center for Chronobiology at the University of Basel in Switzerland, who was not part of the new study.

As for frequent flyers trying this themselves, it is “far too early – neither the methodology is available outside research, nor any guidance about safety, nor tests of simulated jet lag in an appropriate ‘realistic’ protocol,” Wirz-Justice told Reuters Health by email.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The report indicated there was no harm involved:  “In a previous study, the short flashes of light at night did not interrupt sleep or reduce its quality.” This report also indicated helpful additional information from an outside observer, Anna Wirz-Justice, professor emeritus at the Center for Chronobiology at the University of Basel in Switzerland, who was not part of the new study, who said: “Mistiming light therapy can make jet lag worse.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers, including senior author Penny M. Kris-Etherton, PhD, distinguished professor of nutrition at Pennsylvania State University, publish their findings in the Journal of the American Heart Association.

It is well known that avocados are high in fat, but the majority of an avocado's fat is monounsaturated, which is deemed a "good" type of fat. It is known that monounsaturated fats can help lower levels of bad cholesterol, reducing the risk of heart attack and stroke.

For their study, Kris-Etherton and colleagues set out to assess how avocado consumption - by replacing saturated fatty acids, or "bad" fats - affected risk factors associated with cardiovascular diseases.

The team recruited 45 healthy participants aged 21-70 years who were either obese or overweight.

Every participant was required to follow each of three cholesterol-lowering diets for 5 weeks. The diets consisted of a lower-fat diet without avocado, a moderate-fat diet without avocado or a moderate-fat diet with one Hass avocado a day.

Prior to starting each diet, subjects ate what the researchers deem an "average American diet," which was made up of 34% of calories from fat, 16% from protein, while around half of calories were from carbohydrates.

From both of the moderate-fat diets, participants gained 34% of calories from fat, of which 17% were from monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs). The lower-fat diet provided participants with 24% of calories from fat, of which 11% was from MUFAs.

Moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day lowered 'bad' cholesterol by 13.5 mg/dL

The researchers found that participants' levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) - referred to as the "bad" cholesterol - were an average of 8.3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) lower after following the lower-fat diet without an avocado and 7.4 mg/dL lower after following the moderate-fat diet without an avocado, compared with their baseline average.

However, after participants followed the moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day, their LDL levels were found to be an average of 13.5 mg/dL lower than their baseline average.

What is more, the team found that a number of additional blood measurements - such as total cholesterol, small dense LDL, triglycerides and non-HDL (high-density lipoprotein) - were better after participants followed the moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day, compared with the other two diets.

Although these findings demonstrate that an avocado a day alongside a moderate-fat diet has the potential to reduce bad cholesterol, the team notes that their research was a controlled feeding study. "That is not the real-world," says Kris-Etherton, "so it is a proof-of-concept investigation."

Still, the team believes their findings indicate that people should consider replacing saturated fatty acids in their diet with healthier fats from avocados and other sources. Kris-Etherton adds:

"We need to focus on getting people to eat a heart-healthy diet that includes avocados and other nutrient-rich food sources of better fats. In the United States avocados are not a mainstream food yet, and they can be expensive, especially at certain times of the year. Also, most people do not really know how to incorporate them in their diet except for making guacamole. But guacamole is typically eaten with corn chips, which are high in calories and sodium. Avocados, however, can also be eaten with salads, vegetables, sandwiches, lean protein foods (like chicken or fish) or even whole."

It should be noted that this research was supported by the Hass Avocado Board, but the researchers say the organization played no other role in the study.

In January 2014, Medical News Today reported on a study suggesting that consuming half an avocado with lunch each day may satisfy hunger in overweight individuals and help with weight management.

Our Knowledge Center article on the health benefits of avocado reveals some of the other ways the food may be good for us, as well as the potential risks of avocado consumption.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that avocados are typically consumed in the U.S. as guacamole, which is often eaten with corn chips that are high in calories and sodium. We’ll call that good enough for a satisfactory rating on this criterion. The story could have gone one step further, as NBC did, and note that consumers should compensate for the extra calories from avocados by reducing intake of nutrient-poor calories. Otherwise they’re likely to gain weight.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — ARLINGTON, Va., March 1, 2017 – Results from a new prospective clinical trial indicate that high-dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy administered in a single, 19 Gray (Gy) treatment may be a safe and effective alternative to longer courses of HDR treatment for men with localized prostate cancer. The study is available online in the International Journal of Radiation Oncology ● Biology ● Physics, the flagship journal of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO).

With brachytherapy, also known as internal radiation therapy (RT), implants are surgically inserted in or near cancerous tissue to deliver a curative radiation dose directly to the tumor while limiting exposure for surrounding healthy tissue. Reducing this exposure is of particular concern for treating tumors in the prostate, which is surrounded by multiple critical structures. In contrast to low-dose-rate (LDR) brachytherapy, where radioactive seed implants are placed permanently in the body and gradually deposit low levels of radiation over a period of months, HDR treatments deposit the dose in one treatment, after which the radioactive implant is removed from the patient.

Typically, HDR brachytherapy is administered in four to as many as nine treatment sessions, which generally requires multiple invasive procedures to insert the implants. While the number of sessions can be streamlined by increasing the dose given in each session, data on the safety and tolerability of highly escalated brachytherapy doses are still relatively new and therefore limited. In this study, researchers found that patients who received a single fraction of 19 Gy HDR brachytherapy experienced similar clinical outcomes as with LDR brachytherapy, but with the convenience of a single visit.

“It is becoming apparent that patients may be treated definitively for their prostate cancer in as little as a single day with a minimally invasive outpatient procedure,” said lead study author Daniel J. Krauss, MD, a radiation oncologist at Oakland University’s William Beaumont School of Medicine in Royal Oak, Michigan. “We found that patients generally can resume normal activities the following day with typical side effects.”

The study, which appeared in the Red Journal’s January 2017 issue, presented the results of a nonrandomized, prospective clinical trial of 58 patients with low- or intermediate-risk (non-metastatic) prostate cancer, with a median follow-up period of 2.9 years. All patients received a single, 19 Gy fraction of HDR brachytherapy. The median patient age was 63 years (range 43-73), and 91 percent of the patients presented with stage T1 disease.

At an average of nearly three years following treatment, cancer control rates were favorable and the toxicity profile was highly favorable. Three patients experienced recurrence or progression, yielding an estimated three-year cumulative biochemical control rate of 93 percent. Within the six months following HDR therapy, seven patients (12.1%) experienced grade 2 urinary side effects, most commonly frequency/urgency (6.9%). No patients experienced short-term grade 3+ urinary toxicity or grade 2+ gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity. Rates were similarly modest for long-term side effects. Six patients (10.3%) experienced chronic grade 2 urinary toxicity and one patient (1.7%) experienced grade 3 chronic GI toxicity that subsequently resolved. No patients experienced long-term grade 3+ urinary toxicity or grade 4 GI toxicity.

“This study illustrates that a potentially curative dose of radiation may be delivered safely to the prostate entirely in a single administration,” said Dr. Krauss. “Giving the entire dose in a single treatment theoretically could have had a greater negative impact on the normal tissues in close proximity to the prostate—meaning the bladder, urethra and rectum—but this was not found to be the case. Toxicity rates were extremely low, with essentially no major complications encountered in this initial group of 58 patients.”

While findings highlight the potential tolerability of a single fraction of HDR brachytherapy for localized prostate cancer, the article also emphasizes the need for additional follow-up to compare long-term cancer control rates with conventional treatment approaches, which generally administer larger cumulative doses than the 19 Gy dose used in this trial.

“As the follow-up interval lengthens, 19 Gy dosing in a single fraction may or may not be sufficient to result in cure rates comparable to historical standards. One thing that this study has made clear, however, is that the extremely low toxicity and complication rates leave room to escalate the single fraction dose in subsequent trials,” said Dr. Krauss. “While additional study and longer follow-up are necessary to confirm the optimal dose for single-fraction HDR brachytherapy, we are optimistic that the single-treatment approach can eventually become a standard practice for prostate cancer treatment.”

For more information or a copy of the full study, contact ASTRO’s media relations team at press@astro.org. For the study abstract, visit http://www.redjournal.org/article/S0360-3016(16)33096-6/abstract. For more information about Red Journal, visit www.redjournal.org.

ABOUT ASTROASTRO is the premier radiation oncology society in the world, with more than 10,000 members who are physicians, nurses, biologists, physicists, radiation therapists, dosimetrists and other health care professionals who specialize in treating patients with radiation therapies. As the leading organization in radiation oncology, the Society is dedicated to improving patient care through professional education and training, support for clinical practice and health policy standards, advancement of science and research, and advocacy. ASTRO publishes three medical journals, International Journal of Radiation Oncology
• Biology
• Physics (www.redjournal.org), Practical Radiation Oncology (www.practicalradonc.org) and Advances in Radiation Oncology (www.advancesradonc.org); developed and maintains an extensive patient website, RT Answers (www.rtanswers.org); and created the Radiation Oncology Institute (www.roinstitute.org), a nonprofit foundation to support research and education efforts around the world that enhance and confirm the critical role of radiation therapy in improving cancer treatment. To learn more about ASTRO, visit www.astro.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release provided detailed information on harms: “Within the six months following HDR therapy, seven patients (12.1%) experienced grade 2 urinary side effects, most commonly frequency/urgency (6.9%). No patients experienced short-term grade 3+ urinary toxicity or grade 2+ gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity. Rates were similarly modest for long-term side effects. Six patients (10.3%) experienced chronic grade 2 urinary toxicity and one patient (1.7%) experienced grade 3 chronic GI toxicity that subsequently resolved. No patients experienced long-term grade 3+ urinary toxicity or grade 4 GI toxicity.”
But given that many oncology experts would consider the treatment unnecessary, any level of toxicity could be considered unacceptable.
The lay reader would have benefited from a description of what “grade 2 or grad 3+” levels of toxicity means.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study published late last month in The New England Journal of Medicine is raising provocative questions about how best to treat a torn anterior cruciate ligament. For the study, researchers from Lund University in Sweden recruited 121 young adults who had injured their A.C.L.’s. The volunteers, between 18 and 35, were physically active, and many were competitive athletes. They agreed, rather bravely, to be randomly assigned to one of two groups and accept radically different treatments for their torn A.C.L.’s. The first group began physical therapy and then underwent surgical reconstruction of the ligament, considered by many people to be the best option for injured athletes. The second group received only physical therapy, with the option to have the operation later. Twenty-three subjects of that group did eventually have the operation. (For those fortunate enough not to be personally familiar with A.C.L. surgery, reconstruction involves replacing the injured ligament with tissue from elsewhere in your own leg or from a cadaver.)

Over two years, the injured knees were assessed using a comprehensive numerical score that rated pain, function during activity and other measures. At the time of the original injury, the knee also had been scored. At the end of the two years, both groups showed considerable improvement. The scores for the surgically repaired knees had risen by 39.2 points. The scores for the more conservatively treated knees also had risen, by 39.4 points. In other words, the outcomes were virtually identical. Despite a widespread belief that surgery leads to a stronger knee, the results showed that surgically reconstructing the A.C.L. as soon as possible after the tear “was not superior” to more conservative treatment, the study’s authors wrote. The findings suggest, the authors concluded, that “more than half the A.C.L. reconstructions” currently being conducted on injured knees “could be avoided without adversely affecting outcomes.”

This possibility should reverberate across playing fields nationwide, where, at the moment, preseason high school, collegiate and adult-league sports practices are under way, with a concomitant surge in A.C.L. tears. By one estimate, as many as 1 in every 556 fit, active people will tear an A.C.L. — particularly if they participate in sports that involve frequent pivoting and landing, like soccer, football, tennis, skiing and basketball. At the same time, the urge to treat the injury with surgery appears to be growing. The “belief among most surgeons and patients is that surgery is a ‘must,’ at least if you aim to go back into an active lifestyle,” the Swedish authors of the study e-mailed in response to questions.

Part of the reason for A.C.L. surgery’s popularity is that by most measures, it works. In the current study, most of the group members who had reconstructive surgery reported that their injured knees felt healthy after two years and that they had returned to activity — not, in most cases, at the same level as before their injuries, but they were active. Significantly, their knees also were notably more “stable” than the joints that hadn’t been surgically fixed. Stability is, in theory, desirable. A stable knee rarely gives way.

But in practice, the importance of stability after A.C.L. treatment is “controversial,” The New England Journal study’s authors, Richard Frobell, Ph.D., and Stefan Lohmander, M.D., Ph.D., of Lund University, wrote in their e-mail. In an important 2009 study published in The British Journal of Sports Medicine, researchers retrospectively compared outcomes after 10 years in competitive athletes who had surgery or had opted for conservative treatment of their torn A.C.L.’s. The surgically repaired knees were notably more stable. But they weren’t fundamentally healthier. The surgically reconstructed knees and the conservatively treated joints experienced similar (and high) levels of early onset knee arthritis, a common occurrence after an A.C.L. tear. The treatments were almost identical, too, in terms of whether the athletes could return to sports and whether they reported subsequent knee problems.

Why, then, undergo A.C.L. reconstruction, an operation that can be expensive and, like all surgical procedures, carries risks? Several top-flight orthopedic surgeons I contacted say that they remain convinced that surgery leads to a better long-term outcome for certain patients, particularly if they want to return to pivoting sports. “The reason to have the surgery is to preserve” other parts of the knee from injury during activity, says Dr. Warren Dunn, an assistant professor of orthopedics and rehabilitation at Vanderbilt University who has extensively studied A.C.L. tears. He points out that in The New England Journal of Medicine study, only 8 percent of the patients in the first surgical group subsequently tore a meniscus, a fragile pillow of cartilage that can rip if a knee gives way. Twenty-five percent of those in the physical therapy group eventually tore their meniscuses.

What these numbers mean for anyone who tears an A.C.L. or is the parent of a young athlete in that situation is that they should have a long, frank conversation with an orthopedic surgeon and possibly also a nonsurgical sports-medicine specialist about options. “We recommend surgery based on activity level and sports,” Dr. Dunn says. “Most subjects can do in-line activities” like running or biking “without an A.C.L.” He adds, “On the other hand, we believe that A.C.L.-deficient subjects that do return” to sports involving cutting, pivoting or planting the leg “can consequently injure the meniscus” or other cartilage in the knee and would benefit from a replacement A.C.L.

The authors of the study are less sure. “On the basis of our study results, we’d tell patients” that “there is no apparent downside of starting a good rehab program and waiting with the surgery decision to see if it is needed or not,” the authors wrote to me.

The ultimate lesson of The New England Journal study is almost certainly that more science on the subject is needed. “We definitely know only parts of the long-term outcome” after different A.C.L. treatments, says Dr. Duncan Meuffels, an assistant professor of orthopedic surgery at Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam and lead author of The British Journal of Sports Medicine study.

But large-scale, randomized controlled studies, the gold standard of medical research, may be difficult to orchestrate, in part because people with shredded A.C.L.’s can balk at being denied surgery. In The New England Journal study, some of those assigned to physical therapy wound up requesting surgery, although they weren’t experiencing any knee problems. For them, it seems, “the desire to undergo surgery was based on expectations rather than symptoms,” the authors told me. It may be years, unfortunately, before we know if such expectations are justified or if unreconstructed injured knees can be fine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Several of the outcomes in this study straddle the line between benefit and harm (or lack of harm), so please see the "Benefit" criterion below, too. Overall, this story covers the authors’ key safety messages from the published NEJM article, particularly as they refer to the rates of adverse events between the two groups. The piece says in general terms that ACL surgery has risks like any surgery. It would’ve been better to include some more details. A mention, if not quantification, of specific risks would’ve added more balance to the discussion. The study itself did consider surgical and anesthetic adverse events in its analysis. 
It also could have been clearer about the uncertainty about the lack of long-term outcomes. We don’t know how the two treatment groups will compare in terms of development of arthritis and future surgeries (e.g., more meniscectomies) farther out than 2 years. The challenge is that such long-term outcomes may be decades off in this young population.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A nasal spray containing a hormone that is known to make women more maternal and men less shy apparently can help those with autism make eye contact and interact better with others, according to a provocative study released Monday.

The study, involving 13 adults with either a high-functioning form of autism or Asperger syndrome, a mild form of the disorder, found that when the subjects inhaled the hormone oxytocin, they scored significantly better on a test that involved recognizing faces and performed much better in a game that involved tossing a ball with others.

Although more research is needed to confirm and explore the findings, the results are the latest in a growing body of evidence indicating that the hormone could lead to ways to help people with the often devastating brain disorder function better.

"This is the first study that looked at whether oxytocin has an effect on social behavior, which is a major deficit in autism," said Angela Sirigu, who directs the National Center for Scientific Research in France and led the study, published online by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. "It looks like it could be very helpful."

Researchers who were not involved in the study praised the work, saying the findings were promising and could lead to the first effective treatment for the central problems affecting people with autism.

"I think it's going to be a very exciting finding for a lot of people," said Alex Martin, chief of cognitive neuropsychology at the National Institute of Mental Health.

Because oxytocin does not last long in the body and produces its effects for a relatively brief period, some experts said the findings were more likely to encourage drug companies to develop alternative substances that had the same benefits.

"This paper suggests that's worth doing," said Thomas R. Insel, director of the institute. "It adds another brick in the wall that suggests there may be an opportunity to develop treatment for one of the core symptoms of autism. That's been the brass ring."

But Sirigu was among those who said the finding should encourage more research on the potential benefits of oxytocin itself, especially for children. Administering the hormone soon after a child's autism is diagnosed might help him or her develop more normally, she said.

"It's possible it can become a cure, if it's given early when the problems are detected in the little kids," Sirigu said. "We can change the way these patients interact with people from childhood."

Because previous research has indicated that some people with autism might have abnormally low levels of oxytocin, conducting tests to identify those people and administering them the hormone might help as well, said Karen Parker, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Stanford University School of Medicine.

"If you can find someone who appears to have deficits in oxytocin biology, giving them what you might argue would be replacement oxytocin may be helpful," Parker said.

Autism is a baffling disorder that can cause a variety of symptoms, including speech and learning problems and profound, disabling difficulties understanding emotions and social cues when interacting with people. The number of children found to have autism has been increasing for reasons that remain mysterious.

Oxytocin is produced naturally in the bodies of humans and animals. It plays a key role in social interaction, promoting maternal behavior and monogamy in animals. The hormone also heightens social sensitivity, social awareness, generosity and trust in people.

Previous U.S. studies found that people with autism who received the hormone intravenously were less likely to engage in repetitive behavior that is another hallmark of autism and were more likely to be able to identify emotions in voices. Another study being published in the journal Biological Psychiatry found that 16 autistic males in Australia ages 12 to 19 who received the hormone through a nasal spray were better able to recognize other people's facial expressions.

"All the data seem to suggest that manipulating the oxytocin system has a powerful effect on the core symptoms of autism," said Eric Hollander, director of the compulsive, impulsive and autism spectrum disorders program at the Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

While cautioning that more research is needed on children and additional patients to make sure oxytocin is safe and effective, advocates for families with children with autism welcomed the findings. Oxytocin has been in use for several years as an "alternative" therapy for autism.

"Many families are using it with success and reporting improvement," said Wendy Fournier, president of the National Autism Association. "Getting double-blind clinical studies like this one published helps to bring credibility to parental reports."

"We need to be mindful of the fact that the majority of human studies of oxytocin have been conducted using adults, including this study, and only one paper has included individuals between the ages of 12 and 18. We have to be careful about the safety and efficacy of oxytocin on pediatric populations," said Clara Lajonchere, vice president of clinical programs for Autism Speaks.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The study was of relatively short duration and no side effects were reported. The story does note that more research in children particularly is needed on the safety of oxytocin. However, the story could have noted that oxytocin is not without side effects based on usage in adults. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Testing women for human papillomavirus (HPV) may catch more pre-cancerous growths than standard cervical cancer screening does — but more evidence is needed before the newer tests become routine, a study published Monday concludes.

The report, in the Annals of Internal Medicine, sums up a research review done for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), an expert medical panel supported by the federal government.

The USPSTF is set to update its recommendations on cervical cancer screening, which were last laid out in 2003.

At that time, the task force recommended that sexually active women get regular Pap tests to screen for cervical cancer. But it said there was not enough evidence to recommend for or against newer types of testing — including HPV tests and the “liquid-based” Pap tests that are now more often used than the old-fashioned version.

During Pap tests, cells are swabbed or scraped from the cervix for examination under a microscope to find cancer or possible pre-cancerous changes. In the so-called liquid-based version, the cells are placed in special preservative liquid designed to make the specimen easier to “read”; those same cells can also be used for HPV testing (unlike the cells collected with conventional Pap tests).

Exactly what impact the new research review will have on the USPSTF recommendations is anyone's guess. A draft of the guidelines will not be published until Wednesday, when it will be available for public comment on the task force website (here: 1.usa.gov/4xXexl).

A lot of research has been done since the 2003 recommendations, said Dr. Evelyn P. Whitlock, a senior investigator with Kaiser Permanente Northwest in Portland, Oregon, who led the review.

But there are still questions about the effects of HPV screening, and “more complete evidence” is needed before it becomes widely used, Whitlock and her colleagues write.

HPV is a common virus that causes warts, including genital warts. Usually, the immune system clears the infection, but persistent infection with certain strains of HPV leads to cervical cancer in some women.

So in recent years, tests for those “high-risk” HPV strains have been developed to help in screening for the disease. A few HPV tests are approved for use, along with Pap tests, for screening women age 30 or older. (The tests are not approved for younger women because they give doctors little information; younger women commonly have HPV infections that go away on their own.)

It has not been clear exactly how HPV testing, or liquid-based Pap tests, measure up against standard Pap tests.

In their review, Whitlock’s team examined four clinical trials including more than 140,000 women that compared older Pap tests with the liquid-based version.

They found that both tests had nearly the same “sensitivity” — which refers to their ability to detect cancer or pre-cancer. The tests also had the same “specificity,” which can be used to measure how often a screening test produces false-positive results.

Across studies, the false-positive rate ranged between about six percent and 16 percent for both conventional and liquid-based Pap tests.

“It’s reassuring to know that they perform equivalently,” Whitlock told Reuters Health.

In an interview, she noted that the decision of whether to do a conventional or liquid-based Pap test is not the patient’s. It may not even be the doctor’s — but may instead depend on whatever health system he or she is part of.

Several other clinical trials in the review looked at HPV testing. In general, Whitlock’s team found, HPV tests were more sensitive than conventional Pap tests, but they were less specific, meaning they had a higher false-positive rate.

In a 2003 trial of more than 3,000 women, for example, HPV testing caught 96 percent of potentially pre-cancerous growths, versus 65 percent with Pap tests. But the false-positive rate was 15 percent, compared with two percent with Pap testing.

The problem with that higher false-positive rate is that it could lead to needless biopsies and other tests, or treatment to remove abnormal-looking tissue.

“It’s a tricky thing to get your mind around,” Whitlock said. “It may seem that if a test is more sensitive, it must be better. But it’s more subtle than that. You’re trying to make a tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity.”

Since cervical cancer screening is repeated over time, what’s needed is evidence of the longer-term effects of different tests, according to Whitlock. How often, for example, does HPV testing lead to biopsies, versus Pap testing?

And no one knows yet whether HPV testing actually catches cervical cancer at an earlier stage, or reduces deaths from the disease, compared with Pap tests.

Clinical trials are ongoing, Whitlock said. “The state of the science will be changing relatively quickly, so we’ll have to keep looking at this.”

Right now, the American Cancer Society (ACS) and other medical groups recommend that women start Pap tests at age 21 or three years after they become sexually active, whichever comes first. Those should be done every one to two years until age 30; after age 30, women who’ve had three normal Pap tests in a row can be screened less often — every two to three years.

Pap plus HPV testing, done every three years, is considered a “reasonable option” for women age 30 and up, according to the ACS.

Nationally, the cervical cancer death rate dropped by 70 percent between 1955 and 1992, and routine Pap testing is credited for most of that decline.

But many women still do not get regular Pap screening, Whitlock pointed out. It’s thought that more than half of cervical cancer cases in the U.S. occur in women who’ve never been screened, or haven’t been in the past five years.

If more women received the screening that already exists, “that would be a huge step forward,” Whitlock said.

An estimated 12,700 U.S. women will be diagnosed with cervical cancer this year, and nearly 4,300 will die from the disease, according to the ACS.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained the impact that false-positive tests might have if the HPV testing became routine. More women could have unnecessary biopsies to remove tissue that was not cancerous.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 13, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For men who have prostate cancer that's considered "intermediate risk," radiation plus four months of hormone therapy appears to improve survival, a new study finds.

This combination of treatments, however, was not effective in men with either low-risk prostate cancer or advanced disease, the researchers said. Men with high-risk cancer need long-term hormone therapy.

The hormone therapy is known as androgen deprivation therapy. It's designed to reduce the levels of male hormones (androgens) in the body, since they can stimulate the growth of prostate cancer cells.

"For patients with early, localized cancer of the prostate who were treated with radiation therapy, [by] adding short-term androgen deprivation therapy, we improved their cure rates and increased their chance of living 10 years from 57 percent to 62 percent," said lead researcher Dr. Christopher U. Jones, from Radiological Associates of Sacramento, Calif.

But when the researchers looked closely at those findings, they found that patients with low-risk prostate cancer did not need hormone therapy because the chance they would survive with radiation alone was already almost 99 percent, Jones said.

And while short term hormonal therapy is "not very toxic, there are [still] some toxicities," Jones noted. "We don't want to treat any man unnecessarily with that type of treatment. We really want to make sure -- if we are going to recommend that treatment -- the person really needs it," he said.

On the other hand, hormone therapy plus radiation was most effective in patients with intermediate-risk prostate cancer. "We decreased the risk of dying from prostate cancer in those patients from 10 percent to 3 percent, at 10 years," Jones said.

For patients with high-risk prostate cancer, using hormone therapy for just a short while is not effective, he added. "We know from other studies that short-term androgen deprivation therapy isn't enough. You need to give long-term androgen deprivation therapy in addition to radiation to have the best results," Jones said.

The report was published in the July 14 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

For the study, Jones' team randomly assigned almost 2,000 men with prostate cancer to radiation therapy alone or in combination with four months of hormone therapy. The hormone therapy started two months before radiation.

Side effects of male hormone therapy can include erectile dysfunction (impotence), loss of sex drive, hot flashes, growth of breast tissue, loss of muscle and bone mass, weight gain, nausea, liver problems, fatigue, memory problems and mood swings.

In October 2010, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration asked manufacturers to add a warning that certain drugs used in hormone therapy (including the one used in the study) were linked to a small but increased risk of diabetes, heart attack, stroke and sudden death in men.

In this study, men treated with hormone therapy experienced a much higher percentage of liver damage; toxic effects of radiation treatment were similar in both groups.

Over an average of over nine years of follow-up, 62 percent of the men who had combination therapy were alive, compared with 57 percent of the men who received radiation therapy alone, the researchers found.

Overall, hormone therapy reduced the risk of dying from prostate cancer over 10 years from 8 percent to 4 percent, Jones said.

He noted that the radiation treatments in use today differ from those given in 1994 when the trial began.

"We can give 15 to 20 percent higher doses of radiation now than we could then, and we can do it more safely and more accurately," he said. So, that brings into question how much, if any, hormone therapy is needed, he added.

An ongoing trial among patients with intermediate risk prostate cancer aims to answer that question, Jones said. "We are going to find out if androgen deprivation therapy still applies to patients treated with modern techniques," he said.

"This study, in conjunction with what we know about hormonal therapy, really nails home the conclusion that hormonal therapy should not be used in men with low-risk disease because the risks outweigh any conceivable benefit," commented Dr. Anthony D'Amico, chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and author of an accompanying journal editorial.

D'Amico noted that new studies using up-to-date high-dose radiation also found that the addition of short-term hormone therapy improved outcomes at five years for men with intermediate risk prostate cancer, compared with radiation alone.

"If you are in the low-risk category, stay away from hormone therapy. It does no good. [It] can hurt," D'Amico said. "If you have anything beyond low-risk [prostate cancer], the hormonal therapy helps," he said. "It's just a matter of how long you need it for. It could be four months, six months or longer."

These findings are good news for some men, since the effects of short term of hormone therapy are reversible, D'Amico said. "It's not three years, where men are changed forever," he said.

For more information on prostate cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The harms associated with male hormone therapy were listed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON, Sept. 14, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- GSK (LSE/NYSE: GSK) today announced the publication of detailed results from a randomised phase III study (ZOE-70) of its investigational shingles vaccine, Shingrix™, showing 90% efficacy in adults aged 70 years and older that is maintained for at least four years1. The results were published in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM).

The study, from which headline results were reported in October 2015, showed that the two-dose candidate shingles vaccine had 90% efficacy (95% confidence interval: 84-94%) compared to placebo in people over 70 years old. Vaccine efficacy was maintained across the various age groups included in the study, ranging between 90% in people aged 70-79 years (95% confidence interval: 83-94%) and 89% in those aged 80 years and above1 (95% confidence interval: 74-96%)1.

The high efficacy is in line with the results of the ZOE-50 trial, a study in people over 50 years old which was presented and published last year showing a 97% efficacy (95% confidence interval: 93-99%)2. A pooled analysis of data from both trials showed the vaccine demonstrated 91% efficacy against shingles (95% confidence interval: 86-95%) in adults aged 70 years and older compared to placebo1. This efficacy was maintained with an 88% reduction in the risk of shingles (95% confidence interval: 73-95%) in the fourth year after vaccination.

The risk of serious adverse events, potential immune-mediated diseases or deaths observed in ZOE-70 was similar in people receiving Shingrix and placebo. The most commonly reported local adverse reaction was pain at the injection site and the most frequently reported systemic adverse reaction was fatigue. The majority of injection site and systemic reactions occurred within seven days of vaccination, with most lasting 1-3 days, and generally were mild-to-moderate in intensity1.

In addition, a pooled analysis of data from the ZOE-70 and ZOE-50 trials showed that the candidate vaccine effectively reduced the risk of subsequent chronic neuropathic pain, also known as postherpetic neuralgia (PHN)1 which is the most common, and often severe, complication of shingles3,4. The candidate vaccine was shown to be 89% (95% confidence interval: 68-97%) efficacious in preventing PHN in people aged 70 years and older and 91% efficacious (95% confidence interval: 75-98%) in people aged 50 years and over1.

Dr Emmanuel Hanon, Senior Vice President, Vaccines Research and Development, GSK, said: "This is the first time that such high efficacy has been demonstrated in a vaccine candidate for older people and it is remarkable, as we know that these people frequently have an age-related weakening of their immune system. If approved, this candidate vaccine could be an important tool for the prevention of shingles and the pain associated with it, which would significantly impact the health and quality of life of so many people."

Anthony Cunningham, Executive Director of the Westmead Institute for Medical Research in Australia and Principal Investigator of the ZOE-70 study said: "These data show that this investigational vaccine maintains high efficacy against herpes zoster in people over 70 and 80 years of age, the age groups who are most affected by the disease. Importantly, it also prevents a common and feared complication of herpes zoster, prolonged pain, or post herpetic neuralgia in these groups."

Based on these and the previously reported ZOE-50 data2, GSK expects to start submitting regulatory applications for the candidate vaccine for the prevention of shingles in people 50 years and above later this year.

About Shingrix

Shingrix is a non-live, adjuvanted, subunit (HZ/su) candidate vaccine to help prevent herpes zoster and its complications. The candidate vaccine combines glycoprotein E, a protein found on the varicella zoster virus (VZV) that causes shingles, with an adjuvant system, AS01 , which is intended to enhance the immunological response to the antigen5.

Additional trials to evaluate the ability of Shingrix to help prevent shingles are ongoing in healthy people aged 50 and older and in adults with compromised immune systems. These studies will provide additional information with respect to the efficacy and safety profile of the candidate vaccine as well as its ability to stimulate immune responses in other populations and in specific circumstances.

Notes to editors

The name Shingrix is not yet approved for use by regulatory authorities in most countries, including the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 



About the ZOE-70 trial

The ZOE-70 (ZOster Efficacy in adults aged 70 years and over) (NCT01165229) study is a randomised, observer-blind, placebo-controlled (saline solution) multicentre, multinational (North America, Europe, Latin America, Asia-Pacific) phase III trial involving more than 14,800 adults aged 70 years and older. Two doses were given intramuscularly two months apart. The study, which started in August 2010 in parallel with the ZOE-50 trial, includes subjects in the age ranges 70-79 and ≥80 years. The primary objective of ZOE-70 is overall vaccine efficacy against shingles in people 70 years and over, compared to placebo. The co-primary objectives of the pooled analysis over both studies are the assessment of overall vaccine efficacy in reducing the risk of developing shingles and PHN in people aged 70 years and over, using pooled data from both ZOE-70 and ZOE-50 studies.

About the ZOE-50 trial

The ZOE-50 (ZOster Efficacy in adults aged 50 years and over) (NCT01165177) study is a randomised, observer-blind, placebo-controlled (saline solution) multicentre, multinational (North America, Europe, Latin America, Asia-Pacific) phase III trial involving 16,160 adults aged 50 years and older. The study started in August 2010. Two doses were given intramuscularly two months apart. The primary objective of this study is the overall vaccine efficacy against shingles in people aged 50 years or older, compared to placebo. The study includes subjects in the age ranges 50-59, 60-69, 70-79, and ≥80 years.

About the phase III study programme

Involving more than 37,000 subjects globally, the phase III programme for GSK's candidate shingles vaccine evaluates its efficacy, safety and immunogenicity. In addition to older adults, the candidate vaccine is being evaluated in immunocompromised patient populations, including solid and haematological cancer patients, haematopoietic stem cell and renal transplant recipients and HIV-infected people.



About shingles

Shingles typically presents as a painful, itchy rash that develops on one side of the body, as a result of reactivation of latent chickenpox virus (varicella zoster virus, VZV). Anyone who has been infected with VZV is at risk of developing shingles, with age and altered immune system being recognised as the main risk factors3,4. Complications from shingles can include PHN, (the most common complication), scarring, vision complications, secondary infection and nerve palsies3,4.PHN is often defined as a localized pain of significant intensity persisting at least 90 days after the appearance of the acute shingles rash4.

Data from many countries indicate that older adults (aged 50 and over) are at highest risk for shingles as more than 90% of older adults have been infected with wild type VZV3. A person's risk for shingles increases sharply after 50 years of age3. Risk of complications, including PHN and hospitalisation, also increase with age3. The individual lifetime risk of developing shingles is approximately one in three for people in the USA; however, for individuals aged 85 and over, this risk increases to one in two people3,4.
• Cunningham et al., N Engl J Med 2016; 375: 1019-32. Efficacy of the herpes zoster subunit vaccine in adults 70 years of age or older.
• Lal et al., N Engl J Med 2015; 372:2087-2096 Efficacy of an Adjuvanted Herpes Zoster Subunit Vaccine in Older Adults
• Shingles (Herpes Zoster) Clinical Overview. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Accessed at: http://www.cdc.gov/shingles/hcp/clinical-overview.html on .
• The GSK proprietary AS01 adjuvant system contains QS-21 Stimulon® adjuvant licensed from Antigenics Inc, a wholly owned subsidiary of Agenus Inc. (NASDAQ: AGEN), MPL and liposomes

GSK – one of the world's leading research-based pharmaceutical and healthcare companies – is committed to improving the quality of human life by enabling people to do more, feel better and live longer. For further information please visit www.gsk.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release notes that serious adverse reactions occurred with about equal frequency among study participants who received the vaccine and those who had placebo injections. Although the release acknowledges the most common injection site and systemic adverse reactions, most commonly mild-to-moderate pain at the injection site and fatigue, it could have been more forthcoming about how common these reactions were. The article on which the release is based states that 79% of participants who received the vaccine, versus 29.5% of placebo recipients, reported local and/or systemic side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — SAN FRANCISCO, March 16, 2017—-Patients in their 80s and 90s who have early stage lung cancer but cannot undergo an operation can be treated safely and effectively with stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT), according to research presented today at the 2017 Multidisciplinary Thoracic Cancers Symposium. The advanced form of radiation therapy (RT) was well tolerated among this relatively understudied elderly population, indicating that SBRT is a viable option for patients who may otherwise be offered no curative treatment.

While the primary treatment for early stage lung cancer is surgical removal of the tumor, some patients may not be able to tolerate surgery due to health status, advanced age or other factors. For these patients, the best curative option is SBRT, a specialized type of external beam RT that uses advanced imaging techniques to deliver extremely targeted radiation to a tumor. This high degree of precision makes SBRT particularly effective at sparing surrounding healthy tissue, which is important for tumor sites near essential organs, such as the heart and lungs. Patients complete SBRT treatment in three to five days, compared with several weeks for conventional RT.

“While multiple studies and trials have established the effectiveness of SBRT for inoperable early-stage lung cancer, one of the common reasons for not giving radiation in older patients is concern about tolerating the treatment and potential side effects,” said Richard J. Cassidy III, MD, lead author of the study and a resident in radiation oncology at Emory University’s Winship Cancer Institute in Atlanta. “The low rates of side effects from SBRT for this elderly population in our study indicate that these concerns should not prevent physicians from considering definitive treatment for their inoperable octogenarian and nonagenarian patients with early stage lung cancer.”

Findings are based on a retrospective analysis of 58 consecutive patients who received definitive lung SBRT across four academic sites within Emory between 2010 and 2015. All patients were age 80 or older at the time of their diagnosis, with a median age of 84.9 years. Forty percent of the tumors were adenocarcinomas, while 29 percent were squamous cell carcinomas and 31 percent did not have a biopsy. Fifty percent of patients who did not have a biopsy had a previous history of lung cancer. Researchers used logistic regression and proportional hazard testing to determine the association of patient, tumor and treatment characteristics to compare rates of survival, recurrence and progression and assess the influence of patient and disease characteristics. Recursive partitioning analysis (RPA) was conducted to determine which patients were most likely to benefit from therapy.

At two years following definitive SBRT for lung cancer among elderly patients, survival rates were 73 percent for cancer specific survival (CSS) and 57 percent for overall survival (OS). CSS rates were higher for patients who were not active smokers but lower for patients who were older or had a previous lung cancer diagnosis (smoking Hazard Ratio (HR) = 0.14, p = 0.03; age HR = 1.19, p = 0.04; cancer HR = 7.75, p = 0.01). OS rates were higher for patients with higher Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS), which measures a patient’s functional ability to perform ordinary tasks, such as work and self-care (HR = 0.91; p < 0.01). Researchers determined that this metric should be considered when offering SBRT in this elderly population, with certain performance status criterion (i.e., KPS ≥ 75) associated with significantly improved outcomes. Two-year estimates of local control and regional control were 84.5 percent and 71.7 percent, respectively. Local failure was more common among patients with adenocarcinomas (HR = 6.36, p = 0.01) and less common for patients with T1 tumors (HR = 0.20, p < 0.01). Higher KPS scores were associated with lower rates of both local failure (HR = 0.92, p < 0.01) and regional failure (HR = 0.94, p < 0.01). In terms of toxicity, just over one-third of patients (34.5%) experienced radiation pneumonitis of any grade, with only two patients experiencing grade 3+ pneumonitis. Pneumonitis was more frequent among patients who were not actively using ace-inhibitors (Odds Ratio (OR) = 3.49, p = 0.02) and less frequent in smaller tumors (OR = 0.03, p < 0.01).

“Our study, along with other studies, helps to show that SBRT can effectively and safely add years to the lives of elderly patients who have early stage lung cancer but cannot undergo an operation for it,” said Dr. Cassidy. “Elderly patients, who are otherwise doing well, should not have treatment withheld based solely on concerns about side effects and age.”

The abstract, “Stereotactic body radiotherapy for early stage non-small cell lung cancer in patients 80 years and older: A multi-center analysis,” will be presented in detail during the poster session at the 2017 Multidisciplinary Thoracic Cancers Symposium in San Francisco (full details below). To schedule an interview with Dr. Cassidy or an outside expert, contact the ASTRO media relations team at press@astro.org or 703-286-1600.

ATTRIBUTION TO THE 2017 MULTIDISCIPLINARY THORACIC CANCERS SYMPOSIUM REQUESTED IN ALL NEWS COVERAGE.

Abstract and Presentation Details
• Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy for Early Stage Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer in Patients 80 Years and Older: A Multi-Center Analysis
• News Briefing: Friday, March 17, 1:00 – 1:45 p.m. Pacific time, Foothill F, http://bit.do/thoracic2
• Poster Session, Thursday, March 16, and Friday, March 17, Yerba Buena Salons 7 and 8
• This news release contains additional and/or updated information from the study author(s). Full original abstract and author disclosures available from press@astro.org or thoracicsymposium.org.

Resources on Lung Cancer and Radiation Therapy
• Digital brochures: Radiation Therapy for Lung Cancer (Spanish version), Plain Talk about Stereotactic Radiation, Understanding Clinical Trials
• Videos: Radiation Therapy for Lung Cancer, An Introduction to Radiation Therapy
• Additional brochures, videos and information on radiation therapy from RTAnswers.org

ABOUT THE SYMPOSIUMThe 2017 Multidisciplinary Thoracic Cancers Symposium, co-sponsored by the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO), the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and The Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS), features the latest advances in surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy and novel molecular biologic therapies for thoracic malignancies such as lung cancer. The symposium will be held March 16-18, 2017, at the San Francisco Marriott Marquis. For more information about the symposium, visit www.thoracicsymposium.org. For press registration and news briefing information, visit www.astro.org/thoracicpress.

ABOUT ASTROThe American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) is the premier radiation oncology society in the world, with more than 10,000 members who are physicians, nurses, biologists, physicists, radiation therapists, dosimetrists and other health care professionals who specialize in treating patients with radiation therapies. As the leading organization in radiation oncology, the Society is dedicated to improving patient care through professional education and training, support for clinical practice and health policy standards, advancement of science and research, and advocacy. ASTRO publishes three medical journals, International Journal of Radiation Oncology
• Biology
• Physics (www.redjournal.org), Practical Radiation Oncology (www.practicalradonc.org) and Advances in Radiation Oncology (www.advancesradonc.org); developed and maintains an extensive patient website, RT Answers (www.rtanswers.org); and created the Radiation Oncology Institute (www.roinstitute.org), a nonprofit foundation to support research and education efforts around the world that enhance and confirm the critical role of radiation therapy in improving cancer treatment. To learn more about ASTRO, visit www.astro.org.

ABOUT ASCOFounded in 1964, the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) is committed to making a world of difference in cancer care. As the world’s leading organization of its kind, ASCO represents more than 40,000 oncology professionals who care for people living with cancer. Through research, education, and promotion of the highest-quality patient care, ASCO works to conquer cancer and create a world where cancer is prevented or cured, and every survivor is healthy. ASCO is supported by its affiliate organization, the Conquer Cancer Foundation. Learn more at www.ASCO.org, explore patient education resources at www.Cancer.Net, and follow us on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and YouTube.

ABOUT STSFounded in 1964, The Society of Thoracic Surgeons is a not-for-profit organization representing approximately 7,200 cardiothoracic surgeons, researchers, and allied health care professionals worldwide who are dedicated to ensuring the best possible outcomes for surgeries of the heart, lung, and esophagus, as well as other surgical procedures within the chest. The Society’s mission is to enhance the ability of cardiothoracic surgeons to provide the highest quality patient care through education, research, and advocacy.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release reports that just over one-third of the 58 patients experienced radiation pneumonitis (inflammation of lung tissue), and that two had cases severe enough to possibly require oxygen or steroid treatment. However, the release does not mention other harms of this sort of radiation treatment, which can include fatigue lasting for several weeks, neuropathic pain, rib fractures and other problems. There is no mention of any measurements of these other radiation effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OAK BROOK, Ill. - Additional breast cancers found with MRI are sometimes larger and potentially more aggressive than those found on mammography, according to a study published online in the journal Radiology. Researchers said that in some cases MRI findings of additional cancers not seen on mammography may necessitate a change in treatment.

Breast MRI is the most sensitive technique for the detection of breast cancer, with widespread application in the screening of high-risk patients and pre-surgical planning. In younger women and women with dense breasts, MRI is effective in the detection of what are known as multicentric cancers, meaning breast cancers involving two or more distinct primary tumors, usually in different quadrants of the breast. However, there has been some debate about the clinical significance of multicentric cancers found with MRI.

"Patients with clinically insignificant cancers undergoing potential overtreatment versus patients who may be undertreated is at the heart of the controversy surrounding breast MRI," said the study's lead author Chiara Iacconi, M.D., from the Breast Unit at USL1 Massa-Carrara in Carrara, Italy.

To learn more, Dr. Iacconi and colleagues reviewed records from 2,021 patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer who underwent biopsy after preoperative MRI. Of the 2,021 patients, 285, or 14 percent, had additional cancer detected on MRI that was hidden from view on mammography.

In 73 of those 285 patients, or 25.6 percent, MRI identified at least one additional cancer in a different quadrant of the breast than the index cancer, or the cancer detected by mammography and/or breast palpation.

These multicentric cancers were larger than the known index cancer in 17 of the 73 patients, or 23.3 percent. In addition, the MRI-detected multicentric cancers were greater than 1 centimeter in size in 25 percent of the 73 patients.

"We believe invasive cancer larger than 1 centimeter is clinically relevant disease," Dr. Iacconi said. "In general, it is accepted that radiation can likely treat invasive cancer less than 1 centimeter, but lesions larger than 1 centimeter, especially invasive carcinomas, may not be reliably treated with conservation."

The additional MRI-detected multicentric cancers were found mostly in patients with heterogeneously dense or extremely dense breasts. However, MRI also detected additional disease in 19 percent of patients with fatty or scattered fibroglandular tissue.

"The results show that multicentric cancer detected on breast MRI after mammography appears to represent a larger tumor burden in approximately a quarter of patients and can result in potential changes to cancer grade and treatment," Dr. Iacconi said.

"Multicentric Cancer Detected at Breast MR Imaging and Not at Mammography: Important or Not?" Collaborating with Dr. Iacconi on this paper were Lanie Galman, M.D., Juntig Zheng, M.S., Virgilio Sacchini, M.D., Elizabeth J. Sutton, M.D., David Dershaw, M.D., and Elizabeth A. Morris, M.D.

Radiology is edited by Herbert Y. Kressel, M.D., Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass., and owned and published by the Radiological Society of North America, Inc.

RSNA is an association of more than 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: A quote near the top of the release notes that some women may be overtreated. But the release provides no specifics about what that means. In the case of an MRI-detected additional cancer, it could mean an unnecessary mastectomy. We’ll give a borderline satisfactory rating here, although more detail would have been welcome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new, experimental cholesterol-fighting drug is creating quite a buzz among researchers and other experts, prompting some to use words such as "dramatic," "breakthrough" and "game changing," to describe early-stage clinical trial results.

If these initial results pan out in larger trials, the drug could prove to be more effective than statins, the widely prescribed drugs which have been very successful in lowering levels of LDL - or bad cholesterol.

Researchers have known for some time that when the protein PCSK9, which stands for proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9, binds to LDL receptors on the liver, it compromises the organ's ability to filter the bad cholesterol from the blood. 

 

 Too much LDL cholesterol circulating in the blood can lead to the thickening of artery walls, making them less flexible and therefore impairing their function and increasing the risk of heart disease.

In this phase one clinical trial, which is designed to determine if a drug is safe, researchers found that using a monoclonal antibody (lab-produced protein) called REGN727, was not only safe, but effectively blocked PCSK9 and therefore signficantly reduced bad cholesterol in healthy patients as well as those also taking the popular cholesterol-lowering drug Lipitor.

Earlier studies had shown this effect in primates, but this new study, published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine, provides the first clinical trial data for testing the drug on humans. This new drug is being developed by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi, who funded the research.

“Wars for PCSK9 are far bigger than the statin wars," said Dr. Evan A Stein, lead author of the study and researcher at the Metabolic and Atherosclerosis Research Center in Cincinnati, Ohio. “This is a hot research area and everybody is so close together."

Other companies including Amgen, Merck & Company, Novartis and Pfizer, are also hot on the trail developing their own PCSK9 inhibitor drugs. Stein said.

Additional results for PCSK9 inhibitor drugs are expected to be presented at the annual American College of Cardiology meeting which begins Saturday in Chicago, he said.

The REGN727 study included three trial arms. Two arms used 72 healthy volunteers who were either injected with a single dose of the drug in increasing amounts to test for side effects, which is the purpose of a phase one clinical trial. A third arm included 21 people with a family history of high cholesterol, and 30 people with nonfamilial high cholesterol. All of those subjects were also receiving treatment with the statin Lipitor.

A control group of subjects with nonfamilial high cholesterol was treated only with a special diet. None of the subjects who received REGN727 discontinued the study because of adverse effects, and the subjects who received REGN727 had a striking reduction of 60 to 65% in LDL cholesterol, according to Stein.

Stein characterized the results of the trial as “pretty dramatic.”

A PCSK9 inhibitor, Stein said, differs from statins "because it's unlike any other drug. With statins you get toxicity – with these drugs we don’t see any side effects with the antibody.”

In an accompanying editorial, authors Dr. Stephen G. Young, and Loren G. Fong, Ph.D. write: “At this point, the status of PCSK9 therapeutics appears to be full speed ahead. Soon, we can expect more human trials in which investigators will dissect the properties of different PCSK9 antibodies and assess the effect of these agents.”

However, without long-term safety data and evidence that PCSK9 inhibitors truly help prevent heart disease, Young and Fong caution that it will remain unclear how important this class of drugs will be.

The cost of this drug will also play a role in determining which patients might use it, Fong and Young say. But they also note that "patients who cannot tolerate statins could benefit greatly."

If the results are confirmed, “This is game changing science,” said Dr. Richard A. Stein, a spokesman for the American Heart Association who's not related to the study author or involved in the research.

Stein called the trial results “a very important breakthrough," while being careful to note that they represent early science which should be confirmed through larger and longer studies.

He said the study methodology was thorough because it included people with high cholesterol as well as people with genetic familial high cholesterol, which is proven to be a result of impaired PCSK9 genetic function.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story stated that the researchers found that the drug was safe and “None of the subjects who received REGN727 discontinued the study because of adverse effects.” While true, it does not give the whole picture.  Here’s what the investigators said:
“The proportions of subjects who had at least one treatment-emergent adverse event were similar among subjects who received intravenous REGN727 and those who received placebo. As compared with subjects who received placebo, a higher proportion of subjects who received subcutaneous REGN727 had an adverse event in the single-dose and the multiple-dose studies. Headache was the most common adverse event.”
It didn’t include the caveat that the MedPage Today story did:
“Given the small number of subjects and the short duration of exposure, our ability to evaluate the safety profile of REGN727 in these trials was limited,” the researchers cautioned.
But it did report:
However, without long-term safety data and evidence that PCSK9 inhibitors truly help prevent heart disease, (two editorial writers) caution that it will remain unclear how important this class of drugs will be.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Stem cell research can run the gamut from Nobel Prize-winning scientists to hucksters in lab coats making a buck off desperate, seriously ill people. The results of one new study may be less than hoped for, but the science is sound: The study concluded that injecting stem cells into the spinal cords of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is safe in most, though not all, cases. Unfortunately, the procedure provided no benefit to patients, though it caused substantial pain to two of the study participants.

Dr. Jonathan D. Glass, a professor of neurology and pathology at the Emory University School of Medicine and the director of the Emory ALS Center, specifically focused on human spinal cord-derived neural stem cells.

"We put them into the spinal cord, and they came from a human spinal cord. The idea was that they would find a familiar and supportive environment," explained Glass.

In previous studies , Glass and his colleagues had transplanted such stem cells into the spinal cords of rodents with ALS and discovered that the treatment delayed the disease and improved survival.

Next, in a study of 12 patients , Glass tested the safety of injecting the stem cells into the spinal cords of humans. What he discovered during that experiment was that none of the patients suffered long-term effects (from either the surgical procedure or the implantation of stem cells), and no unusual acceleration of disease occurred. Importantly, one patient showed some improvement, though he and his colleagues noted that this outcome "must be interpreted with caution" since the study wasn't designed to measure effectiveness of the treatment.

For the new study, funded by the National Institutes of Health, Glass and his colleagues tested increasing amounts of stem cells injected into 15 patients who were not enrolled in his previous study.

What ALS does to the body

When someone gets ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, their motor network rapidly disintegrates. Nerve cells that communicate and control the voluntary muscles of the body (such as those in the arms, legs and face) degenerate or die. When communication between the brain and muscles ceases, the result is a gradual weakening and wasting away of muscles.

"My father was actually 69 when he was diagnosed. Someone can go for two years without being diagnosed properly, and that was the case with my father," Pharr said.

Neither his primary care physician nor his neurologist could identify the cause of his deterioration. In fact, they first believed he had suffered a stroke. After all, ALS is rare, and in up to 90% of all cases, there is no family history and no known risk factors, as was the case with Pharr's father.

ALS affects men more often than women, usually between the ages of 40 and 70. Though more common between the ages of 60 and 69, this neurodegenerative disease can develop at any age, progressing rapidly. Most people with ALS die within three to five years after their symptoms begin, though about 10% survive for 10 years or longer. In Pharr's father's case, the progress of disease was rapid.

"He did not want to go on the ventilator," she said, adding that many people prefer a "natural death." ALS often ends with respiratory failure since muscles in the diaphragm and chest walls eventually stop functioning. "There's no cure, and we don't even have a treatment," she said.

According to Goldstein, this isn't entirely a negative. "One of the things ALS has going for it is, since it has no effective treatment or cure, you throw anything you can at it," he said. While for many other diseases, the researchers are focused on just one modality, ongoing ALS research uses each of the four key modes of medical treatment: small molecules, proteins and biologics, gene therapy and stem cells.

Was this research necessary -- and ethical?

The ethics of human experimentation were thoroughly examined before the study began.

"Ethical review happens at several levels: at the NIH, at the Food and Drug Administration and most importantly at University Institutional Review Boards at each institution where a faculty member is participating in a trial," Glass explained.

In Pharr's opinion, this and other stem cell studies are certainly fair from a participant's perspective, since beforehand, "patients are presented with all the risk factors involved so they can make an informed decision." Besides, she added, "you automatically assume anyone with ALS can participate, but not everyone meets the criteria for a particular study."

The results of the study: Most participants fared well. However, severe complications occurred in two of the patients as a result of the surgery involved. One developed partial paralysis, and another experienced "incapacitating pain."

"People who do these studies should be considered medical heroes," Goldstein said, adding, "The selflessness of these people when they're told they're gonna die."

Sadly, disappointment is part of it, according to Pharr, who typically hears the frustration of people who go through a study that worked for another person but not for them. "It may have had a different effect on someone else," she said. "But that's why we don't have a treatment yet: because it doesn't work for everyone."

These early stages may be painful for some of the "medical heroes" involved, but the goal is clear: providing an effective and safe treatment for future patients who suffer from a devastating condition.

"Importantly, people should understand that, at least for neurological diseases like ALS, we are just now getting started with testing our hypotheses about using stem cells as therapeutics," Glass said. "We do not know if these treatments will work, and it will take time to test these therapies in a systematic and safe way."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provided a lot of detail on the harms noted in the study, earning it a Satisfactory rating in this criterion, albeit with caveats.
Certainly, the bar for safety may be lower for ALS than for other diseases, but we think the story misleads by calling the treatment “generally safe.” As the story explains, two of the 15 patients developed “severe complications,” including partial paralysis and “incapacitating pain.” More detail is warranted here. In fact, the 15 patients in the study experienced a total of 81 adverse events that researchers said were probably or definitely related to the treatment, mainly surgery. While most of these were not serious, they may have reduced the quality of life at least temporarily for patients who probably have little time left to live. In addition, these patients spent several days in a hospital going through an uncomfortable procedure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TAMPA, Fla. (Jan. 3, 2016) - Deregulation and inhibition of the immune system contributes to cancer development. Many therapeutic strategies aim to re-stimulate the immune system to recognize cancer cells and target them for destruction. Researchers from Moffitt Cancer Center report that a dendritic cell vaccine that targets the HER2 protein on breast cancer cells is safe and effectively stimulates the immune system leading to regression of early-stage breast cancer.

The HER2 protein is overexpressed in 20-25% of all breast cancer tumors and is associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis. Researchers have previously shown that immune cells are less able to recognize and target cancer cells that express HER2 as breast cancer progresses into a more advanced and invasive stage. This suggests that strategies that can restimulate the immune system to recognize and target HER2 early during cancer development may be effective treatment options.

The researchers previously developed a vaccine that helps the immune system recognize the HER2 protein on breast cancer cells. Their approach involves creating the vaccine from immune cells called dendritic cells that are harvested from each individual patient to create a personalized vaccine.

In order to determine if the HER2-dendritic cell vaccine is safe and effective, the researchers performed a clinical trial in 54 women who have HER2-expressing early-stage breast cancer. The dendritic cell vaccines were prepared by isolating dendritic cells from each patients' blood and exposing them to fragments of the HER2 protein. Patients were injected with a dose of their personal dendritic cell vaccine once a week for 6 weeks into either a lymph node, the breast tumor, or into both sites.

The researchers report that the dendritic cell vaccines were well-tolerated and patients only experienced low-grade toxicities. The most common adverse events were fatigue, injection site reactions, and chills. They also show that the vaccine was able to stimulate an immune response in the majority of the patients. Approximately 80% of evaluable patients had a detectable immune response in their peripheral blood and/or in their sentinel lymph node wherein their cancer is most likely to spread to first. Importantly, the immune responses among the patients were similar, regardless of the route of vaccine administration.

The Moffitt researchers assessed the effectiveness of the vaccine by determining the percentage of patients who had detectable disease within surgical specimens after resection. The absence of disease is termed a pathological complete response (pCR). They report that 13 patients achieved a pCR and patients who had early non-invasive disease called ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) achieved a higher rate of pCR than patients who had early-stage invasive disease. Interestingly, patients who achieved a pCR had a higher immune response within their local sentinel lymph nodes.

"These results suggest that vaccines are more effective in DCIS, thereby warranting further evaluation in DCIS or other minimal disease settings, and the local regional sentinel lymph node may serve as a more meaningful immunologic endpoint," said Brian J. Czerniecki, MD, PhD, Chair of the Department of Breast Oncology at Moffitt Cancer Center.

The study was published in the December 13th online issue of Clinical Cancer Research and was supported by funds received from R01-CA096997, P30-CA016520, Pennies-in-Action®, and the Henle Foundation.

Moffitt is dedicated to one lifesaving mission: to contribute to the prevention and cure of cancer. The Tampa-based facility is one of only 47 National Cancer Institute-designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers, a distinction that recognizes Moffitt's excellence in research, clinical trials, prevention and cancer control. Moffitt is the No. 6 cancer hospital in the nation and has been listed in U.S. News & World Report as one of the "Best Hospitals" for cancer care since 1999. Moffitt devotes more than 2.5 million square feet to research and patient care. Moffitt's expert nursing staff is recognized by the American Nurses Credentialing Center with Magnet® status, its highest distinction. With more than 5,200 team members, Moffitt has an economic impact in the state of $2.1 billion. For more information, call 1-888-MOFFITT (1-888-663-3488), visit MOFFITT.org, and follow the momentum on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that the vaccines were “well-tolerated and patients only experienced low-grade toxicities. The most common adverse events were fatigue, injection site reactions, and chills.”  The release would have been better if it had told us how often these side effects occurred in the patient volunteers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 7, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Evidence is mounting that a marijuana-derived oil might benefit some children with epilepsy whose seizures aren't controlled by approved medications, two new studies show.

Cannabidiol (CBD) significantly reduced seizures in as many as half of children with epilepsy, researchers planned to report Monday at the American Epilepsy Society's annual meeting, in Philadelphia.

But experts say these positive findings may have been influenced by a "placebo effect." All participants in these studies knew they were taking the oil, which could have affected reports of its effectiveness.

"We know that our placebo rates can be as high as 30 percent, and sometimes higher," said Dr. Amy Brooks-Kayal, American Epilepsy Society president, who wasn't involved in the studies.

"We don't know the real effect of the cannabidiol, and we won't until we complete the studies that are ongoing that are placebo-controlled and blinded," added Brooks-Kayal, who is also a professor of pediatrics, neurology and pharmaceutical sciences at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.

There also are concerns that cannabidiol may interact badly with some anti-seizure medications approved for epilepsy treatment, according to another study scheduled for presentation at the meeting.

Cannabidiol is a major chemical component of marijuana, said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, a neurologist at NYU Langone Medical Center's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center in New York City and co-author of one of the studies.

CBD doesn't produce intoxication like pot's other major chemical compound, THC. But, researchers believe it may interact with a brain receptor that plays a role in the development of seizures, Devinsky said.

"This receptor has several effects, but one of them may be to modulate the calcium inside and outside the neuron, which is very much related to the excitability of nerve cells," he explained.

Previous studies have shown some benefit in adults, and word has spread. Families with adults and children with epilepsy have flocked to states where medical marijuana is legal to seek treatment, Brooks-Kayal said.

"There is a fairly active and vocal group of families in Colorado who are using cannabidiol oils that are made artisanally," she said.

To see whether children with epilepsy would benefit from cannabidiol treatment, Devinsky led a study involving 261 people, mostly children, whose seizures had not been controlled using current anti-seizure medications. The average age of the participants was 11.

Everyone received a British-made cannabidiol oil called Epidiolex, which was administered as a drop on the tongue, Devinsky said. This was in addition to their current drug therapy.

After three months, seizure frequency declined by an average 45 percent in all participants. Almost half experienced a 50 percent or greater reduction in seizures, and about one of every 10 patients became seizure-free, the study found.

"This was a very, very treatment-resistant group, and the response was very promising," Devinsky said.

A second study from the University of California, San Francisco, explored the long-term effectiveness of cannabidiol for children with epilepsy, by adding the marijuana-derived oil to the regular drug regimen of about 25 kids for one year.

The study found that after a year, the treatment resulted in a 50 percent reduction in seizures for 10 participants -- about 40 percent of the group. One child remained seizure-free, but 12 of the initial participants dropped out of the study because the cannabidiol didn't seem to do them any good.

Although he said he would prescribe CBD to people with uncontrolled seizures, Devinsky said he is "very anxious" to see the results of ongoing randomized, controlled clinical trials. The results of one major trial are expected in the first quarter of 2016, he added.

If CBD proves effective in controlled trials, it could be two to five years before the drug is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Devinsky noted.

Federal regulators also will have to weigh potential interactions of cannabidiol with other anti-seizure drugs. Another study scheduled for presentation at the meeting found that CBD appeared to enhance the effects of the epilepsy medication levetiracetam (Keppra), when given to lab mice.

However, the oil appeared to interact negatively with two other drugs, clobazam (Onfi) and carbamazepine (Tegretol), the University of Utah researchers found.

Data and conclusions presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more on medical marijuana, visit the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The subheadline declares that “drug interactions remain a concern,” and story includes reference to a study that found cannabidiol to interact “badly” with anti-seizure medications currently approved for epilepsy treatment. It later specifies the drugs that may be affected. We think this nod in the direction of harms is sufficient for a Satisfactory rating, although we’re concerned that the story mentions no other side effects from the treatment. A news release noted that “Adverse events occurred in more than 10 percent of participants with the most common being somnolence, diarrhea and fatigue and led to discontinuation in 4 percent of patients.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Dec. 7, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Hot flashes, a common curse in menopause, can be especially bothersome after breast cancer. But a new study suggests an existing medication may help.

The drug is oxybutynin (Ditropan XL), long used to treat urinary incontinence.

The study found that women taking the medicine had an average of five fewer hot flashes a week, compared with three fewer among women taking a placebo.

"Oxybutynin is an option that can control these symptoms and improve quality of life," said lead researcher Dr. Roberto Leon-Ferre, an assistant professor of oncology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

There are a couple of reasons for severe hot flashes after breast cancer. Chemotherapy may induce early menopause, and drugs that reduce estrogen levels may make hot flashes worse, the research team noted.

Hormone replacement therapy, which is often recommended for menopausal symptoms, is generally not advised for breast cancer survivors. That's left women who can't take hormones at a disadvantage.

Oxybutynin blocks a substance in the brain, and one of its side effects is decreased sweating, Leon-Ferre noted.

"Because of this, we can take advantage of the 'side effect' and decrease involuntary sweating associated with hot flashes, and decrease the hot flashes as well," he explained.

The drug could be game-changing for certain women, said Dr. Alice Police, regional director of breast surgery at Northwell Health Cancer Institute in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y.

"This is a really important advance in survivorship and compassionate cancer care," added Police, who wasn't involved in the study.

Because oxybutynin is already available for other conditions, Leon-Ferre said doctors could prescribe it off-label.

However, he cautioned that its long-term effects aren't known. Drugs in this class -- called anticholinergics -- have been linked with mental decline, he said.

For example, the drugs may raise the risk for problems with short-term memory, reasoning and confusion, and may also hike the risk for dementia among older patients, studies indicate.

For the new study, Leon-Ferre and his colleagues randomly assigned 150 women who experienced at least 28 hot flashes a week to oxybutynin or a placebo.

Almost two-thirds were also taking drugs to prevent a return of breast cancer, either tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor.

The women were randomly assigned to one of three groups: low-dose oxybutynin twice a day for six weeks; low-dose oxybutynin for one week followed by an increased dose; or a placebo.

Both doses appeared to reduce hot flashes better than the placebo.

And oxybutynin doesn't interfere with the metabolism of tamoxifen, Leon-Ferre said, calling that an important consideration for breast cancer survivors.

Most insurance covers oxybutynin, and a month's supply can range from $21 to $42. With insurance, copays would be less, he added.

Side effects included constipation, mild diarrhea, dry mouth, dry eyes, episodes of confusion and difficulty urinating, the researchers found.

Women taking oxybutynin also reported improvement in work, social activities, leisure activities, sleep and overall quality of life.

These are vital issues, Police said. "I will never forget the first time a patient said, 'Thank you for curing my breast cancer, but you ruined my life,' " she said.

The patient said endocrine therapy had caused hot flashes so severe that she could not sleep. As a result, she was having trouble at work and in all other aspects of her life, Police recalled.

"Her intimate relationship was also suffering, as nighttime had become a battleground between her and her internal temperature control," Police said.

The patient said she was willing to stop her hormone therapy and risk the return of breast cancer rather than live with her current symptoms, she said.

"This study makes me hopeful that these patients may have a way out of their dilemma," Police said. "Instead of just telling them they should be happy to be alive, we may be able to offer a reliable treatment for some of the debilitating side effects of our treatments for breast cancer."

The research was scheduled to be presented Friday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas. Studies presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until peer-reviewed for publication in a medical journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about hot flashes and cancer survivors.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article says that side effects included constipation, mild diarrhea, dry mouth, dry eyes, episodes of confusion and difficulty urinating. It’s not noted if these side effects were seen in both the low-dose and high-dose groups. There is also no indication of which side effects were most common or how many women experienced them.
Importantly, though, the article does note that the long-term effects of the drug aren’t known and that oxybutynin is in a class of drugs that “have been linked with mental decline” and that previous studies have found “the drugs may raise the risk for problems with short-term memory, reasoning and confusion, and may also hike the risk for dementia among older patients.”
Information on ClincalTrials.gov about the trial suggests this study evaluated two doses in an effort to find an effective dose with fewer side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Just an avocado a day can significantly lower your cholesterol and reduce the risk of heart disease, a new study shows.

Avocados are rich in so-called healthy fats and other nutrients and the study, published in the Journal of the American Heart Association, shows the creamy fruit can work within weeks to lower cholesterol.



Just like olive oil and nuts, avocados have plaque-busting monounsaturated fatty acids, and the effects seem similar to all the benefits from a Mediterranean diet, the researchers said.

And it’s one more piece of evidence in favor of adding good fats to the diet.

“In the past, we used to substitute carbohydrate for saturated fat, and that would result in a low-fat diet,” said Penny Kris-Etherton, chair of the American Heart Association’s Nutrition Committee and distinguished professor of nutrition at Pennsylvania State University.

“Now we're seeing that it's better for people to have good fats in their diet at the expense of saturated fat. And so the current message is to replace saturated fat with unsaturated fat, and in so doing, consume a moderate-fat diet, not too much, and also not too little,” Kris-Etherton told NBC News.

Kris-Etherton and colleagues did an intensive study with 45 typical Americans – all overweight or obese, but with healthy cholesterol and blood pressure levels.

It’s tough to test diets in real life, because people eat so many different things, but the team controlled what everyone ate, feeding them carefully calibrated diets. One was a lower-fat diet without avocado, another was a moderate-fat diet without avocado, and the third added one avocado per day to the moderate-fat diet.

The two moderate-fat diets looked a lot like the average American diet, with about a third of calories coming from fat. The lower fat diet provided 24 percent of calories from fat.

Everyone spent five weeks on each diet. No one lost weight, but their low-density lipoprotein (LDL or “bad” cholesterol) levels changed.

“All diets decreased LDL cholesterol, the main lipid risk factor for cardiovascular disease. But the diet with the avocado decreased LDL cholesterol the most,” Kris-Etherton said.

Americans are advised to keep total cholesterol below 200 and preferably below 180. LDL should be below 100.

While they were eating the avocado-a-day diet, the volunteers saw their LDL go down by more than 13 points compared to their usual levels, Kris-Etherton’s team reported in the Journal of the American Heart Association.

LDL was 8.3 points lower on the moderate-fat diet without the avocado and 7.4 points less on the lower-fat diet.

The volunteers all ate Hass avocados, which have bumpy green skin. The Hass Avocado Board helped pay for the research, which was also funded by the U.S. government.

In addition to monounsaturated fats, the avocados contain fiber, phytosterols and polyphenols – all of which can help lower cholesterol. Avocados also contain natural sugars that may help regulate blood sugar.

“We need to focus on getting people to eat a heart-healthy diet that includes avocados and other nutrient-rich food sources of better fats,” Kris-Etherton said.

“All the foods were exactly the same, except the avocado versus oils that were high in monounsaturated fat on the moderate-fat diet. So that was the only difference between the two diets, which then tells us that it's the avocado that has additional benefits which are beyond the unsaturated fat.”

The findings are similar to a batch of studies that showed people who were given olive oil and nuts and told to add them to their diets ended up healthier. They were less likely to have strokes or heart attacks, and they were less likely to die over a period of years than people who didn’t get the extra oils.

Saturated fat – the kind found in meat and butter – has a different chemical structure from the unsaturated fats found in plant products. Repeated studies have shown it raises the risk of heart disease.



“We studied avocados but maybe a lot of other fruits and vegetables have these bioactive components which have additional cholesterol-lowering effects,” Kris-Etherton said. “And certainly there's an emerging research base showing that some of these bioactive components may affect another lipoprotein particle favorably, like high-density lipoprotein. I think we need to stay tuned for that. “

Americans may not be used to eating avocado but Kris-Etherton says it’s easy to add.

“Consumers can include avocados in their diet in salads. They can include avocados on top of a sandwich, or in a sandwich. They can make guacamole and use vegetables rather than chips as the dip,” she said.

“I love guacamole and with my recipe, I'll use avocados, cilantro, lime juice and garlic... and then sometimes I'll put salsa in, or red pepper flakes.”

But like anything, too much of a good thing can be harmful. Avocados are definitely not low-calorie food.

“One avocado has around 200 to 250 calories. So I would strongly urge people not to just add an avocado a day to their diet but they have to substitute nutrient-poor calories, which are so popular in the U.S. diet.,” Kris-Etherton said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explicitly states that “too much of a good thing can be harmful,” explaining that avocados are high in calories. The story quotes a researcher associated with the study as saying that people should not simply add avocados to their current diets, but find a way to incorporate the avocado into their diets without increasing overall calorie consumption. That’s the best discussion of this issue that we’ve seen in any of the four stories we reviewed on this topic.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jan. 13, 2010 - A new anticlotting drug works better than Plavix, one of the most prescribed and most profitable drugs in the world, a huge clinical trial finds.

The new kid on the block is AstraZeneca's ticagrelor, to be named Brilinta if the experimental drug gets FDA approval.

That approval seems likely, given the results of a new clinical trial that compared Plavix to Brilinta in patients with acute coronary syndromes who had stents placed in their arteries to improve blood flow. Such patients need anticlotting drugs because blood clots can be a deadly complication of getting a stent.

Plavix is the drug most often used to prevent this complication. But there's a problem with Plavix, and with a newer, stronger drug in the same class called Effient.

Both drugs increase the risk of dangerous bleeding. And since the drugs irreversibly bind to blood-clotting platelets, a patient has to stop taking these drugs for five to seven days before the body can make enough new platelets.

Brilinta lets go of platelets more quickly than Plavix -- in about two or three days. And in the new study, patients had less bleeding after stent installation.

That's probably why the 6,732 study patients who got Brilinta were 16% less likely to die, or have a heart attack or stroke, than were the 6,676 patients who got Plavix. Brilinta reduced overall death rates by 1.1% .

"We estimate that use of [Brilinta] instead of [Plavix] for one year in 1,000 patients with acute coronary syndromes and who are planning to undergo an invasive strategy at the start of drug treatment would lead to 11 fewer deaths, 13 fewer myocardial infarctions, and six fewer cases of stent [clotting] without an increase in the rates of major bleeding or transfusion," conclude study researcher Christopher P. Cannon, MD, and colleagues.

The findings impress Columbia University researcher Gregg W. Stone, MD. Stone has in the past received honoraria from the makers of both Plavix and Brilinta and serves on the advisory boards of Boston Scientific and Abbott Vascular.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The story did discuss the main harm – the difference in bleeding – and that since  ticagrelor must be taken twice a day, missing a dose can be very dangerous since the drug wears off so quickly.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Evidence suggests it may not only be good for mind and body, but also for a long life

The consensus--one of the first of its kind--comes on the eve of the Ryder Cup, the biennial golf tournament between Europe and the US.

Amid a growing body of evidence on the health impacts of the sport, the consensus aims to help current and would-be players maximise the health pros and minimise the health cons of golf, and to guide policy-makers and industry leaders on how best to make golf more inclusive and accessible and so encourage more people from all walks of life to take up the sport.

The statement draws on a systematic review of the available published evidence (342 eligible studies) and discussions among an international working group of 25 experts in public health and health policy, and industry leaders.

Agreement was reached on 79 statements in three areas. These set out what is currently known about golf's associations with health; the factors that may help or hinder take-up of the sport; and a series of recommendations for golfers, industry leaders, and policy makers on how best to maximise its health benefits, promote sustainability, and widen participation.

The evidence shows that playing golf regularly is associated with longevity and reducing the risk factors for heart disease/stroke. And it can boost older people's strength and balance.

The sport is also associated with good mental health and improving the overall health of those with disabilities.

Compared with other sports, the risk of injury is moderate, but as it's an outdoor activity, golfers may be more at risk of skin cancer.

Golf is sociable, and gets people outdoors, connecting with nature. It can provide moderate intensity aerobic physical activity, and its health benefits are greatest for players (and spectators) who walk round the course rather than opt for a golf cart.

While around 60 million people play golf at least twice every year, the participant profile is quite narrow: players tend to be middle aged to older, male, of white European heritage, relatively well off, and living in North America, Europe, and Australasia.

And the sport is often perceived as expensive, male dominated, difficult to learn, and not a game for the young or those on the lower rungs of the social ladder.

This can put people off, says the statement. The sport needs to be more inclusive and welcoming of people from all walks of life and ethnic backgrounds, and any such initiatives should be supported, it says.

More people might be keen to take it up if golf were promoted as an enjoyable, lifelong outdoors activity that affords a sense of community and competitive challenge while providing some 'me time' as well as helping to fulfil recommended exercise quotas, says the statement.

And the sport can do its bit for sustainability by "practices that prioritise diversity, healthy societies, connection with, and care of, the environment, environmental integrity and health and wellbeing," the statement suggests.

Among its raft of recommendations, the consensus statement says that:
• Should aim to play for 150 minutes/week, or do less, but couple golf with other physical activity, and walk the course rather than ride a golf cart
• Do warm-up/strengthening exercises to cut the risk of injury and use sun-cream and wear collared shirts/blouses to minimise the risk of skin cancer
• Build on existing initiatives to promote inclusivity and develop environments and price structures that will be attractive to everyone
• Develop a culture that will inspire more women and girls to play golf
• Make every effort to promote equality and diversity, and boost accessibility
• Promote sustainability through wildlife conservation and by restricting the use of water, energy, and pesticides
• Provide additional facilities at clubs, such as a gym, walking routes, crèches and improve the focus on health and safety, with the provision of healthy foods, defibrillators, and speed limiters on golf carts, for example
• Promote the benefits of regular physical activity, including golf, for people of all ages, genders, and income brackets
• Work with industry and national associations to boost take up of the sport, particularly in groups where physical activity levels are low
• Work with industry and regulatory bodies to get golf included in the Paralympics

"These outputs, if widely shared and adopted, will contribute to an improved understanding of golf and health, and aid these groups in making evidence-informed decisions and to improve health and wellbeing," the consensus statement concludes.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The only potential harm from golf mentioned is an increased risk for skin cancer. It’s an important inclusion that prompts us to give a barely passing grade.
This nebulous statement is also included: “Compared with other sports, the risk of injury is moderate.” (Rugby and mixed martial arts come to mind).
What’s not mentioned is a host of musculoskeletal injuries related to the repetitive and asymmetric nature of swinging a golf club.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 3, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- A new class of sleep medications appears to help people fall asleep without causing grogginess the next day, researchers say.

These new medications -- known as dual orexin receptor antagonists (DORA) -- target a more specific region of the brain than popular sleep drugs such as Ambien and Lunesta, promoting sleep without affecting learning and memory (also called "cognition"), according to the new research.

"We've shown that these compounds improve sleep at doses that don't impact cognition," said Jason Uslaner, lead author of a study published in the April 3 issue of Science Translational Medicine. Uslaner is director of In Vivo Pharmacology at Merck & Co., which funded the study.

Merck already has one such drug, suvorexant, under review by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

More than 30 million Americans struggle to get a good night's sleep, and about one-third of these use drugs to help the process, the study authors pointed out.

But widely prescribed sleep medications such as Ambien (zolpidem) and Lunesta (eszopiclone) can leave people feeling hung over and inattentive the next day. So much so that the FDA recently cut recommended doses of Ambien and other drugs that contain zolpidem for fear that their use, even the night before, might impair driving or other activities the next day.

Lunesta and Ambien affect GABA receptors, which are found throughout the brain and are associated with side effects, including thinking disturbances, and deficits in attention and memory, explained Uslaner.

About 15 years ago, scientists discovered chemical messengers known as orexins, which are released by a relatively small brain region known as the lateral hypothalamus. This area of the brain releases orexins during the day to keep us awake and lowers levels at night so we can sleep.

The appeal of orexin antagonists, said Dr. Michael Thorpy, director of the Sleep-Wake Disorders Center at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, is that they "target a system that's more specific for sleep."

That means, theoretically, fewer side effects and perhaps less of a tendency to be habit forming, Thorpy explained.

Uslaner and his colleagues investigated a compound called DORA-22, which has the same mechanism of action as suvorexant, to see how it fared alongside not only Ambien and Lunesta but also diazepam (Valium) in rats and rhesus monkeys.

DORA-22 did not lead to the same mental impairments as the other three drugs. Rhesus monkeys and rats performed just as well on memory and attention tasks shortly after being administered DORA-22 as they did on an inactive placebo.

In each case, the minimum dose to achieve sleep was compared with the minimum dose that altered memory and thinking. DORA-22 promoted sleep at lower doses than those that impaired mental skills when compared with the "control" drugs.

This is the first time in years that scientists have targeted a totally different receptor in the quest to combat insomnia, said Dr. Alexandre Abreu, co-director of the UHealth Sleep Center at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

But many questions remain: Do the drugs truly have fewer side effects? Will they be habit forming? And will they change the quality of sleep in any way?

Those questions will only be answered with more testing and use in humans, he said.

Experts note that findings from animal studies do not always hold up in human trials.

The U.S. National Institutes of Health has more on insomnia.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag.
While the study did not examine the effects of DORA-22 in any detail it did in fact look at level of cognition in the animals studied.  While the story notes, “DORA-22 did not lead to the same mental impairments as the other three drugs. Rhesus monkeys and rats performed just as well on memory and attention tasks shortly after being administered DORA-22 as they did on an inactive placebo,” it fails to note that cognition was impaired at higher doses.  This is a major error in interpretation of the study results.
Although we would prefer to see potential harms mentioned as high up in stories as potential benefits, this story does highlight questions about harms at the end, so at least those who read the whole story are alerted to the many unknowns.
Because of that ending, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt and grade it satisfactory on this criterion.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For Headaches, A Lifestyle Change May Be Better Than A Doctor Visit

Terri Bradford has suffered debilitating headaches all her life. Some days the pain is so bad, she says, "By 11 o'clock in the morning, I'm on the couch in a darkened room with my head packed in ice."

Over the years, Bradford, who is 50 years old and lives in Bedford, Mass., has searched desperately for pain relief. She's been to the doctor countless times for countless tests. "Everything I've had, I've had twice," she says. "I've had two spinal taps; I've had so many nerve blocks I've lost count."

Bradford is not alone. It's estimated that every year 12 million Americans go to the doctor seeking help for headaches. Nearly one quarter of the population suffers from recurrent severe tension headaches or migraines.

People who go to the doctor for headaches are increasingly likely to be sent for advanced testing and treatment, a study finds. That testing is expensive, it may not be necessary and it could even be harmful, says lead researcher Dr. John Mafi, of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston.

Mafi looked at the rates of advanced imaging like CT scans and MRIs in people with headaches, as well as referrals to other doctors, presumably specialists. He found that from 1999 to 2010, the number of diagnostic tests rose from 6.7 percent of all doctor visits to 13.9 percent. At the same time, referrals to other doctors increased from 6.9 percent to 13.2 percent. In other words, almost double what it was a decade ago.

Mafi says this isn't because more people are suffering headaches. The headache rate has remained virtually the same over the past decade. But what has changed is supply and demand. Today there are a lot more advanced diagnostic machines than there were a decade ago, and more patients are asking to be tested.

"Patients are more assertive than ever before," Mafi says. "They do research online, are more informed and sometimes go to the doctor demanding, 'I think I need an MRI.' "

And while an informed patient is a good thing, Mafi says sometimes the patient gets it wrong. "I think there's a subconscious perception that more is better, and that fancier, more expensive tests are better and that equals better care."

Mafi's study did not include patients with tumors or other serious problems that can cause headaches. He only looked at otherwise healthy patients who suffered chronic headaches. And in these cases, repeated diagnostic testing can lead to further unnecessary procedures like biopsies.

On top of that, exposure to radiation in tests like CT scans adds up over time and can increase the risk of certain cancers.

For Terri Bradford, the years of searching for effective treatment proved futile. "I've been to four neurologists. A lot of them have given up on me because I haven't gotten any better," she says.

Eventually Bradford ended up at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, where neurologist Carolyn Bernstein directs the Comprehensive Headache Center. Bernstein says she sees lots of desperate patients like Bradford. "The majority of them have really been suffering a number of years and they're really miserable with the pain," Bernstein says. They say, " 'I hope you have a magic pill,' and of course there is no magic pill."

There is just no single reason why people get chronic headaches, although we do know that migraines have a genetic component and usually a trigger. "If you are a migraine sufferer and I expose you to the right trigger, you're going to have a migraine," Bernstein says.

But the triggers are different for different people. They can include poor diet, too much sugar or certain types of alcohol. Problems sleeping, stress, lack of exercise or a combination of any number of these things can cause chronic headaches.

At the headache center, patients receive a thorough medical history that includes headache patterns, disability and mood assessments. Then the center works with patients to try to identify what triggers their headaches and how they can avoid those triggers in the future.

Some people find relief through exercise. "I write an exercise prescription probably as often as I write a prescription for medication," Bernstein says. She acknowledges it's sometimes difficult to encourage a patient with cracking head pain to get up and exercise. But even a little can help, and according to Bernstein it doesn't have to be jogging for miles and miles. It can be yoga, tai chi or even just a little stretching.

A big lifestyle adjustment worked for Terri Bradford. She started exercising and changed her diet, giving up gluten, dairy and sugar. And she learned how to meditate to reduce stress. All these changes, she says, have made a huge difference. She has far fewer headaches and when she does have them, they're far less severe. "I'm finally healing," she says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: A strong point of this story is that it does explore the potential harm from unnecessary diagnostic tests. We applaud the mention, as too few stories address this phenomenon, but the facts that are presented to help the audience understand why a test would be harmful are somewhat confusing. The story says:
Mafi’s study did not include patients with tumors or other serious problems that can cause headaches. He only looked at otherwise healthy patients who suffered chronic headaches. And in these cases, repeated diagnostic testing can lead to further unnecessary procedures like biopsies. On top of that, exposure to radiation in tests like CT scans adds up over time and can increase the risk of certain cancers.
In other words, diagnostic tests could find something like a tumor that is causing a headache or early bleeding in the brain prior to an aneurysm, for example. But those people weren’t part of this study so we have no way to make a true comparison to people who had a test and found a problem versus people who had an unnecessary test.
The story should have explained the exclusion of patients with tumors more clearly. The patients here are chronic headache patients, as opposed to people who have developed headache as a new symptom or a new type of headache. Depending on their presentation, the latter two may need a series of tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jessie Quinn of Sacramento was 36 years old when loss of appetite, weight loss, some eye issues and finally pelvic pain sent her to the emergency room in 2010. Tests quickly revealed she had acute myeloid leukemia — a type of blood cancer that progresses quickly — and doctors told her that chemotherapy would probably not be enough; she would need a bone-marrow transplant.

Quinn, who has a science background, knew that finding a donor would be difficult. In college, she had donated to a bone-marrow registry after learning that people like her, with a mixed racial heritage, have a much harder time than others finding a match.

In fact, when she and her doctors scoured the registry for a match for her, only one name came up: her own.

“I didn’t know whether to laugh or cry,” Quinn said.

While searching unsuccessfully for a match for five months, Quinn underwent four cycles of chemotherapy to keep the leukemia at bay. What eventually saved her, though, was an experimental transplant using stem cells from the blood of a baby’s umbilical cord, an approach that can be used without perfectly matching blood types.

This therapy and another — haploidentical transplantation, which uses bone-marrow cells that are only half-matched to a patient — have revolutionized the treatment of blood cancers in the past few years. Every biological child is a half-match for a parent, and vice versa.

“Many patients who previously died for lack of a match are now cured of their underlying malignancy,” said Richard Jones, director of the bone-marrow transplant program at Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center.

Bone-marrow transplants, which infuse healthy blood cells taken from a donor, are used when chemotherapy and radiation fail to stop cancerous blood cells from taking over and ultimately destroying a person’s immune system.

The transplant can be taken from either the blood or bone marrow, which produces blood cells. The procedure is typically preceded by high doses of chemotherapy and radiation that wipe out the patient’s faulty blood cells and replace them with healthy ones from a donor.

The process is dangerous because it leaves a patient vulnerable to life-threatening infection for months before the reconstituted immune system begins to work.

In the past, a patient’s body would reject as a foreign intruder anything but a perfect or near-perfect match, a usually fatal development. Umbilical-cord stem cells, however, are sort of a blank slate because they haven’t been exposed to much life — such as bacteria and viruses — and thus are more easily accepted even if they aren’t a perfect match.

When Quinn’s doctors found no match on the donor registry, she turned to a clinical trial examining the safety of taking blood cells from umbilical cords, expanding their numbers in a laboratory and then infusing them into patients.

Because each umbilical cord produces only a tiny number of stem cells, umbilical-cord transplants take longer to work than standard transplants, which makes patients more likely to get fatal infections. And if cells from several umbilical cords are used, the chances of immunity problems increase.

This expanded cord-blood technique has been a “huge home run” for patients, said Colleen Delaney of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, who helped create it.

“No one had successfully taken stem cells and gotten them to grow and put back in a person,” she said. The advance should be particularly valuable for minorities and people of mixed-race background, whose chances of finding a matched donor were slim to none.

“This is where cord blood becomes an amazing and beautiful resource,” Delaney said. “We can find cord-blood donors for 99 percent of patients who cannot find a donor.”

Quinn was hospitalized for 30 days, and she said the recovery was difficult but relatively uneventful. Mostly she had to deal with overwhelming fatigue for the first year. She also developed graft-versus-host disease, which caused rashes when her skin was exposed to the sun. But she has been free of cancer for five years.

She remembers learning that she had leukemia and assuming that she would soon die.

“It still gives me pause — I went to Costa Rica — that I am able to travel and went backpacking and kayaking,” Quinn says. “I was so sure I would never get to do those things again. It’s an indescribable feeling.”

In haploidential transplants, rather than wiping out the patient’s immune system, doctors use just enough drugs to suppress it. This reduces the risk of damaging organs or causing a rejection of the donated marrow.

“Parents are always haploidentical. Children are always haploidentical,” Jones said. “Siblings are half the time and all second-degree relatives (grandchildren, nieces, nephews) have a 50 percent chance of being a half-match. . . . Everybody now has a donor, and that is a major advance.”

Yet doctors and patients may not be aware there are choices other than conventional bone-marrow transplants, Jones said.

“Despite the recent data showing equivalency of half-matched and cord-blood transplants with conventional matched transplants, many cancer doctors and even some transplant doctors still consider these newer transplants not standard practice,” Jones said. “There are still lots of patients in need of transplants that are not getting them because of lack of matched donors, and that is unacceptable in the year 2016.”

Jones estimates that about 7,500 transplants of donated stem cells were done in 2014 — primarily for leukemia and lymphoma but also for nonmalignant blood disorders such as sickle cell and aplastic anemia — but that more than 15,000 could easily be done annually if more doctors embraced the new methods now available.

Gregg Gordon, 44, developed leukemia in 2011. He noticed two bumps under his shin and had been feeling unusually tired. He went to his internist, who drew blood and within 24 hours Gordon was in the hospital receiving chemotherapy.

His wife, Caryn, recalls how little they knew about his disease — acute myeloid leukemia — as doctors discussed treatment with them.

“We knew it would be a very long journey to battle this disease,” Caryn Gordon said. “He decided he would be focused on being the patient and said, ‘Do whatever you have to do with me because I want to walk my girls [who were then 12 and 16] down the aisle.’ ”

On advice of their hematologist, the Gordons traveled to Hutchinson, which has established a national reputation as a bone-marrow transplant center, but quickly discovered there was no good donor match.

“We thought we would find a match. It was extraordinarily shocking to us that it was impossible,” Caryn recalled.

According to Be the Match, which operates the national donor program, a patient’s likelihood of finding a donor match on their registry ranges from 66 to 97 percent, depending on ethnic background.

But Gregg Gordon was able to participate in Delaney’s clinical trial and, like Quinn, received lab-expanded cord blood following intensive chemotherapy and radiation. He also will be five years cancer-free in September.

Not everyone is as lucky. Quinn, Gordon and 11 other participants in Delaney’s clinical trial “are all alive, in remission, at a median age of about 4.7 years,” the researcher said, but two patients died when the disease relapsed.

A larger trial using umbilical cord blood that had been expanded in a lab is underway.

He beat leukemia, so why was he feeling so bad?

New therapies offer hope for a really bad brain cancer

Scientists just doubled the number of known contagious cancers
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story nicely raises the risk of cord blood transplantation and the risk of standard cancer therapies throughout the piece. For example, it says, “Because each umbilical cord produces only a tiny number of stem cells, umbilical-cord transplants take longer to work than standard transplants, which makes patients more likely to get fatal infections. And if cells from several umbilical cords are used, the chances of immunity problems increase.”
We do wish that the story made it clear earlier on that the new approach is preceded by intensive chemotherapy and the inherent side effects it entails.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cocoa confectioner Jacques Torres told CBS News Correspondent Michelle Miller that dark chocolate is wholesome goodness to its very core.

"When you take cocoa bean and break it between your hands, you get the nibs," Torres said. "The nibs don't contain any sugar and are full of antioxidants."

New research from Germany adds to mounting evidence linking dark chocolate with health benefits, but it's the first to suggest that just a tiny amount may suffice.

Volunteers for the study ate just over six grams of dark chocolate daily for almost five months — one square from a German chocolate bar called Ritter Sport, equal to about 1½ Hershey's Kisses. People who ate that amount ended up with lower blood pressure readings than those who ate white chocolate.

The researchers note that eating a small amount of dark chocolate daily is a dietary change that's "easy to adhere to," reports CBS News partner WebMD.

University of Cologne researcher Dr. Dirk Taubert, the study's lead author, said the blood pressure reductions with dark chocolate were small but still substantial enough to potentially reduce cardiovascular disease risks, although study volunteers weren't followed long enough to measure that effect.

The research involved just 44 people aged 56 through 73, but the results echo other small studies of cocoa-containing foods. Cocoa contains flavanols, plant-based compounds that also are credited with giving red wine its heart-healthy benefits.

One problem is chocolate bars containing cocoa tend to have lots of calories, so Taubert and his colleagues tested small amounts containing just 30 calories each.

The study appears in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association. It was funded by University Hospital in Cologne.

The results are interesting but need to be duplicated in larger, more ethnically diverse populations, said Dr. Laura Svetkey, director of Duke University's Hypertension Center.

She stressed that the study results should not be viewed as license to gorge on chocolate.

"I would be as happy as the next person if I got to eat more chocolate," she said. Svetsky cautioned that weight gain from eating large amounts of dark chocolate would counteract any benefits on blood pressure.

Study participants were otherwise healthy and mostly normal-weight German adults with mild high blood pressure or pre-hypertension, which includes readings between 120 over 80 and 139 over 89.

Average blood pressure at the start was about 147 over 86.

Every day for 18 weeks, the volunteers were instructed to eat one-square portions of a 16-square Ritter Sport bar, or a similar portion of white chocolate. White chocolate doesn't contain cocoa.

Systolic blood pressure, the top number, fell an average of nearly three points and diastolic dropped almost two points in the dark chocolate group, compared with no change in blood pressure readings in the white chocolate group.

Tests suggested that steady exposure to dark chocolate prompted chemical changes that helped dilate blood vessels and regulate blood pressure, the researchers said.

Participants were told not to eat other cocoa-containing products and to continue regular eating habits and activity levels. They also kept food diaries so researchers could see if other foods might have influenced the results.

But, said Taubert, "It is very unlikely that other factors may explain the blood pressure reduction."

Chocolate-makers have embraced these findings and have developed new ways to satisfy the sweet tooth and curb the guilt by introducing more varieties of dark chocolates, fortifying them with vitamins and anti-oxidants, reports Miller.

Dr. Lawrence Appel of Johns Hopkins School of Medicine said the most proven non-drug methods for lowering blood pressure are losing weight and eating less salt. Eating dark chocolate might help if combined with those two, he said.

The study was funded by the University Hospital of Cologne. In the journal, none of the researchers report financial ties to any chocolate companies.

For most people, "the lower your blood pressure, the better you are. So if you can get it lower from different strategies, that's good for the long term," Appel said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although not explicit, this piece did allude to weight gain as a potential problem with advocating consumption of chocolate.  It could have mentioned that with the portion of dark chocolate used in the study, no weight gain was seen during the 18 weeks of study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON, March 5, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc. (Vanda) (NASDAQ: VNDA) today announced that HETLIOZ®, a circadian regulator, demonstrated significant and clinically meaningful benefits in nighttime and daytime symptoms of jet lag disorder. HETLIOZ® is currently approved in the US and Europe for the treatment of Non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder, a rare and chronic circadian rhythm sleep disorder.

Jet lag disorder is a common circadian disorder frequently observed in millions of travelers who cross multiple time zones. Jet lag disorder is characterized by nighttime sleep disruption, a decrease in daytime alertness and impairment to social and occupational functioning.

The clinical efficacy results reported today are from the JET8 Phase-III clinical study (3107) (the JET8 study). In the JET8 study, 318 healthy volunteers were admitted to a sleep unit and were subjected to a circadian challenge of an 8 hours advance to their usual bedtime. The JET8 study design induced the circadian challenge experienced by travelers who cross 8 times zones, which leads to jet lag disorder. This clinical design allowed for the study of HETLIOZ® without the confounding effects of sleep deprivation and variable light conditions.

Results from the JET8 study showed significant and clinically meaningful effects of HETLIOZ® 20 mg on the primary endpoint of the study as well as multiple secondary endpoints. The pre-specified primary endpoint was the amount of sleep time in the first two thirds of the night. Secondary endpoints included measures of sleep parameters (TST, LPS, WASO) and next day alertness (KSS and VAS). (Table 1).

The results of the JET8 study shown above demonstrate the effectiveness of HETLIOZ® in treating jet lag disorder. The magnitude of the total sleep time benefit of 85 minutes improvement over placebo is significant and clinically meaningful. The demonstration of benefits in measurements of next day alertness on both KSS and VAS is meaningful and it underscores the ability of HETLIOZ® to address both nighttime and daytime symptoms of jet lag disorder.

Vanda previously reported on the JET5 study (3101) that examined the effects of HETLIOZ® in a circadian challenge of 5 hours advance of the subjects' usual bedtime. The results of that study were published in The Lancet in 2009.1 The observation that HETLIOZ® is effective in treating the symptoms caused by an abrupt advance of the circadian cycle of a magnitude of 5 or 8 hours suggests that HETLIOZ® will be an effective therapeutic tool in the treatment of individuals that experience symptoms of jet lag. HETLIOZ® will be potentially useful under circumstances of rapid eastward transmeridian travel experienced by frequent travelers, the rapid deployment of military troops and any circumstances that will necessitate the abrupt phase advance of the sleep wake cycle.

Jet lag disorder affects millions of individuals annually who cross multiple time zones during their travel. Jet lag disorder symptoms are more severe during eastward travel. It is reported that more than 30 million US residents make trips abroad each year to overseas destinations. Of these, 60% (approximately 20 million) travel to destinations in Europe, Middle East and Asia. It is also reported that 8% (approximately 1.6 million) travel in Business or First class.2

"We are extremely pleased with the outcome of this study which establishes the utility of HETLIOZ® in the treatment of jet lag disorder as HETLIOZ® was shown to overcome a significant circadian challenge of an 8 hour phase advance. This challenge is equivalent to eastward travel across 8 time zones as experienced for example on travel from Los Angeles to London, Washington DC to Moscow, Paris to Tokyo, or London to Singapore. HETLIOZ® improved both nighttime sleep and next day alertness potentially offering significant benefits to millions of travelers," said Mihael H. Polymeropoulos, MD, Vanda's President and CEO.

Vanda intends to seek marketing approval for the use of HETLIOZ® in the treatment of jet lag disorder. Vanda believes that if HETLIOZ® is approved by regulatory authorities for the treatment of jet lag disorder it will potentially offer a therapeutic solution to many travelers and will likely represent an important commercial opportunity for the company. For review of the current prescribing information of HETLIOZ® please visit www.hetlioz.com.

The Vanda management team will host a conference call and live webcast today, March 5, 2018, at 8:30 AM ET to discuss these updates. Investors can call 1-888-771-4371 (domestic) or 1-847-585-4405 (international) and use passcode 46600533. A replay of the call will be available on Monday, March 5, 2018, beginning at 11:00 AM ET and will be accessible until Monday, March 12, 2018, at 11:59 PM ET. The replay call-in number is 1-888-843-7419 for domestic callers and 1-630-652-3042 for international callers. The passcode number is 46600533.

The conference call will be broadcast simultaneously on Vanda's website. Investors should click on the Investor Relations tab and are advised to go to the website at least 15 minutes early to register, download, and install any necessary software or presentations. The call will also be archived on Vanda's website for a period of 30 days.

HETLIOZ® IS NOT CURRENTLY APPROVED BY ANY REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR THE TREATMENT OF JET LAG DISORDER.

HETLIOZ® is a melatonin receptor agonist. HETLIOZ® has been granted market authorization by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency. For full U.S. prescribing information, please visit www.hetlioz.com.

The most common adverse reactions (incidence >5% and at least twice as high on HETLIOZ® (tasimelteon) than on placebo) were headache, increased alanine aminotransferase, nightmares or unusual dreams, and upper respiratory or urinary tract infection. The risk of adverse reactions may be greater in elderly (>65 years) patients than younger patients because exposure to HETLIOZ® is increased by approximately 2-fold compared with younger patients.

HETLIOZ® is indicated for the treatment of Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Disorder (Non-24).

HETLIOZ® may cause somnolence: After taking HETLIOZ®, patients should limit their activity to preparing for going to bed, because HETLIOZ® can potentially impair the performance of activities requiring complete mental alertness.

The most common adverse reactions (incidence >5% and at least twice as high on HETLIOZ® than on placebo) were headache, increased alanine aminotransferase, nightmares or unusual dreams, and upper respiratory or urinary tract infection. The risk of adverse reactions may be greater in elderly (>65 years) patients than younger patients because exposure to HETLIOZ® is increased by approximately 2-fold compared with younger patients.

Use of HETLIOZ® should be avoided in combination with fluvoxamine or other strong CYP1A2 inhibitors, because of a potentially large increase in exposure of HETLIOZ®, and a greater risk of adverse reactions. HETLIOZ® should be avoided in combination with rifampin or other CYP3A4 inducers, because of a potentially large decrease in exposure of HETLIOZ®, with reduced efficacy.

There are no adequate and well-controlled studies of HETLIOZ® in pregnant women. Based on animal data, HETLIOZ® may cause fetal harm. HETLIOZ® should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risks. Caution should be exercised when HETLIOZ® is administered to a nursing woman.

HETLIOZ® has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment and is not recommended in these patients.

Safety and effectiveness of HETLIOZ® in pediatric patients have not been established.

Vanda is a global biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of innovative therapies to address high unmet medical needs and improve the lives of patients. For more on Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc., please visit www.vandapharma.com.

1. Rajaratnam SM, Polymeropoulos MH, Fisher DM, Roth T, Scott C, Birznieks G, Klerman E. Melatonin agonist tasimelteon (VEC-162) for transient insomnia after sleep-time shift: two randomized controlled multicenter trials. The Lancet. 2009: 373: 433-516.

2. US Department of Commerce, International Trade Administration, National Travel and Tourism Office. Profile of U.S. Resident Travelers Visiting Overseas Destinations: 2015 Outbound.

Various statements in this release and to be made on the conference call are "forward-looking statements" under the securities laws. Forward-looking statements are based upon current expectations that involve risks, changes in circumstances, assumptions and uncertainties. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those reflected in Vanda's forward-looking statements include, among others: the ability of HETIOZ® to provide significant benefit in the treatment of the symptoms of jet lag disorder; Vanda's ability to obtain marketing approval for the use of HETLIOZ® in the treatment of jet lag disorder; and other factors that are described in the "Risk Factors" and "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" sections of Vanda's annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017, which is on file with the SEC and available on the SEC's website at www.sec.gov. In addition to the risks described above and in Vanda's annual report on Form 10-K, other unknown or unpredictable factors also could affect Vanda's results. There can be no assurance that the actual results or developments anticipated by Vanda will be realized or, even if substantially realized, that they will have the expected consequences to, or effects on, Vanda. Therefore, no assurance can be given that the outcomes stated in such forward-looking statements and estimates will be achieved.

All written and verbal forward-looking statements attributable to Vanda or any person acting on its behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements contained or referred to herein. Vanda cautions investors not to rely too heavily on the forward-looking statements Vanda makes or that are made on its behalf. The information in this release is provided only as of the date of this release, and Vanda undertakes no obligation, and specifically declines any obligation, to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.

Corporate Contact:

Jim Kelly

Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer 

Vanda Pharmaceuticals Inc. 

(202) 734-3428

jim.kelly@vandapharma.com
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The end notes attached to the release describe potential harms in clear terms. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
While use of the products in such operations has since fallen, one expert said the new report should convince doctors to stop using them in anterior cervical fusions, as the procedure is known. The use of a bioengineered protein should be “discontinued either permanently or until further information becomes available regarding how to use it safely,” said Dr. Thomas A. Einhorn, chairman of orthopedic surgery at Boston University.

One form of the bioengineered protein is marketed by Medtronic under the brand name Infuse, and another form is sold by Stryker as OP-1 Putty.

Infuse is also at the center of a controversy in which Army officials have accused a Medtronic consultant who was a former military doctor of falsifying data in a study about the product. Medtronic recently suspended its relationship with that doctor, Timothy R. Kuklo.

Federal and state investigators are conducting separate investigations to determine whether either company illegally promoted off-label use of their products for procedures including cervical fusions. Both companies deny the accusations. Although doctors are free to use any product on the market for whatever purposes they choose, companies may promote them only for their federally approved uses.

The products’ use in cervical fusion procedures is a small component of their total sales, which reached an estimated $760.3 million in 2008, with Medtronic’s share the larger one, according to Millennium Research Group, a consulting firm in Toronto.

Marybeth Thorsgaard, a Medtronic spokeswoman, said the company was close to completing a clinical trial involving the use of Infuse in anterior cervical fusion. In a statement, she said the trial would help address how the procedure, if approved by federal regulators, “should be appropriately managed to minimize complications.”

Some experts have speculated that the adverse effects were dose-related. Medtronic has also noted such effects in Infuse’s warning label.

The study published Tuesday found that patients who had received the bioengineered proteins during spinal fusions for lower or middle back pain did not have increased complications when compared with those who did not get the product. But complications rates while patients were still in the hospital were 50 percent higher for cervical fusions procedures, researchers reported.

Dr. Kevin S. Cahill, a neurosurgeon at Brigham and Women’s, who led the study released Tuesday, said he believed the complication rates for the cervical fusion procedures were actually higher than those reported in the study because complications often occurred after a patient left the hospital.

“Ours is probably a bottom estimate,” Dr. Cahill said.

He added that the study also confirmed how quickly physicians had adopted the proteins both for approved and unapproved uses. By 2006, just four years after such products were first sold, the proteins were used in about 25 percent of all spinal fusions, the review found.

Dr. Richard A. Deyo, a spine expert who is a professor at Oregon Health and Science University in Portland, said the new study also suggested that the F.D.A could do a better job monitoring problems by analyzing hospitals records, just as Dr. Cahill and his colleagues had done.

The research team based its report on records collected through a database known as the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, which gathers information from 20 percent of the nation’s hospitals. The high complication rate was seen in 2006 data..

“I would have hoped that this sort of surveillance would be a routine part of F.D.A practice,” Dr. Deyo said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The harms associated with the use of bone-growth proteins in fusions to treat upper spine pain are the headline of the story – and the study it is based on. The story specifically notes that patients have reported life-threatening complications, including difficulty breathing and swelling of the neck.
The story would have been better if it had included some explanation of the number needed to treat in order to see an additional case of harm.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Panel Says Aspirin Lowers Heart Attack Risk For Some

Millions of Americans take baby aspirin every day to prevent a heart attack or stroke. If they are at high risk of heart disease, they're doing the right thing, according to draft recommendations issued Monday by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

The independent panel also said that taking low-dose aspirin daily for at least 10 years may protect against colorectal cancer, at least in people who are already taking it to prevent heart attacks and stroke.

Adults between the ages of 50 and 59 who have a 10 percent or greater risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 10 years benefit the most from taking about 81 milligrams of aspirin every day, the panel says.

But the potential benefit is smaller for adults between the ages of 60 and 69. And it's unknown for adults under 50 or over 70. People should talk with their health care provider to find out if they have health problems that would justify taking aspirin, according to Dr. Douglas Owens, a professor of medicine at Stanford University and a member of the task force.

For example, uncontrolled high blood pressure, or high cholesterol, obesity, age and diabetes can all increase heart disease risk. "Because heart attacks are caused by clots in the arteries of the heart, aspirin can help prevent heart attack and it can also help prevent strokes that are caused by blood clots," Owens says.

Several groups including the American Heart Association offer online calculators to help people figure out their risk, which, along with discussion with a health care provider, can help determine whether daily aspirin might be useful.

However, there is a caveat. Daily aspirin can cause bleeding in the stomach and brain. And Owens says that people with medical conditions like ulcers, kidney problems, liver problems or bleeding disorders are more vulnerable, as are people who take blood-thinning drugs and NSAIDs.

These new recommendations aren't final, and are open to public comment.

Concerns have been raised about whether aspirin is really effective enough, when so many other medicines are available to help control heart disease risk.

One physician with major concerns is Steven Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic, in Cleveland, Ohio. "I think that millions of Americans are taking aspirin — some of them are really the 'worried well,' " he says.

If people don't have a significantly increased risk of having a heart attack or stroke over the next decade, Nissen says, they may be "causing more harm than benefit."

And while many medical groups recommend daily aspirin to lower heart disease risk, not all federal agencies agree. The Food and Drug Administration actually issued a warning against routinely taking aspirin to prevent heart disease in people without significantly high risk.

Nissen worries that many people are mistaking their actual heart disease risk. "With all the good therapies, better blood pressure control, better cholesterol control, all the things we do in modern medicine," he says, "over the last couple of decades, we've had nearly a 50 percent reduction in the rate of cardiovascular disease."

People who don't really need to should not be taking aspirin every day, says Nissen. "It's just not prudent or safe," he says, noting that bleeding in the abdomen or brain is extremely dangerous and can be fatal. Nissen does agree with the general consensus that taking low dose aspirin is beneficial for people who have had a heart attack or stroke.

But for pretty much everyone else, assessing actual heart disease risk in consultation with your doctor is crucial to deciding whether to take aspirin every day.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article highlights the risks of taking aspirin daily, in particular the risk of bleeding. The article even brings in an independent source, Dr. Nissen, who discusses the bleeding risks. The story would have been stronger had it helped the reader/listener understand the likelihood of those harms, as the ubiquity of aspirin use in our culture may lead individuals to downplay the medicine’s possible harms. However, the story does enough to clear our bar here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
More intensive treatment for patients with acute kidney injury did not bring better results in a large randomized, controlled clinical trial sponsored by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and the National Institutes of Health.

The findings will be published Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine; they were released early online.

The trial was conducted from 2003 to 2007 and included 1,124 critically ill adult patients at 17 VA hospitals and 10 university hospitals.

The study's lead author, Dr. Paul M. Palevsky, said the results may lead to a large savings in U.S. health care costs, estimated at $100 million to $250 million a year for this type of patient. He is chief of the renal section at the VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System and a professor of medicine at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

In acute kidney injury, the kidneys shut down, causing fluids and waste products to build up in the body. The VA reports the condition has a 50 percent to 80 percent death rate.

In the study, patients who did not need drugs to maintain blood pressure were assigned to either a six-day or three-day dialysis to filter toxins and extra fluid from the blood.

Those patients who needed drugs to increase blood pressure were assigned to two other forms of blood cleaning, both divided into intensive or less intensive groups.

Throughout the study, patients remained in intensive or less intensive therapy, although as their clinical conditions changed, they could change forms of therapy, Dr. Palevsky said.

There was no difference in death rates in both groups, and both also had similar rates of recovering kidney function and other organ failure.

In an accompanying editorial, Dr. Joseph V. Bonventre of Harvard Medical School wrote that he had concerns about the change of therapy offered to patients in the study.

"When a patient transitions from one therapy to another, the dialysis dose is unlikely to be equivalent," he said, adding that results could be affected by different methods in the high-intensity and low-intensity groups. "For example, there was a small over-representation of sustained low-efficiency dialysis in the intensive-therapy group."

Dr. Bonventre wrote that the study had "a predominance of male patients," so there is a question of whether its results can be applied to female patients. And, he said, the results cannot be simply applied to patients with chronic kidney disease, who then have acute kidney injury, since the study excluded any patients with advanced chronic kidney disease.

He concluded, "Given the results of the [Acute Renal Failure Trial Network] study, the renal and intensive care communities must now focus on other strategies to help this population of patients. ... We still have a long way to go in treating acute kidney injury."

First published on July 1, 2008 at 12:00 am
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that "There was no difference in death rates in both groups, and both also had similar rates of recovering kidney function and other organ failure." 
But the story did not provide a clear picture of the view from patient perspective about how the two treatment approaches differed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Welcome to Dear Julia, a weekly column where readers can submit everyday health questions on anything from the science of hangovers to the mysteries of back pain. Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.

Is running really a better form of exercise than walking, given that running can lead to more injuries?

At Vox, I sit near health reporter Sarah Kliff, who trains for half-marathons and triathlons with a casualness most people reserve for grocery shopping. But Sarah’s also suffered with plantar fasciitis and a stress fracture. At times, she's hobbled around in running shoes for months because everything else hurt too much, and even sported a big blue brace on her left leg to help cushion the tiny cracks in the bones of her foot brought on from too much wear and tear.

In many ways, Sarah is a perfect case study in how to think about the benefits and risks of running versus walking. Running has greater health benefits than walking (Sarah is super fit), but it also carries a much bigger risk of injury (see Sarah’s foot brace).



So which effect dominates? To find out, I first searched for "randomized control trials" and "systematic reviews" on running, walking, and exercise at PubMed health (a free search engine for health research) and in Google Scholar. I wanted to see what the highest-quality evidence — trials and reviews are the gold standard — said about the relative risks and benefits of these two forms of exercise.

It was immediately apparent that running can lead to more injuries, and the risk goes up as running programs get more intense. Studies have found that runners have significantly higher injury rates than walkers (one study found that young men who run or jog had a 25 percent higher risk of injuries than walkers), and that ultramarathoners are at an even greater risk. The main running-related injuries include tibia stress syndrome, Achilles tendon injuries, and plantar fasciitis.

Overall, more than half of people who run will experience some sort of injury from doing so, while the percentage of walkers who will get hurt is around 1 percent. Interestingly, it seems you can walk pretty much endlessly without any increased risk of hurting yourself.

That running hurts people shouldn't be surprising. As this study described, "Running produces ground reaction forces that are approximately 2.5 times body weight, while the ground reaction force during walking is in the range of 1.2 times body weight." You're also more likely to trip and fall while running than you are during a walk.

Jogging even 5 to 10 minutes per day can reduce the risk of death from all causes I also learned about some of the incredible health benefits of going fast: Even five to 10 minutes per day of jogging at around 6 miles per hour can reduce the risk of death from cardiovascular disease and other causes. Joggers have been found to live longer than non-joggers even after adjusting for other factors — a difference of 3.8 years for men and 4.7 years for women.

That said, research has found that walking carries significant health benefits, as well. Some studies suggest that you can extend your life and stave off disease by simply walking — and the more, the better.

All this research, while illuminating, didn’t offer up any clear conclusions on whether running or walking was better for you overall. So I asked some of the world’s leading researchers in this area. Their conclusion? You need to consider the trade-offs.

"Running moderately prolongs life more than walking does," said Peter Schnohr, a clinical cardiologist who has researched many aspects of exercise and health. The key word there is "moderately." Schnohr warned of the emerging research that doing a lot of endurance exercise over the long term (like triathlon training) can lead to heart problems. Overall, there's a U-shaped association between running and mortality, he said. Too little isn't helpful for health, but too much might be harmful.



 "The most favorable regimen is two to three running days per week, at a slow or average pace"

"The most favorable [regimen] is two to three running days per week, at a slow or average pace," Schnohr advised. "Running every day, at a fast speed, more than 4 hours per week is not as favorable." And for those who don't like running, he noted, "Fast walking, not slow, also prolongs life. I can’t tell how much."

Dutch researcher Luiz Carlos Hespanhol pointed out that in general, running simply delivers health benefits more efficiently than walking does. This study, for example, found that five minutes of running per day is as beneficial as 15 minutes of walking. Hespanhol also said that after one year of training just two hours a week, runners lose weight, reduce their body fat, lower their resting heart rates, and drive down their blood serum triglycerides (fat in the blood). There's even evidence that running can have positive effects on tension, depression, and anger.

Even so, Hespanhol wasn't a total cheerleader for running. A good walking regimen can have similar benefits, he noted. So on running versus walking, it really depends on your values and preferences: "One could choose walking instead of running as a mode of physical activity based on injury risks, since walking is less risky than running," he explained. Or alternatively: "One could choose running because the health benefits are larger and come faster, in a shorter period of time."

To recap: Running improves your health more efficiently than walking does and has greater health benefits per time invested. But even a small amount of running carries more injury risk than walking. And a lot of running (i.e., ultramarathon training) can well be harmful, while the same is never true for walking.

Where does this leave us? All the exercise researchers seemed to agree on one thing: that the best exercise routine is the one you'll actually do. So the answer to the running versus walking question will probably vary from person to person. If you prefer one over the other, stick with that. And if you still can't decide, Hespanhol suggested this: "Why not do both — running and walking — in order to get the best of each?"

Send your questions to Julia via the submission form or @juliaoftoronto on Twitter. Read more about Dear Julia here. 



When running was for weirdos
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a very good job of quantifying the potential risks of running and of comparing the likelihood of injury from running to those for walking.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Contrary to earlier reports, giving acetaminophen (Tylenol, etc.) for pain and fever does not worsen asthma in young children with the condition, concludes a randomized trial in the August 18 New England Journal of Medicine.

The Acetaminophen Versus Ibuprofen in Children with Asthma (AVICA) trial, led by researchers at Boston Children's Hospital for the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute's Asthma Network (AsthmaNet), is the only blinded, randomized, controlled trial to date to prospectively compare acetaminophen head-to-head with ibuprofen (Motrin, etc.) in children with asthma.

The 18-site study should settle a debate that originated when several retrospective studies seemed to indicate that children had exacerbations of their asthma when receiving Tylenol for pain and/or fever.

"We found no matter how you slice it, there was absolutely no difference between Tylenol and Motrin," says senior investigator and corresponding author Wanda Phipatanakul, MD, MS, of Boston Children's Hospital's Division of Allergy and Immunology. "Our findings should alleviate the concerns for safety that were based on observational data."

The study enrolled 300 children 1 to 5 years old with mild persistent asthma. Their families were randomized to use either acetaminophen or ibuprofen as indicated for pain and fever over a 48-week period.

Both groups received the same asthma control therapies: daily inhaled glucocorticoids, as needed inhaled glucocorticoids, and daily oral leukotriene receptor antagonist. (The asthma therapies were given in varying order as part of a concurrent randomized trial, making this, in effect, a "trial within a trial.") Medication adherence was closely monitored.

Of the original 300 children, 226 (75 percent) completed the study. Children in the acetaminophen and ibuprofen groups used similar amounts of these medications for pain and/or fever (median, 5.5 doses).

During the 48 weeks, there were no statistically significant differences between groups:
• The number of asthma exacerbations per child averaged 0.81 in the acetaminophen group versus 0.87 in the ibuprofen group.
• At least one asthma exacerbation occurred in 49 percent of the acetaminophen group, vs. 47 percent of the ibuprofen group. At least two episodes occurred in 21 and 24 percent, respectively.
• The percentage of days with full asthma control were virtually the same for acetaminophen and ibuprofen: 85.8 and 86.8 percent, respectively.
• Use of "rescue" medication (albuterol) was essentially the same: 2.8 vs. 3.0 puffs per week.
• Unscheduled healthcare visits for asthma were equivalent, averaging 0.75 vs. 0.76 episodes per child.

While the study was modest in size, it was powered to detect any clinically significant differences, more so than past retrospective studies, Phipatanakul notes. "There was no difference that would cause me to be alarmed," she says.

The researchers note that earlier studies linking acetaminophen with increased asthma symptoms did not use a randomized design. Those studies therefore couldn't rule out the possibility that the asthma exacerbations were caused by the respiratory infections themselves.

"The toddler age is a wheezy age when kids are developing asthma, but they also get a lot of fevers and colds," says Phipatanakul. "Without a randomized design, it's hard to tease out the effects of medications."

Since the study was limited to young children with mild persistent asthma receiving asthma controller therapy, the authors also note that their findings may not apply to other age groups or children with more severe asthma. Further studies will be necessary to answer those questions.

William J. Sheehan, MD, of Boston Children's Hospital was first author on the paper. The study was funded by The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute's Asthma Network (AsthmaNet) and grants from the National Institutes of Health (HL098102, HL098096, HL098075, HL098090, HL098177, HL098098, HL098107, HL098112, HL098103, HL098115, TR001082, TR000439, TR000448, TR000454, K23AI104780, and K24AI106822).

Boston Children's Hospital is home to the world's largest research enterprise based at a pediatric medical center, where its discoveries have benefited both children and adults since 1869. More than 1,100 scientists, including seven members of the National Academy of Sciences, 11 members of the Institute of Medicine and 10 members of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute comprise Boston Children's research community. Founded as a 20-bed hospital for children, Boston Children's today is a 404-bed comprehensive center for pediatric and adolescent health care. Boston Children's is also the primary pediatric teaching affiliate of Harvard Medical School. For more, visit our Vector and Thriving blogs and follow us on our social media channels: @BostonChildrens, @BCH_Innovation, Facebook and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Another major study question was whether frequent acetaminophen use in children with mild persistent asthma worsens symptoms. This was measured by the number of asthma exacerbations, percentage of days with full asthma control, use of “rescue” medication and unscheduled healthcare visits for asthma. As mentioned in the “Quantify Benefits” section, this release includes quantitative data from the original study in easy-to-read bullet form. Furthermore, the headline and quotations used in the news release reinforce the study’s findings, making it clear that acetaminophen does not worsen asthma symptoms in children.
For these reasons, we give the news release a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO - The majority of patients were pain free after receiving a new image-guided pulsed radiofrequency treatment for low back pain and sciatica, according to a study presented today at the annual meeting of the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA).

Low back pain is an extremely common problem that affects at least 80 percent of the population at some point in their lifetime. It is the most common cause of job-related disability. Low back pain affects men and women equally.

Most back pain is short-term, but about 20 percent of people affected by acute low back pain go on to develop chronic low back pain lasting a year or more. A compressed and herniated disk, in which the rubbery cushion between vertebrae impinges on and irritates nearby nerves, is a major cause of low back pain that can radiate to the legs.

"The nerve root is a sensitive structure that when pinched becomes inflamed and causes pain," said lead investigator Alessandro Napoli M.D., Ph.D., an interventional radiologist at Sapienza University of Rome. "The body reacts with muscle constriction, which decreases the distance between vertebrae, and a vicious cycle is created."

The single-center prospective study included 80 patients experiencing at least three months of low back pain due to a herniated disk that had not responded to conservative treatments including exercise and medication.

The patients underwent a minimally invasive interventional radiology procedure in which, with the help of CT imaging, a needle is guided to the location of the bulging disc and nerve root. A probe is then inserted through the needle tip and delivers pulsed radiofrequency energy to the area over a 10-minute period. Even without touching the disc, the pulsation serves to resolve the herniation.

"The probe delivers a gentle electrical energy, so there's no thermal damage," Dr. Napoli said. "The results have been extraordinary. Patients have been relieved of pain and resumed their normal activities within a day."

Of the 80 patients treated, 81 percent were pain free one year after a single 10-minute treatment session. Six patients required a second pulsed radiofrequency session. Ninety percent of the patients were able to avoid surgical treatment.

"Following this treatment, inflammation and pain go away. With relaxation of the muscles, the distance between the vertebrae returns," Dr. Napoli explained.

Dr. Napoli said no patients experienced side effects after receiving the minimally invasive outpatient treatment.

"There's a big gap between conservative treatments for disc compression and herniation and surgical repair, which can lead to infection, bleeding and a long recovery period," Dr. Napoli said. "Evolving technologies like this image-guided treatment may help a substantial number of patients avoid surgery."

Note: Copies of RSNA 2017 news releases and electronic images will be available online at RSNA.org/press17 beginning Monday, Nov. 27.

RSNA is an association of over 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists, promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does mention side effects, saying, “Dr. Napoli said no patients experienced side effects after receiving the minimally invasive outpatient treatment.”
But just because there were no side effects in this small study, does that mean there is no risk of such side effects for anyone? That seems like downplaying the risks. The release would have been more thorough had it mentioned that any invasive treatment such as this one carries a risk of infection.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The use of proton radiotherapy to treat the most common malignant brain tumor in children is as effective as standard photon (x-ray) radiation therapy while causing fewer long-term side effects such as hearing loss and cognitive disorders, according to a study receiving online publication in Lancet Oncology. The paper from a team led by Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) investigators describes patient outcomes an average of seven years after proton therapy for medulloblastoma, a fast-growing tumor that develops in the cerebellum at the base of the brain.

"Proton radiotherapy is still not widely available in the U.S. or around the world, but it is increasingly recognized for its potential to reduce the side effects of treatment, particularly in the pediatric population," says Torunn Yock, MD, MCh, MGH Department of Radiation Oncology, lead and corresponding author of the report. "At experienced centers, proton therapy has a proven track record of treatment success and safety."

In contrast to photon radiotherapy, in which a dose of radiation is delivered all along the x-ray beam as it passes through a patient's body, in proton therapy the dose is precisely focused on the target area with little or no dose delivered to normal tissues in front of or behind the tumor. This feature has made proton therapy particularly attractive to treat tumors in or near the brain or eyes, areas where the protection of nearby healthy tissues is particularly critical.

While medulloblastoma can often be successfully treated with a combination of surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy, because of its location within the brain, long-term side effects are common. These can include hearing loss, which can be particularly problematic in young children; problems with learning and memory, and neuroendocrine disorders caused by irradiation of the pituitary gland and hypothalamus. Also commonly seen are problems affecting the heart, lungs, thyroid, spine and reproductive organs, all of which tend to be more serious in children treated at younger ages.

While proton therapy may appear to be ideal for reducing these adverse effects, no previous study had prospectively examined the long-term results of children treated for medulloblastoma with proton therapy. To investigate their hypothesis that proton therapy would reduce the incidence and severity of side effects without loss of treatment effectiveness, the researchers enrolled children and adolescents ages 3 to 21 - with an average age of around 6 ½ - who received proton therapy for medulloblastoma at the MGH from 2003 to 2009. All had previous surgery to remove as much of the tumor as possible, and all received chemotherapy before, during or after proton therapy.

Study participants were tested for hearing, a variety of cognitive functions, levels of important hormones and height and weight at the outset of the study and at several follow-up visits for up to eight years. Of 59 patients who enrolled, 12 died from their tumor during the study period and one from a traumatic brain injury. Significant hearing loss was seen in 12 percent of patients three years after treatment and in 16 percent at five years, which compares with around 25 percent reported in studies using photon radiotherapy. The cognitive effects of proton therapy - primarily affecting verbal comprehension and processing speed - were also less serious than what has been reported with photon radiotherapy, and those effects were primarily seen in children who were under the age of 8 when treated.

The neuroendocrine effects of proton therapy - deficits in any hormone level were seen in 63 percent of participants seven years after treatment - were similar to what has been reported with photon therapy. However, no cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, seizure or secondary tumor effects - all of which have been reported in photon therapy studies - were seen in the current study's participants. Survival rates and the incidence and type of tumor recurrence all were similar to what has been reported for photon radiotherapy.

"Our results indicate that proton therapy maintains excellent cure rates in pediatric medulloblastoma while reducing long-term side effects, particularly in hearing and neurocognitive function, and eliminating cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal and reproductive effects," says Yock, who is an associate professor of Radiation Oncology at Harvard Medical School. "While we are currently investigating quality of life differences between proton and photon treatment, I truly believe that - particularly for the youngest children - the ability to offer them proton therapy can make a big difference in their lives."

Nancy J. Tarbell, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology, is senior author of the Lancet Oncology report. Additional co-authors are Elizabeth Weyman, Bree Eaton, MD, and Shannon M MacDonald, MD, MGH Radiation Oncology; Beow Yeap, ScD, MGH Department of Medicine; David Ebb, MD, Beverly Lavally, RN, and Mary Huang, MD, MGH Pediatric Oncology; Nicole Sherry, MD, MGH Pediatric Endocrinology; Robin Jones, MD, MGH Pediatric Neurology; Margaret Pulsifer, PhD, MGH Psychiatry; Annah Abrams, MD, MGH Child Psychiatary; and Karen Marcus, MD, Brigham and Women's Hospital Radiation Oncology. The study was funded in part by National Cancer Institute grant P01 CA021239.

Massachusetts General Hospital, founded in 1811, is the original and largest teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. The MGH conducts the largest hospital-based research program in the United States, with an annual research budget of more than $800 million and major research centers in AIDS, cardiovascular research, cancer, computational and integrative biology, cutaneous biology, human genetics, medical imaging, neurodegenerative disorders, regenerative medicine, reproductive biology, systems biology, transplantation biology and photomedicine. In July 2015, MGH returned into the number one spot on the 2015-16 U.S. News & World Report list of "America's Best Hospitals."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release addresses some of the harms associated with the therapy and provides specific numbers that are easy for readers to understand. It says, for example, “Of 59 patients who enrolled, 12 died from their tumor during the study period and one from a traumatic brain injury. Significant hearing loss was seen in 12 percent of patients three years after treatment and in 16 percent at five years, which compares with around 25 percent reported in studies using photon radiotherapy.”
The release didn’t point out that all of the patients had additional treatments — including surgery and chemotherapy — so it’s not possible to pinpoint years later where to place the blame for any hearing loss or cognitive deficits.
We think some of the harms from the therapy were given short shrift, but we address this in the “Quality of Evidence” measure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At workshops and conferences across the country, students, counselors and psychologists in private practice throng lectures on mindfulness. The National Institutes of Health is financing more than 50 studies testing mindfulness techniques, up from 3 in 2000, to help relieve stress, soothe addictive cravings, improve attention, lift despair and reduce hot flashes.

Some proponents say Buddha’s arrival in psychotherapy signals a broader opening in the culture at large — a way to access deeper healing, a hidden path revealed.

Yet so far, the evidence that mindfulness meditation helps relieve psychiatric symptoms is thin, and in some cases, it may make people worse, some studies suggest. Many researchers now worry that the enthusiasm for Buddhist practice will run so far ahead of the science that this promising psychological tool could turn into another fad.

“I’m very open to the possibility that this approach could be effective, and it certainly should be studied,” said Scott Lilienfeld, a psychology professor at Emory. “What concerns me is the hype, the talk about changing the world, this allure of the guru that the field of psychotherapy has a tendency to cultivate.”

Buddhist meditation came to psychotherapy from mainstream academic medicine. In the 1970s, a graduate student in molecular biology, Jon Kabat-Zinn, intrigued by Buddhist ideas, adapted a version of its meditative practice that could be easily learned and studied. It was by design a secular version, extracted like a gemstone from the many-layered foundation of Buddhist teaching, which has sprouted a wide variety of sects and spiritual practices and attracted 350 million adherents worldwide.

In transcendental meditation and other types of meditation, practitioners seek to transcend or “lose” themselves. The goal of mindfulness meditation was different, to foster an awareness of every sensation as it unfolds in the moment.

Dr. Kabat-Zinn taught the practice to people suffering from chronic pain at the University of Massachusetts medical school. In the 1980s he published a series of studies demonstrating that two-hour courses, given once a week for eight weeks, reduced chronic pain more effectively than treatment as usual.

Word spread, discreetly at first. “I think that back then, other researchers had to be very careful when they talked about this, because they didn’t want to be seen as New Age weirdos,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn, now a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Massachusetts, said in an interview. “So they didn’t call it mindfulness or meditation. “After a while, we put enough studies out there that people became more comfortable with it.”

One person who noticed early on was Marsha Linehan, a psychologist at the University of Washington who was trying to treat deeply troubled patients with histories of suicidal behavior. “Trying to treat these patients with some change-based behavior therapy just made them worse, not better,” Dr. Linehan said in an interview. “With the really hard stuff, you need something else, something that allows people to tolerate these very strong emotions.”

In the 1990s, Dr. Linehan published a series of studies finding that a therapy that incorporated Zen Buddhist mindfulness, “radical acceptance,” practiced by therapist and patient significantly cut the risk of hospitalization and suicide attempts in the high-risk patients.

Finally, in 2000, a group of researchers including Dr. Segal in Toronto, J. Mark G. Williams at the University of Wales and John D. Teasdale at the Medical Research Council in England published a study that found that eight weekly sessions of mindfulness halved the rate of relapse in people with three or more episodes of depression.

With Dr. Kabat-Zinn, they wrote a popular book, “The Mindful Way Through Depression.” Psychotherapists’ curiosity about mindfulness, once tentative, turned into “this feeding frenzy, of sorts, that we have going on now,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn said.

Mindfulness meditation is easy to describe. Sit in a comfortable position, eyes closed, preferably with the back upright and unsupported. Relax and take note of body sensations, sounds and moods. Notice them without judgment. Let the mind settle into the rhythm of breathing. If it wanders (and it will), gently redirect attention to the breath. Stay with it for at least 10 minutes.

After mastering control of attention, some therapists say, a person can turn, mentally, to face a threatening or troubling thought — about, say, a strained relationship with a parent — and learn simply to endure the anger or sadness and let it pass, without lapsing into rumination or trying to change the feeling, a move that often backfires.

One woman, a doctor who had been in therapy for years to manage bouts of disabling anxiety, recently began seeing Gaea Logan, a therapist in Austin, Tex., who incorporates mindfulness meditation into her practice. This patient had plenty to worry about, including a mentally ill child, a divorce and what she described as a “harsh internal voice,” Ms. Logan said.

After practicing mindfulness meditation, she continued to feel anxious at times but told Ms. Logan, “I can stop and observe my feelings and thoughts and have compassion for myself.”

Steven Hayes, a psychologist at the University of Nevada at Reno, has developed a talk therapy called Acceptance Commitment Therapy, or ACT, based on a similar, Buddha-like effort to move beyond language to change fundamental psychological processes.

“It’s a shift from having our mental health defined by the content of our thoughts,” Dr. Hayes said, “to having it defined by our relationship to that content — and changing that relationship by sitting with, noticing and becoming disentangled from our definition of ourselves.”

For all these hopeful signs, the science behind mindfulness is in its infancy. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which researches health practices, last year published a comprehensive review of meditation studies, including T.M., Zen and mindfulness practice, for a wide variety of physical and mental problems. The study found that over all, the research was too sketchy to draw conclusions.

A recent review by Canadian researchers, focusing specifically on mindfulness meditation, concluded that it did “not have a reliable effect on depression and anxiety.”

Therapists who incorporate mindfulness practices do not agree when the meditation is most useful, either. Some say Buddhist meditation is most useful for patients with moderate emotional problems. Others, like Dr. Linehan, insist that patients in severe mental distress are the best candidates for mindfulness.

A case in point is mindfulness-based therapy to prevent a relapse into depression. The treatment significantly reduced the risk of relapse in people who have had three or more episodes of depression. But it may have had the opposite effect on people who had one or two previous episodes, two studies suggest.

The mindfulness treatment “may be contraindicated for this group of patients,” S. Helen Ma and Dr. Teasdale of the Medical Research Council concluded in a 2004 study of the therapy.

Since mindfulness meditation may have different effects on different mental struggles, the challenge for its proponents will be to specify where it is most effective — and soon, given how popular the practice is becoming.

The question, said Linda Barnes, an associate professor of family medicine and pediatrics at the Boston University School of Medicine, is not whether mindfulness meditation will become a sophisticated therapeutic technique or lapse into self-help cliché.

“The answer to that question is yes to both,” Dr. Barnes said.

The real issue, most researchers agree, is whether the science will keep pace and help people distinguish the mindful variety from the mindless.

A variety of meditative practices have been studied by Western researchers for their effects on mental and physical health.

An active exercise, sometimes called moving meditation, involving extremely slow, continuous movement and extreme concentration. The movements are to balance the vital energy of the body but have no religious significance.

Studies are mixed, some finding it can reduce blood pressure in patients, and others finding no effect. There is some evidence that it can help elderly people improve balance.

Meditators sit comfortably, eyes closed, and breathe naturally. They repeat and concentrate on the mantra, a word or sound chosen by the instructor to achieve state of deep, transcendent absorption. Practitioners “lose” themselves, untouched by day-to-day concerns. Studies suggest it can reduce blood pressure in some patients.

Practitioners find a comfortable position, close the eyes and focus first on breathing, passively observing it. If a stray thought or emotion enters the mind, they allow it to pass and return attention to the breath. The aim is to achieve focused awareness on what is happening moment to moment.

Studies find that it can help manage chronic pain. The findings are mixed on substance abuse. Two trials suggest that it can cut the rate of relapse in people who have had three or more bouts of depression.

Enhanced awareness through breathing techniques and specific postures. Schools vary widely, aiming to achieve total absorption in the present and a release from ordinary thoughts. Studies are mixed, but evidence shows it can reduce stress.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story alludes to the harms of mindfulness mediation for some patients who have had fewer than 3 episodes of depression (according to one study). The story also notes the general harms of a new practice becoming a fad when there are few standardized training programs, and it has not been studied long enough for all conditions for which it is currently being promoted. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- When a manufacturer recalls an implanted heart defibrillator because of a potential flaw, patients and doctors must decide whether to leave the device in the body or replace it.

A new Canadian study provides the first estimate of the risk of major complications from replacement surgery, important information for patients facing the choice.

"That risk is much higher than we initially thought," said study co-author Dr. Andrew Krahn of the London Health Sciences Center in Ontario. Some patients "might want to hang out and wait and see what happens," Krahn said.

Six percent of the 533 patients who decided to have their recalled defibrillators replaced over a 12-month period suffered major complications, including two deaths, according to a study published in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association.

In contrast, the risk of failure among recently recalled defibrillators has been estimated by the manufacturers at just 0.009 percent to 2.6 percent. And not every failure is deadly.

Implantable defibrillators can be as small as a half dollar and are placed surgically under the skin of the upper chest. Vice President Dick Cheney is among the thousands of Americans who have one.

When the device senses a dangerous and potentially deadly irregular heartbeat, it sends electrical impulses to jolt the heart back to normal. It can correct a heart that beats too fast, as in ventricular tachycardia, or quivers chaotically, a condition known as ventricular fibrillation.

A total of 270,000 defibrillators have been recalled since January 2005, though it is unclear how many were inside patients and how many were on the shelf, according to the Food and Drug Administration. About 80,000 patients received the implantable devices in 2004.

Krahn said the rate of complications from surgical removal will surprise doctors, because replacing a defibrillator is considered a minor procedure.

"It's typically performed with a local anesthetic and sedation. It takes an hour or less," he said. "Most patients return home the same day."

The researchers studied 2,915 patients who were tracked by 17 Canadian hospitals in 2004-05. All the patients had devices that were recalled by manufacturers, Canada's national health system or the FDA.

Only 18 percent decided to undergo replacement surgery. Infection, bruising or bleeding required a follow-up operation in 31 of those patients. Two patients died.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Article lists all harms noted in the study, both serious and less serious, and explains that the authors did not track what happened to patients who did not have devices replaced. The story did note that untreated abnormal rhythms can be ‘potentially deadly’. However, the article notes that manufacturers estimate the rate of failure for devices that are subject to safety advisories, and also lists both the minor and serious things that can go wrong with them. One big issue that is not dealt with well is that the initial decision threshold for putting these devices in place may change now, based on the higher failure rates and the higher rates of complications with replacement.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
While smoking is a public health scourge, the nicotine in cigarettes may have some promise in treating another growing problem, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), which can be a precursor to Alzheimer’s disease or other forms of dementia. A new study on nonsmokers found that six months of treatment with nicotine patches restored long-term memory performance to 46% of normal— while placebo patients experienced a 26% decline in recall during the same treatment period.

The randomized controlled trial included 74 people, mainly in their late 70’s, with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). MCI falls somewhere between the normal senior moments that occur with aging, and the more serious lapses in recall and orientation that are typical of dementia. People with MCI are aware of their deficits, but are still able to function and complete their daily activities. Prior research has shown repeatedly that nicotine enhances memory and reaction time, which is one reason smokers cite for sticking with their habit. About half the participants were former smokers.

Attention, memory and reaction time all improved in those given nicotine treatment on several objective tests— and patients’ own ratings of their cognitive abilities and those of family members or other people close to them also showed improvement. Moreover, nicotine’s positive effects did not seem to wane over time. However, when clinical experts rated overall general change in the patients, they did not see a significant difference between the two groups.

MORE: A Cheaper Way to Quit Smoking?

Was the nicotine actually having an effect on memory? Possibly. Intriguingly, it appeared to be more effective among people with two copies of the APOE4 gene, a genetic combination that increases risk for Alzheimer’s by a factor of 20 or higher. People with Alzheimer’s disease have reduced numbers of nicotine receptors in their brains— and while the research is conflicting, some evidence suggests that the drug could protect these neurons. Other research, however, suggests that nicotine might enhance the cancer-causing properties of other substances.

The authors conclude, “This initial study provides evidence for nicotine-induced cognitive improvement in subjects with MCI; however, whether these effects are clinically important will require larger studies.”

The study found no problematic side effects associated with the nicotine patch and none of the patients had withdrawal symptoms when it was stopped. However, patients on nicotine did lose a few pounds, which is a known side effect.

The research was funded by the National Institute on Aging, but some of the authors also receive pharmaceutical industry funding and one reported funding from Philip Morris. Patches were provided by the manufacturer, Pfizer.

The study was led by Dr. Paul Newhouse of Vanderbilt University and published in Neurology.

MORE: Is Nicotine a ‘Gateway’ to Cocaine Addiction (and Cancer)?

Maia Szalavitz is a health writer at TIME.com. Find her on Twitter at @maiasz. You can also continue the discussion on TIME Healthland’s Facebook page and on Twitter at @TIMEHealthland.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story reported:  “The study found no problematic side effects associated with the nicotine patch and none of the patients had withdrawal symptoms when it was stopped.  However, patients on nicotine did lose a few pounds, which is a known side effect.” The study also reported a small drop in systolic blood pressure in subjected treated with nicotine – an unusual finding which the story did not report.
We like that the story, unlike the MSNBC piece, noted that “nicotine might enhance the cancer-causing properties of other substances.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The treatment is also gaining attention from mainstream researchers, including some former skeptics. The National Institute of Mental Health recently sponsored its first study of neurofeedback for A.D.H.D.: a randomized, controlled trial of 36 subjects.

The results are to be announced Oct. 26 at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. In an interview in the summer, the study’s director, Dr. L. Eugene Arnold, an emeritus professor of psychiatry at Ohio State, noted that there had been “quite a bit of improvement” in many of the children’s behavior, as reported by parents and teachers.

Dr. Arnold said that if the results bore out that neurofeedback was making the difference, he would seek financing for a broader study, with as many as 100 subjects.

John Kounios, a professor of psychology at Drexel University, published a small study in 2007 suggesting that the treatment speeded cognitive processing in elderly people. “There’s no question that neurofeedback works, that people can change brain activity,” he said. “The big questions we still haven’t answered are precisely how it works and how it can be harnessed to treat disorders.”

Russell A. Barkley, a professor of psychiatry at the Medical University of South Carolina and a leading authority on attention problems, has long dismissed claims that neurofeedback can help. But Dr. Barkley says he was persuaded to take another look after Dutch scientists published an analysis of recent international studies finding significant reductions in impulsiveness and inattention.

Still, Dr. Barkley cautioned that he had yet to see credible evidence confirming claims that such benefits can be long lasting, much less permanent.

And another mainstream expert is much more disapproving. William E. Pelham Jr., director of the Center for Children and Families at Florida International University, called neurofeedback “crackpot charlatanism.” He warned that exaggerated claims for it might lead parents to favor it over proven options like behavioral therapy and medication.

Neurofeedback was developed in the 1960s and ’70s, with American researchers leading the way. In 1968, M. Barry Sterman, a neuroscientist at the University of California, Los Angeles, reported that the training helped cats resist epileptic seizures. Dr. Sterman and others later claimed to have achieved similar benefits with humans.

The findings prompted a boomlet of interest in which clinicians of varying degrees of respectability jumped into the field, making many unsupported claims about seeming miracle cures and tainting the treatment’s reputation among academic experts. Meanwhile, researchers in Germany and the Netherlands continued to explore neurofeedback’s potential benefits.

A major attraction of the technique is the hope that it can help patients avoid drugs, which often have side effects. Instead, patients practice routines that seem more like exercising a muscle.

Brain cells communicate with one another, in part, through a constant storm of electrical impulses. Their patterns show up on an electroencephalogram, or EEG, as brain waves with different frequencies.

Neurofeedback practitioners say people have problems when their brain wave frequencies aren’t suited for the task at hand, or when parts of the brain aren’t communicating adequately with other parts. These issues, they say, can be represented on a “brain map,” the initial EEG readings that serve as a guide for treatment. Subsequently, a clinician will help a patient learn to slow down or speed up those brain waves, through a process known as operant conditioning. The brain begins by generating fairly random patterns, while the computer software responds with encouragement whenever the activity meets the target.

Dr. Norman Doidge, a psychiatrist at the Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research at Columbia and the author of “The Brain That Changes Itself” (Viking, 2007), said he considered neurofeedback “a powerful stabilizer of the brain.” Practitioners make even more enthusiastic claims. Robert Coben, a neuropsychologist in Massapequa Park, N.Y., said he had treated more than 1,000 autistic children over the past seven years and had conducted a clinical study, finding striking reductions in symptoms, as reported by parents.

Maureen and Terrence Magagnos of Lynbrook, N.Y., took their 7-year-old son, Peter, to Dr. Coben after he was given a diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorder in first grade. “He had classic symptoms of autism,” said Mr. Magagnos. “His speech was terrible, he made very little eye contact and he screamed for attention — literally screamed.”

Their exceptionally generous insurance covered neurofeedback, so they decided to give it a try, with sessions twice a week for the next five years.

At the start of the treatment, Dr. Coben said, he discovered that Peter had been suffering tiny, asymptomatic seizures. He says neurofeedback helped stabilize the child’s brain activity, eliminating the seizures. And within three months, said Mr. Magagnos, a retired police officer, Peter’s teachers were calling to report remarkable improvements.

“Today I’d say he has ‘autism light,’ ” he added. “He still has some symptoms, but he is much more manageable.”

Whether such results can be achieved with other children is a matter of debate. Still, as practitioners lobby for broader acceptance, including insurance recognition, a sure sign of neurofeedback’s increasing popularity is the number of companies selling supposedly mind-altering systems to use at home.

With names like SmartBrain Technologies and the Learning Curve Inc., they offer equipment purported, respectively, to “pump the neurons” and “make lasting changes in attention, memory, mood, control, pain, sleep and more.”

The Food and Drug Administration regulates all biofeedback equipment as medical devices. The only approved use, however, is for “relaxation.”

Peter Freer, a former grade-school teacher who is chief executive of a North Carolina firm called Unique Logic and Technology, says that since he began his business in 1994, he has sold several thousand of his “Play Attention” systems, advertised to improve a child’s focus, behavior, academic performance and social behavior.

The equipment, which costs $1,800, is advertised as “a sophisticated advancement of neurofeedback.” Mr. Freer says his clients include more than 600 school districts. (He adds that his system, as distinct from “clinical” neurofeedback, aims not to change brain waves but rather to put the user in an “attentive state” that makes it easier to learn skills.) Neurofeedback in general is a largely unregulated, with practitioners often devising their own protocols about where on the scalp to place electrodes. Results vary widely, and researchers caution that it is extremely important to choose one’s practitioner with care.

When it comes to to the actual devices, Dr. Kerson, at the International Society for Neurofeedback and Research, cautioned that they should never be used without experienced supervision.

“Oftentimes what people do is find a way to get one of these machines on eBay and use it at home,” she said, adding that unskilled use could interfere with medications or prompt an anxiety attack or a seizure.

“Neurofeedback is a powerful therapy,” she said, “and should be treated that way.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We will give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion because it did at least mentions that there are potential harms, but the story would have been better if it had given more detail about the type and frequency of harms. It should have also clearly noted that risks exist even when a treatment is supervised by a skilled practitioner.One of the potential harms raised is this uNPRoven treatment may be favored over proven options like behavioral therapy and medication.  The story mentioned readily available neurofeedback packages while at the same time had stern warning from a society spokesperson that people can have seizures or anxiety attacks if they use equipment that they get from ebay and use without supervision. No information about how commonly problems such as these occur. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a limited trial, 16 overweight young adults taking various doses of green coffee bean extract lost an average of 17.5 pounds and 16% in body fat in 22 weeks. But questions remain, experts say.

But as a dietary supplement, green coffee extract does not require the FDA's blessing. In fact, it is already available as a naturopathic medicine and antioxidant.

If green coffee extract were a medication seeking approval from the Food and Drug Administration, these results would make it a viable candidate — more than 35% of subjects lost more than 5% of their body weight, and weight loss appeared to be greater while subjects were taking the pills than when they were on the placebo.

In a study presented Tuesday at the American Chemical Society's spring national meeting in San Diego, 16 overweight young adults took, by turns, a low dose of green coffee bean extract, a high dose of the supplement, and a placebo. Though the study was small, the results were striking: Subjects lost an average of 17.5 pounds in 22 weeks and reduced their overall body weight by 10.5%.

When roasted at 475 degrees, coffee beans are sometimes described as rich and full-bodied. But for the full-bodied person who is not so rich, unroasted coffee beans — green as the day they were picked — may hold the key to cheap and effective weight loss, new research suggests.

Joe Vinson, the University of Scranton chemist who conducted the pilot study, said the findings should pave the way for more rigorous research on coffee bean extract's effects. A larger trial involving 60 people is being planned.

Vinson, whose research focuses on plant polyphenols and their effects on human health, said it appears that green coffee bean extract may work by reducing the absorption of fat and glucose in the gut; it may also reduce insulin levels, which would improve metabolic function. There were no signs of ill effects on any subjects, Vinson reported Tuesday.

The study used a "cross-over" design, which allowed each subject to serve as his or her own comparison group. For six weeks, volunteers swallowed capsules three times a day, ingesting either 700 or 1,050 milligrams of green coffee extract a day or taking a placebo. After a two-week break, they moved, round-robin style, to another arm of the trial.

Subjects did not change their calorie intake over the course of the trial. But the more extract they consumed, the more weight and fat they lost. Altogether, they reduced their body fat by 16%, on average.

Of the 16 volunteers, six wound up with a body mass index in the healthful range.

One downside is that the extract is "extremely bitter." It would be difficult to take without a lot of water, Vinson reported.

At roughly $20 per month, however, green coffee extract is much less expensive than any of the weight-loss medications available over the counter or by prescription.

The trial was conducted in India and paid for by Applied Food Sciences Inc. of Austin, Tex., a manufacturer of green coffee bean extract.

The pilot study drew strong cautions from several scientists who weren't involved in the research.

"This is certainly a provocative study," said Dr. Gerald Weissmann, a physician and biochemist at New York University. But he said nutrition experts would want assurances that green coffee beans do not cause "malabsorption" within the human gut — a condition that would lead to weight loss as well as malnutrition, heart arrhythmias and other problems because vitamins and minerals are not passing through the intestine.

Dr. Arthur Grollman, a pharmacologist at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, said coffee beans contain about 250 different chemicals — some with positive and others with negative effects on human health. Though Vinson identified polyphenols and chlorogenic acid as the agents that appear to promote weight loss, Grollman said that claim needed further study. In the meantime, he said, consuming an extract that contains both good and bad chemicals in dense concentration seems an unwise thing to do.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Better than the HealthDay story on this criterion, quoting an expert on a specific concern about malabsorption within the gut – “a condition that would lead to weight loss as well as malnutrition, heart arrhythmias and other problems.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many migraine sufferers could have fewer, less severe headaches if they took preventive medicines, but few eligible patients do, say doctors releasing updated treatment guidelines Monday.

The guidelines list seven prescription medicines and one herbal remedy backed by strong evidence, and include many other treatments that might work for some patients.

"Migraine is one of the most disabling conditions known to man, but patients need to know that there is hope," says Stephen Silberstein, a neurologist at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia and lead author of the guidelines from the American Academy of Neurology and the American Headache Society. They were presented at an academy meeting and published in the journal Neurology.

Medicines backed by the strongest evidence include anti-seizure drugs (divalproex sodium, sodium valproate and topiramate), blood pressure drugs (metoprolol, propranolol and timolol) and, for menstrual-related migraines, a medicine called frovatriptan, the guidelines say. They also cite strong support for the herbal remedy butterbur and include a longer list of prescription and non-prescription therapies patients can consider.

These preventive treatments usually are used daily. The guidelines do not look at the options patients have once symptoms begin.

Not everyone with migraines needs prevention medicine. But nearly 40% have headaches that are so frequent (at least once a week), severe or hard-to-treat that they qualify, Silberstein says. Studies find that just 3% to 13% use the treatments.

Why so few? One reason is that it's hard to persuade people to take medicines on days when they feel fine, says Elizabeth Loder, a neurologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. Silberstein adds that some patients have not been properly diagnosed or made aware of their options. Still others try the treatments and decide they don't work or have unacceptable side effects.

"You have a lot of gun-shy patients because of a lot of bad experiences," says Michael John Coleman, founder of the patient group MAGNUM, also known as the National Migraine Association. Many spend months or years taking medicines that don't work and make them miserable, he says.

That's what happened to Emily Guzan, 26, a lawyer from Pittsburgh who was diagnosed with migraine in 2008. She was given a prescription for Topamax (topiramate), and it "was a real nightmare," she says. She kept having headaches bad enough to land her in an emergency room once a month and suffered nightmares, an altered sense of taste, an unwanted 30-pound weight loss and memory problems — all of which she attributes to the drug.

She tried some other medications, but for now, she's given up on all of them and says she's getting better results with diet, yoga and other lifestyle changes.

Finding the right medication for the right patient can take a lot of trial and error and careful dosing, Silberstein says. But about 80% will get relief, he says — defined as a headache reduction of at least 50% — after trying three or four drugs, alternative remedies and lifestyle changes.

Even hard-to-treat patients may eventually respond to something, Loder says, so she urges frustrated patients to keep trying.

"The life toll that poorly controlled headaches take is really underappreciated," she says. "You don't get back the time you lost at work or the time you lost with your children."

Coleman, of Alexandria, Va., also urges fellow sufferers to keep working with their doctors: His own migraines took 40 years to control. "This is not a cookie-cutter disease and there is no magic bullet, but there is hope."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story doesn’t sugar coat the side effects of these drugs. A spokesman for a patient group notes that many patients “spend months or years taking medicines that don’t work and make them miserable.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The gene responsible for cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989. Now, 22 years later, a drug that tries to compensate for the genetic defect might be nearing the market.

Vertex Pharmaceuticals announced Wednesday morning that the drug, VX-770, improved lung function in people with cystic fibrosis in a late-stage clinical trial. The drug also reduced the frequency of disease exacerbations that required treatment with antibiotics.

The caveat is that VX-770 is designed to counter one specific genetic mutation that accounts for about 4 percent of cases of cystic fibrosis. Vertex is working on another drug for the most common mutation, but that one is further behind in development.

Still, the news is expected to be greeted favorably by doctors and patients and by Wall Street.

“I’ve been doing clinical trials for 30 years in C.F. and these are amazing results,’’ Dr. Bonnie W. Ramsey, a lead investigator in the trial, said in an interview.

Dr. Ramsey, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Washington, was briefed on the results by Vertex.

The results were announced by a press release and have not been peer reviewed by experts.

About 30,000 Americans and 70,000 people worldwide have cystic fibrosis, a disease caused by defects in a gene responsible for the transport of chloride ions across cell membranes. People with the disease tend to have very thick mucus in their lungs, which leads to infections and lung damage. Many do not live past age 40.

Two inhaled antibiotics and one drug that loosens mucus are approved to treat cystic fibrosis, but nothing that directly improves chloride ion transport.

 

 In the trial, those who received VX-770 gained 10.6 percentage points more on a lung function test after 24 weeks than those getting a placebo, a difference that statistically was highly significant. Patients continued to take either drug or placebo for another 24 weeks and the improvement was sustained. Lung function, the primary endpoint of the trial, was measured by how much a person could exhale in one second, a standard test.

Investors had been expecting around a 5 percentage point improvement. In a note to clients Tuesday evening, before the results were known, an analyst at ISI Group, Mark Schoenebaum, said that an improvement of 10 percent would be a “home run’’ that could lead to $600 million in annual sales for the drug.

Dr. Ramsey, who has received research grants from Vertex, said that some patients could perceive a 10 percentage point change in lung function. She said other results of the trial were encouraging.

These included fewer exacerbations of the disease in those who got the drug, fewer self-reported respiratory symptoms, and a gain in weight, which is good for people with cystic fibrosis, who often have digestive problems. The saltiness of their sweat — a measure used to diagnose the disease — was markedly reduced, suggesting that the drug was having an effect on chloride ion transport.

The trial involved 161 people age 12 and older, all with at least one copy of the particular mutation, known as G551D. The main side effects, Vertex said, were headache, upper respiratory tract infections, nasal congestion, rash and dizziness.

Vertex said it hoped to apply in the second half of the year for approval of VX-770 in the United States and Europe. The company is awaiting results of a second trial of the drug, this one in younger children.

Vertex has not said how much it will charge for VX-770. But since there are only about 1,200 Americans who are candidates for the drug, the price is likely to be tens of thousands of dollars a year.

Vertex, based in Cambridge, Mass., was founded in 1989, coincidentally the same year the cystic fibrosis gene was discovered. It has not yet had a big commercial success and had a $2.5 billion net loss in the last five years.

The company is hoping that by late May it will win approval to sell a new type of drug for hepatitis C, which analysts expect will be a blockbuster.

The long time needed to develop a drug for cystic fibrosis is a lesson for those expecting a quick payout from the sequencing of the human genome, which was completed a decade ago. It is not enough to know the gene behind a disease. It can take years of research to determine how a mutation actually causes a disease and then to design a drug that corrects the problem.

Vertex received $75 million in financial support from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, one of the first nonprofit disease groups to give money to companies.

“These results are highly encouraging,’’ Robert J. Beall, president of the foundation, said in a statement Wednesday. “They provide scientific evidence that support our long-standing belief that targeting the underlying defect of C.F. may have a profound effect on the disease.’’
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A study shows that not all good fats are the same when it comes to protecting your health

A study shows that not all good fats are the same when it comes to protecting your health.

For decades, the message about fats has been relatively simple — reduce the amount of oils and fats you eat from animal and dairy products (less red meat and cheese) and substitute them with healthier fats from plants or fish (olive oil, omega-3 fatty acids). The difference came down to the specific type of fats that make up these foods — animal and dairy fats tend to be saturated, which means all of the free bonds available in a chain of carbon atoms are bound to hydrogen atoms, while plant fats are unsaturated, meaning some of carbon atoms have double bonds with each other. Saturated fats are more likely to build up within artery walls and form plaques that can trigger heart attacks.

But in the latest study on fats published in the BMJ, researchers found convincing evidence that not all plant fats are created equal and that linoleic acid, or omega-6 fatty acids, may be associated with a higher risk of early death from any cause, as well as increased risk of heart disease and death from heart-related conditions.

The study is actually a reanalysis of data that had not been included in the original publication of results from the Sydney Diet Heart Study, a trial that was conducted from 1966 to 1973. For more than three years, researchers at the time followed 458 men aged 30 to 59 years old who had a history of heart disease; about half were told to replace the saturated fats they consumed from animal and dairy sources with omega-6 linoleic acid, which is commonly found in safflower oil or margarines made from it. The other half were not told to change their diet in any way. When that study was published in 1978, researchers noted an increased risk of early death from any cause among the omega-6 group, but did not break down the data by what caused the deaths.

So Dr. Christopher Ramsden, a clinical investigator at the National Institutes of Health, who was interested in understanding the effects of linoleic acid on heart health, contacted one of the original authors and reviewed data that had not been included in the study. This information involved deaths from heart-related causes, and the new analysis showed that the omega-6 group had a 17% higher risk of dying during the study period from heart disease, compared with 11% among the control group.

The American Heart Association (AHA) currently recommends that people replace 25% to 35% of their daily saturated-fat intake with foods containing unsaturated fats, such as canola and olive oils. The AHA further breaks down the unsaturated-fat advice by suggesting that people devote about 5% to 10% of their daily calories to foods containing linoleic acid. The recommendation is based on a review of the available data.

The latest results, however, raise questions about that advice. Ramsden says the findings provide some refined understanding of unsaturated fats, which come in different chemical forms that may have varying benefits or risks. “I wouldn’t necessarily say that the [current advice] is necessarily completely wrong,” he says. “What happened is that in the 1960s all polyunsaturated fats were considered the same. They were grouped together under one mechanism of being able to lower blood-cholesterol levels. Then, over the ensuing decades, it became clear as science progressed that there were multiple types of polyunsaturated fats, and these compounds potentially have distinct biochemical and health effects.”

There has been some evidence to suggest that omega-6 fatty acids, for example, may trigger inflammation, a condition that is linked to an increased risk of heart problems, while omega-3 fatty acids, found in deepwater fish like salmon, tend to inhibit inflammatory reactions. Ramsden says the results highlight the need to study dietary ingredients in more detail, rather than lumping them together and assuming they have the same effect on the body.

Recognizing that need, the AHA says it is considering re-evaluating all its dietary recommendations, and will make the issue of polyunsaturated fats part of this assessment. Reviewing the dietary advice as a whole is important, says Alice Lichtenstein, a spokesperson for the association, since changes in one area could have unexpected, and potentially harmful, effects on other eating habits. When health organizations advised people to lower their intake of saturated fats, for example, many replaced the fats with carbohydrates, which can increase risk of diabetes and lead to higher levels of another type of fat in the blood, triglycerides. “One of the things we learned is that we need to look at the whole picture,” says Lichtenstein. “Just looking at one individual component puts undue emphasis on that component, and may lead to unanticipated consequences. We need to look at dietary patterns rather than individual nutrients or individual food components.”

Whether the association will change its advice about consuming linoleic acid isn’t clear yet, but Ramsden says the results of the latest study “could have important implications” for the way people eat if they want to stay heart-healthy.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The overall thrust of the story was about harms of linoleic acid, so we’ll call this satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Robots may not help doctors do a better job on some surgeries, according to a new study.

Surgeons treating women with endometriosis - a chronic condition that affects more than 5 million women and adolescent girls in the U.S. - didn’t get better or faster results when they used a robotic system.

With the surgeon alone, “the incision is smaller (and) the manipulations are more controlled,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat, an author on the study and the chair of Obstetrics & Gynecology at Northside Hospital in Atlanta, told Reuters Health.

Because the robot lets the surgeon get a better picture of the inside of the body, the authors had expected that surgeries using the robot would go more smoothly than those without it.

To test this idea, they looked back at 78 minor surgeries that were done on women with endometriosis - half using the assistance of a robot, half without it.

There was no difference in how much blood patients lost, and there were no complications in either group. But robotic surgeries took longer than non-robotic surgeries by about 40 minutes - 3 hours and 11 minutes compared to 2 hours and 29 minutes, on average. Longer surgeries often mean a more tired surgeon and more chances for things to go wrong.

The robot-surgeon team might not have outperformed the surgeon alone because the procedure was a relatively simple one.

Surgical robots do not operate on their own. Rather, surgeons move electronic instruments that are linked to the movement of other instruments inside the body, while they watch a three-dimensional image of what’s going on inside. One robot can cost around $1.5 million.

“We were surprised that (surgery with the robot) did not have better outcomes than (the surgeon alone), as we have always believed if you can see more and see better you can do more and do better,” the authors write.

However, they suggest that more complicated procedures for severe endometriosis, which might require open surgery, would benefit from the help of a robot.

Inexperienced doctors might also take advantage of the robot for surgery if they don’t think they have the skills to do the surgery with only a small cut, Dr. Nezhat said. In this case, the robot could turn what would have to be an open surgery into a simpler one.

Dr. Tommaso Falcone, chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Cleveland Clinic, said this study shows that more technology is not always better. Using a robot for basic surgery, like the kind studied here, would be like using a computer to do addition, he told Reuters Health.

“I just need a calculator to add a few things,” said Falcone, who was not involved in the study. “Yes it’s true that if I’ve got that supercomputer maybe it looks better. But all I need to do is add 5 and 5.”

Especially in a time of concern over rising medical costs, “we should not simply use the highly sophisticated technology just because it’s there,” Falcone said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that there were no complications in either group and goes on to say that the robotic surgeries took longer, making it more likely that surgeons would make mistakes (although they did not, apparently, make any mistakes.) It says in passing that "the incision is smaller (and) the manipulations are more controlled" when a surgeon works without a robot, a counter-intuitive piece of information that merited at least an additional sentence of explanation, even in a story this short.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Middle-aged women may find some relief from hot flashes and other menopause problems with soy supplements, according to Chinese researchers.

They found daily supplements of soy germ isoflavones reduced the sudden sweats more than inactive placebo pills after six months.

But a U.S. expert wasn’t convinced by the results, which run counter to other published studies.

“The majority of them are showing no benefit,” said William W. Wong, a nutrition researcher at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston who wasn’t involved in the new work.

The new study, published in the journal Menopause, is based on 90 Chinese women. A third of them received placebo pills made of starch, while the rest took soy germ isoflavones, either 84 or 126 milligrams a day.

They all kept diaries of their hot flashes and filled out questionnaires about various problems tied to menopause, including hot flashes, sweating, insomnia, tiredness and headache.

At six months, their Kupperman scores — a measure of symptom severity that ranges from 0 to 63 — had dropped by more than 40 percent from an initial value of about 25 in the soy groups.

The number of hot flashes also fell from about 20 a week to less than 10.

While the same pattern was seen in the placebo group, it was less pronounced. Their symptom score dropped by 29 percent and the number of hot flashes by 35 percent, according to Dr. Yan-bin Ye of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou.

The work was supported by Frutarom Netherlands, which also donated the supplements.

Wong cautioned that the new study was small and that the women involved only had few hot flashes. He said it was “hard to believe” that soy would have an effect on these women.

In one of his own studies, Wong found no effect on soy germ isoflavones among women who took the supplements for two years.

The standard drug treatment for stubborn menopause symptoms is hormone replacement therapy. But doctors and women have become increasingly wary of that option because of serious side effects such as increased risk for heart attack, stroke and breast cancer.

“It is something they need to gauge, is it worth the risk?” Wong told Reuters Health.

He generally recommends exercise and an active lifestyle to women who feel bothered by menopause.

Soy supplements also have side effects such as nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the National Institutes of Health. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

Wong said that in Asia, women tend to think of menopause problems as a natural part of life — not a medical problem.

“There is a major cultural difference in how we deal with menopause symptoms,” he mused.

The new study didn’t find significant hormone changes in women who took soy supplements, and Wong said the compounds are probably safe for women.

“Consuming soy is not bad for them,” Wong noted, “but it might be a waste of money if you don’t see any benefit.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There was a brief mention of harms that the National Institutes of Health list for soy supplements, but no mention of side effects experienced by women in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Sarah, a petite 34-year-old woman from who asked that only her first name be used, considered implants, but said she didn’t want her breasts to “look hard or fake or extremely unnatural.” So she had Dr. Roger K. Khouri, a plastic and reconstructive surgeon in charge of the Miami Breast Center, take fat from her thighs and buttocks to fill out her chest.

“I love that it’s just mine, my own fat,” she said. “I didn’t have to put anything foreign in my body.”

At the October meeting of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Dr. Khouri presented a long-term study that suggested liposuctioned fat was now a “viable alternative to breast implants.” It tracked 50 women, ages 17 to 63, for an average follow-up of 3.5 years. (For weeks, participants wore a cumbersome bra-like tissue expander at night that was created by Dr. Khouri to create a scaffolding for their fat.) The study, which Dr. Khouri plans to publish in a peer-reviewed journal, found that the procedure does not impede the reading of mammograms and that on average, 85 percent of transplanted fat survived to give patients natural-feeling larger breasts.

This kind of is a two-fer: trim fat where you don’t want it and put it where you do. Another advantage is not having to worry about an implant breaking or hardening.

But the disadvantages cannot be discounted. It’s usually more expensive than implants, it takes a year to see how much fat survived, and breast volume can fluctuate with weight. Dr. Scott L. Spear, the chairman of the plastic surgery department at Hospital, has enlarged a patient’s breasts only to have the patient undo his handiwork by losing weight. “They decide to run a marathon and their breasts go away,” he said.

But a far worse scenario is that a doctor’s technique is so wanting that much of the transplanted fat dies and complications ensue. “Anyone can take fat and inject it into the breast, and the patient will look good immediately afterwards,” Dr. Khouri said, but a few months later, the fat injected by a doctor with sub-par skills may result in “oil cysts, masses, and scarring.”

To some, this kind of fat recycling seems simple. But Dr. Michael F. McGuire, the president of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, cautioned: “How you take the fat, how you process it, how you inject it are all factors in how successful fat survival is going to be.”

In some cases, radiologists can distinguish between innocuous and suspicious calcifications, said Dr. Sameer A. Patel, a plastic and reconstructive surgeon at Fox Chase Center in . But when they can’t, biopsies may be done. So he fears that fat injections for breast enlargement could increase unnecessary biopsies.

Last month, new guidelines from the recommended that most women should start mammograms at 50, instead of 40, to try to reduce the number of tests, including biopsies for false positives.

But a baseline mammogram for a woman considering breast augmentation (or reduction) is a must, said Dr. Emily F. Conant, a radiology professor and the chief of breast imaging at the Medical Center.

In recent years, fat injections have been used to correct irregularities from reconstructive breast surgery after a or a . Because much smaller volumes of fat are used, some plastic surgeons felt comfortable, for example, filling in a dent in the cleavage area.

But Dr. Stephen F. Sener, a professor of surgery at the Keck School of Medicine at the , wrote in an e-mail message: “I’ve seen enough injections of fat after mastectomies to tell you that fat necrosis is a real problem.” It can result in a “palpable mass” that needs to be biopsied to establish malignancy or infection, wrote Dr. Sener, the former president of the .

It’s a pivotal time to set the record straight on fat grafting to the breast. Recently, television news segments have featured doctors touting “natural breast augmentation.” In one segment available on YouTube.com, from an ABC station in , a patient said she grew two cup sizes after injections. Most doctors injecting fat for breast augmentation say implants are a better choice for such an increase.

The pleased mother of three in the news clip said her breasts grew “overnight,” which is misleading. Typically, doctors wait months to assess whether transplanted fat is there to stay. Others wait longer. “Unless you go a year, you can’t say ‘we succeeded,’ ” Dr. Spear said.

Yet, marketing for fat-enhanced breasts has ramped up. The Web site naturalaugmentation.com lists several doctors, mostly ob-gyns and family medicine physicians, not plastic surgeons, who offer coupons for “natural augmentation” and even something called “stem-cell breast augmentation.”

A company called makes a machine used in that concentrates the cells within fat tissue that aren’t strictly fat cells, including . The company hopes that its Celution 800 system can “double the cells that act as fertilizer, so it’s possible to achieve a more predictable graft,” said Tom Baker, the director of investor relations.

But Cytori’s machine hasn’t been approved by the . Nor has “concentrating” cells in fat been proved to make a difference in controlled studies, said Dr. Karol A. Gutowski, chairman of the plastic-surgery society’s task force.

That hasn’t stopped Dr. Todd Malan, a board-certified ob-gyn in , Ariz., who is the surgeon in the ABC news clip, from anointing himself the “First in U.S. to perform Stem Cell Enhanced Breast Augmentation!” on his Web site.

Dr. Coleman, who was part of the task force, said, “it’s easy to kill fat,” and worried that Johnny-come-latelies won’t be meticulous. “Suddenly everyone is claiming to have 10 years of experience,” said Dr. Coleman, who is a paid adviser to Cytori.

Dr. Coleman has that experience. In 1998, when augmenting breasts with fat was “unheard of,” Linda Francipane, a hairdresser in Manhattan, had her modest chest filled out by him. “The best part is I’m in my 40s and I have these nice perky breasts,” she said. “They look like teenager breasts.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml"/>



 
The body of the story details several potential complications including long-term fat loss that undoes any initial benefits, as well as the appearance of cysts, masses, nodules and scarring. The story also notes concern about fat grafts potentially interfering with breast cancer screening.
However, the story should have at least referred to such problems higher in the story. It also neglected to mention reports of at least one death, as well as strokes and serious infections including septic shock, that were noted in the task force report.


<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can carry serious health risks, but a new study adds to evidence that menopausal women who use the hormones may have lower odds of developing colon cancer.

The study, which followed nearly 57,000 California teachers, found that women who were using HRT at the outset were 36 percent less likely to develop colon cancer over the next decade than those who had never used HRT.

Of the 34,433 HRT users, 193 were diagnosed with colon cancer during the study period; that compared with 151 cases among the 13,778 women who had never used hormone replacement.

HRT — with either estrogen alone or a combination of estrogen and progestin — was linked to a lower colon cancer risk even when the researchers accounted for the women’s age, weight, exercise levels and race.

Older age and African-American race are risk factors for colon cancer, and there is evidence linking obesity and a sedentary lifestyle to the disease as well.

The findings, reported in the American Journal of Epidemiology, support the theory that estrogen offers some protection against colon cancer.

Some past studies have linked not only HRT, but also use of birth control pills, to a lower colon cancer risk. And lab experiments have shown that estrogen may inhibit tumor development in the colon by affecting cell growth, or by lowering levels of a cancer-linked hormone called IGF-1.

However, no one is recommending that women take HRT to ward off colon cancer. Millions of women stopped using the hormones after a large U.S. government study in 2002 found that postmenopausal women given HRT had higher risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots than women given an inactive placebo.

As a result, experts now advise that while HRT is effective at relieving menopausal symptoms — like hot flashes and vaginal dryness — women should take it at the lowest dose and for the shortest time possible.

These latest findings do not alter that advice. But they point to a need for further study into the different effects of HRT on specific organs, write the researchers, led by Dr. Katherine DeLellis Henderson of the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, California.

The findings are based on 56,864 menopausal women who took part in the California Teachers Study, a health study begun in 1995. Most of the women were past menopause at the outset, and 61 percent were currently using HRT.

Over the next decade, 442 women were diagnosed with colon cancer.

While women who were current HRT users at the start of the study showed a lower risk of the disease, the same was not true of those who were former users.

Henderson’s team also found that the beneficial effect of HRT was stronger among women who had had a first-degree relative diagnosed with colon cancer. Among these women, HRT use was linked to a 55 percent lower risk of the disease versus non-use.

The implications of that finding, if any, are not yet clear.

Family history of colon cancer is an established risk factor for the disease, but only one study, according to Henderson’s team, has looked at whether family history affects the link between HRT and colon cancer risk — and it found no evidence that it did.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did state, "a large U.S. government study in 2002 found that postmenopausal women given HRT had higher risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots than women given an inactive placebo."  And we think that’s sufficient in this case. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Dec. 27, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Heart failure patients have weakened hearts, but researchers say an experimental drug used for the first time in humans may repair heart cells and improve heart function.

According to the results of a small phase 1 trial, a single intravenous infusion of the drug cimaglermin was safe and, at high doses, improved heart function for at least three months.

"Right now we have many therapies that we use for heart failure, and these patients [in the study] were on all of those therapies and still had significant heart dysfunction," said lead researcher Dr. Daniel Lenihan. He's a professor of medicine and director of Vanderbilt University's heart clinical research program in Nashville.

People with heart failure often take a combination of drugs, Lenihan said. These include medications to lower blood pressure and diuretics to help remove excess fluid that builds up as a result of the heart's labored pumping ability. In addition, some people have implanted defibrillators or pacemakers.

Even with all these options, the death rate among these patients is "unacceptably high," Lenihan said.

Heart failure, a condition where the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs, is among the leading causes of death worldwide. A significant number of heart failure patients don't respond well to current treatments, particularly those patients whose left lower heart chamber, which pumps blood into the arteries, is weak, Lenihan said.

Cimaglermin acts as a growth factor for the heart, helping it repair itself following injury, Lenihan said. Specifically, it binds to the HER2 and HER4 receptors on the surface of heart cells that are important for cellular repair and survival, he explained.

Researchers have tried using stem cells to repair heart muscle in much the same way, he said, but these efforts have not been effective. "You don't see any sustained effect," he added.

A phase 1 trial like this one is designed to see if a new drug is safe, not to test its effectiveness. Before cimaglermin could be used to treat patients, it must prove its worth in a series of progressively larger and challenging trials and then be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The process can take several years. Based on these preliminary findings, larger trials are being planned, Lenihan said.

"This drug, although still in an experimental phase, might be an important way to improve heart function in patients with heart failure," he said.

For the study, Lenihan and his colleagues randomly assigned 40 patients to get an infusion of cimaglermin or a placebo.

Compared with patients who received a placebo, patients given a high dose of cimaglermin had a sustained increase in the heart's ability to pump blood. The improvement lasted 90 days, with the maximum increase in heart function reached in 28 days, the researchers found.

The most common side effects were headache and nausea directly after receiving the drug. One patient who received the highest dose of cimaglermin developed abnormal liver function, which cleared up over a two-week period, Lenihan said.

The study was funded by Acorda Therapeutics, the maker of cimaglermin, and the report was published online Dec. 26 in the journal JACC: Basic to Translational Science.

Dr. Nanette Bishopric is a professor of medicine at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine and the author of an accompanying journal editorial. "There haven't been breakthrough treatments for heart failure for a long time," she said.

Cimaglermin, however, may be such a drug, she said. "It's a remarkable thing that you could give a drug once and have it affect heart function three months later -- it's really extraordinary," she said.

Every drug currently used to treat heart failure has to be given daily or several times a day to get it to work, Bishopric said. "And when you stop taking it, it stops working," she said.

Despite the encouraging results of this first trial, a lot more testing will be needed before cimaglermin can be considered a standard treatment for heart failure, Bishopric said.

"These findings need to be replicated in larger trials, and you have to be able to predict whether improved heart function from cimaglermin will help people live longer and feel better," she noted.

For more on heart failure, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly points out that side effects included nausea and headaches, and that one participant did experience abnormal liver function after receiving the highest dose, a side effect that eventually cleared up.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heterosexuals who are HIV negative can significantly reduce their risk of infection by taking a daily dose of an antiviral drug, according to a new study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The study, called TDF2, followed 1,200 uninfected heterosexual men and women between the ages of 18 and 39 years in Botswana, Africa.

Study participants took a tablet containing tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and emitricitabine (TDF/FTC), whose brand name is Truvada, or a placebo. On average, patients were followed for a year although some were followed for about three and a half years. The risk of infection was reduced 63% overall, but for participants who actually got the drugs, that risk decreased by 78%.

Giving daily antiretroviral drugs to uninfected individuals to prevent the disease is called pre-exposure prophylaxis or PrEP. Previous studies have shown PrEP to be effective in reducing infection rates among the uninfected.

Dr. Kevin Fenton, director of the CDC's national Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, called the news a milestone. "It is clear we are not going to find one magic pill to solve the issue of HIV but by combining this approach with others we are beginning to get a better handle on combination packages. There is reason to be excited."

The news comes at the same time a second study looking at PrEP in heterosexual couples in Kenya and Uganda also found significant reductions in infection rates. The Partners PrEP study participants took either TDF/FTC, the drug tenofovir–brand name Viread, or a placebo. Preliminary results showed both treatments significantly reduced transmission in couples where one partner was already infected with the virus. Patients who took tenofovir had 62% fewer infections while those taking the combination drug had 73% fewer infections than those who got the placebo.

"Just a few years ago the tool kit for HIV prevention was not very large," says Dr. Jared Baeten, the principal investigator of the Partners PrEP study at the University of Washington. "Now we have a nice collection of really powerful strategies that work for the population at greatest risk in the world. This is really a game changer."

"We now have findings from two studies showing that PrEP can work for heterosexuals, the population hardest hit by HIV worldwide," Fenton said. "Taken together, these studies provide strong evidence the power of this prevention strategy."

In fact, an interim review of the Partners data on effectiveness was so compelling that the trial was stopped early and the placebo arm was discontinued. Clear evidence Baeten said, that PrEP substantially reduces infection risk. At the same time he says, there was no evidence of safety concerns. Patients taking the placebo will be put on one of the drugs.

In the TDF2 study those taking the drug reported nausea, vomiting and dizziness.

An earlier PrEP trial, the iPrEx study, looked at treatment in men who have sex with men. Infection rates dropped by 90% in patients who consistently used PrEP.

“We are in a critical moment in HIV prevention research,” said Robert Grant, M.D., M.P.H, of the Gladstone Institutes and the University of California at San Francisco. He is the iPrEx protocol chair. “iPrEx provided the first proof of an important new method of HIV prevention that can help slow the global toll of 2.6 million new HIV infections each year. Partners PrEP and the TDF2 study have now expanded that finding by demonstrating the effectiveness of PrEP in heterosexual women and men.

"Developing and deploying proven HIV prevention methods – including PrEP, microbicides, vaginal gels, clean needles, medical male circumcision, early treatment, counseling, testing, condoms and suppressive therapy for pregnant women will all be key to slowing the global epidemic," he said.

The CDC says the next step is to fully review all the data and begin to develop guidelines for the use of these drugs in heterosexual men and women here in the U.S.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Given that the primary source was a press statement (the results haven’t been published yet), the story provided about as much information about potential harms as could be expected. In one of the studies, the story notes that the safety monitors saw no evidence of safety concerns. The story also notes that subjects taking the active drug in the the other study reported nausea, vomiting and dizziness.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She is among just a dozen patients with advanced leukemia to have received the experimental treatment, which was developed at the University of Pennsylvania. Similar approaches are also being tried at other centers, including the and in New York.

“Our goal is to have a cure, but we can’t say that word,” said Dr. Carl June, who leads the research team at the University of Pennsylvania. He hopes the new treatment will eventually replace bone-marrow transplantation, an even more arduous, risky and expensive procedure that is now the last hope when other treatments fail in leukemia and related diseases.

Three adults with chronic leukemia treated at the University of Pennsylvania have also had complete remissions, with no signs of disease; two of them have been well for more than two years, said Dr. David Porter. Four adults improved but did not have full remissions, and one was treated too recently to evaluate. A child improved and then relapsed. In two adults, the treatment did not work at all. The researchers were presenting their results on Sunday and Monday in at a meeting of the American Society of Hematology.

Despite the mixed results, cancer experts not involved with the research say it has tremendous promise, because even in this early phase of testing it has worked in seemingly hopeless cases. “I think this is a major breakthrough,” said Dr. Ivan Borrello, a cancer expert and associate professor of medicine at the School of Medicine.

Dr. John Wagner, the director of pediatric blood and marrow transplantation at the , called the Pennsylvania results “phenomenal” and said they were “what we’ve all been working and hoping for but not seeing to this extent.”

A major drug company, , is betting on the Pennsylvania team and has committed $20 million to building a research center on the university’s campus to bring the treatment to market.

Hervé Hoppenot, the president of Novartis Oncology, called the research “fantastic” and said it had the potential — if the early results held up — to revolutionize the treatment of leukemia and related blood cancers. Researchers say the same approach, reprogramming the patient’s immune system, may also eventually be used against like breast and .

To perform the treatment, doctors remove millions of the patient’s T-cells — a type of white blood cell — and insert new genes that enable the T-cells to kill cancer cells. The technique employs a disabled form of H.I.V. because it is very good at carrying genetic material into T-cells. The new genes program the T-cells to attack B-cells, a normal part of the immune system that turn malignant in leukemia.

The altered T-cells — called chimeric antigen receptor cells — are then dripped back into the patient’s veins, and if all goes well they multiply and start destroying the cancer.

The T-cells home in on a protein called CD-19 that is found on the surface of most B-cells, whether they are healthy or malignant.

A sign that the treatment is working is that the patient becomes terribly ill, with raging fevers and chills — a reaction that oncologists call “shake and bake,” Dr. June said. Its medical name is cytokine-release syndrome, or cytokine storm, referring to the natural chemicals that pour out of cells in the immune system as they are being activated, causing fevers and other symptoms. The storm can also flood the lungs and cause perilous drops in — effects that nearly killed Emma.

Steroids sometimes ease the reaction, but they did not help Emma. Her temperature hit 105. She wound up on a ventilator, unconscious and swollen almost beyond recognition, surrounded by friends and family who had come to say goodbye.

But at the 11th hour, a battery of blood tests gave the researchers a clue as to what might help save Emma: her level of one of the cytokines, interleukin-6 or IL-6, had shot up a thousandfold. Doctors had never seen such a spike before and thought it might be what was making her so sick.

Dr. June knew that a drug could lower IL-6 — his daughter takes it for . It had never been used for a crisis like Emma’s, but there was little to lose. Her oncologist, Dr. Stephan A. Grupp, ordered the drug. The response, he said, was “amazing.”

Within hours, Emma began to stabilize. She woke up a week later, on May 2, the day she turned 7; the intensive-care staff sang

Since then, the research team has used the same drug, tocilizumab, in several other patients.

In patients with lasting remissions after the treatment, the altered T-cells persist in the bloodstream, though in smaller numbers than when they were fighting the disease. Some patients have had the cells for years.

Dr. Michel Sadelain, who conducts similar studies at the Sloan-Kettering Institute, said: “These T-cells are living drugs. With a pill, you take it, it’s eliminated from your body and you have to take it again.” But T-cells, he said, “could potentially be given only once, maybe only once or twice or three times.”

The Pennsylvania researchers said they were surprised to find any big drug company interested in their work, because a new batch of T-cells must be created for each patient — a far cry from the familiar commercial strategy of developing products like or medicines, in which millions of people take the same drug.

But Mr. Hoppenot said Novartis was taking a different path with cancer drugs, looking for treatments that would have a big, unmistakable impact on a small number of patients. Such home-run drugs can be approved more quickly and efficiently, he said, with smaller studies than are needed for drugs with less obvious benefits.

But such drugs tend to be extremely expensive. A prime example is the Novartis drug Gleevec, which won rapid approval in 2001 for use against certain types of leukemia and gastrointestinal tumors. It can cost more than $5,000 a month, depending on the dosage.

Dr. June said that producing engineered T-cells costs about $20,000 per patient — far less than the cost of a bone-marrow transplant. Scaling up the procedure should make it even less expensive, he said, but he added, “Our costs do not include any profit margin, facility depreciation costs or other clinical care costs, and other research costs.”

The research is still in its early stages, and many questions remain. The researchers are not entirely sure why the treatment works, or why it sometimes fails. One patient had a remission after being treated only twice, and even then the reaction was so delayed that it took the researchers by surprise. For the patients who had no response whatsoever, the team suspects a flawed batch of T-cells. The child who had a temporary remission apparently relapsed because not all of her leukemic cells had the marker that was targeted by the altered T-cells.

It is not clear whether a patient’s body needs the altered T-cells forever. The cells do have a drawback: they destroy healthy B-cells as well as cancerous ones, leaving patients vulnerable to certain types of infections, so Emma and the other patients need regular treatments with immune globulins to prevent illness.

So far, her parents say, Emma seems to have taken it all in stride. She went back to school this year with her second-grade classmates, and though her grades are high and she reads about 50 books a month, she insists impishly that her favorite subjects are lunch and recess.

“It’s time for her to be a kid again and get her childhood back,” Mr. Whitehead said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story describes some of the adverse effects of treatment in great detail, and mentions that patients treated successfully have compromised immune systems and must undergo ongoing therapy with immunoglobulins. The story could have noted that we have little idea what kind of long-term challenges these patients might face as a result of the alterations made to their immune systems.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Zafgen Inc. is set Wednesday to release findings of a clinical trial showing many patients taking its experimental obesity treatment lost weight and engaged in less binge-eating, pointing to a way forward for a drug program halted by regulators last year after the deaths of two patients.

Thomas E. Hughes, chief executive of Zafgen, said the Boston company will use the data to prepare a “risk-mitigation” plan to help persuade the Food and Drug Administration to lift its so-called clinical hold on the late-stage trial, allowing it to resume. But he conceded that Zafgen, which had once hoped to begin selling its drug candidate, Beloranib, as early as 2016, will have to conduct at least one additional study before it can apply for FDA approval.

“We’re delighted with the results,” Hughes said in an interview. “This is the first demonstration of a clinical benefit against two of the major issues that affect this patient population. Our intention is to provide a plan for moving forward with an emphasis on patient safety.”

The clinical results did not address a key issue for patients and regulators: whether Beloranib triggered the blood clotting that resulted in two patient deaths last year. Zafgen has lost more than 80 percent of its stock value since the week in October when the first death was made public.

Many patients suffering from Prader-Willi syndrome, the rare condition Beloranib treats, are prone to blood-clotting and other diseases. Hughes said Zafgen will continue to study the effect of the drug in its further trials and risk-mitigation plan, and address it in discussions with FDA officials.

“As of today, we have no evidence to suggest that Beloranib by itself can cause blood clots,” Hughes said. “This is a patient population that’s at risk for thrombotic [clotting] issues.”

Zafgen said its six-month study involving 107 patients suffering from Prader-Willi syndrome met its two primary goals, known as end points: showing significant weight loss by many patients and a decrease of hyperphagia-related behavior, meaning excessive eating.

While the FDA’s clinical hold prevented Zafgen from completing its trial, Dennis D. Kim, the company’s chief medical officer, said it was largely finished. Sixty-eight of the enrolled patients completed the study, Kim said, while 27 other patients completed 20 of the trial’s scheduled 26 weeks. A small number of other patients withdrew early.

Zafgen has not identified the patients who died or said at which of 14 US trial sites they were taking the drug. Some analysts have suggested the FDA might approve the drug, despite the adverse events, if Zafgen can prove its benefits outweigh its risks to some patients.

There are currently no treatments for Prader-Willi syndrome, the most common genetic cause of life-threatening obesity. Prader-Willi affects an estimated 6,000 to 8,000 Americans.

It can dominate the lives of patients and their families, leading to excessive overeating, choking, and stomach rupture, along with slowed metabolism and psychiatric disorders.

“The efficacy of Beloranib looks very promising,” said Dr. Merlin G. Butler, director of research and genetics at the University of Kansas Medical Center in Kansas City, Kan., and a principal investigator for the clinical trial there. “We’ve seen individuals who have lost significant amounts of weight in the six-month period. We think the drug must at least diminish the food-seeking drive, which correlates to an increased caloric intake in patients.”

Zafgen, founded in 2005, is backed by investors that include venture capital firms Atlas Venture of Cambridge and Third Rock Ventures of Boston. The company raised $96 million in an initial public offering in 2014, using the money to finance its clinical studies.

Shares of Zafgen, which traded as high as $55.36 on the Nasdaq stock exchange last year, closed Tuesday at $5.62, down nearly 3.3 percent for the day.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article discloses the possible side effects of beloranib related to blood clotting along with the caveat that Prader-Willi patients are predisposed to clotting issues. Two deaths out of 100 patients is a significant issue, even if they can’t be linked definitively to the drug, so it’s good that this is a focal point. But the story mentions no other adverse effects that were observed in the study, and it should have. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt and hope for improvement next time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The delivery virus, carrying a good version of the human gene for the clotting agent known as Factor IX, was prepared by researchers at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis. The patients had been recruited and treated with the virus in England by a team led by Dr. Amit C. Nathwani of University College London; researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia monitored their immune reactions.

Hemophilia B is caused by a defect in the gene for Factor IX. Fatal if untreated, the disease occurs almost only in men because the Factor IX gene lies on the X chromosome, of which men have only a single copy.

Women who carry a defective gene on one X chromosome can compensate with the good copy on their other X chromosome, but they bequeath the defective copy to half their children. About one in 30,000 of newborn boys have the disease, with about 3,000 patients in the United States.

Dr. Nathwani and his team reported that they treated the patients by infusing the delivery virus into their veins. The virus homes in on the cells of the liver, and the gene it carries then churns out correct copies of Factor IX. A single injection enabled the patients to produce small amounts of Factor IX, enough that four of the six could stop the usual treatment, injections of Factor IX concentrate prepared from donated blood. The other two patients continued to need concentrate, but less frequently.

Treating a patient with concentrate costs $300,000 a year, with a possible lifetime cost of $20 million, but the single required injection of the new delivery virus costs just $30,000, Dr. Katherine P. Ponder of the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis notes in her commentary in The New England Journal of Medicine, calling the trial “a landmark study.”

The patients have continued to produce their own Factor IX for up to 22 months, said Dr. Edward G. D. Tuddenham, director of the Hemophilia Center at the Royal Free Hospital in London. One patient, a geologist, had a good response at first, but his level of Factor IX has declined to 1 percent of normal, the level at which the disease kicks in.

“We attribute this to the fact that he had an inflammation, and although we treated it promptly, we should have been quicker off the mark,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

The patient cannot be injected again with the same virus because his immune system is now primed to attack it. “He’s very philosophic about it, but he’s a scientist, and his motivation is to help the science,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

Twenty more patients will be treated to assess the best dose of the virus, the goal being the highest dose that does not set off an immune system attack, Dr. Tuddenham said. “We are pretty close to the sweet spot,” he said. If all goes well, a genetic treatment for hemophilia B “could be available for widespread use in a couple of years.”

In a trial in 2006, a patient injected with a corrective gene produced his own Factor IX but only for 10 weeks. The designer of that treatment, Dr. Katherine A. High of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, said the new therapy had worked because the delivery virus had been made more efficient and because the research team had treated the patients with steroids to suppress immune system attacks on the virus.

“I think it’s incredibly exciting, and I say that even though these people are my competitors,” she said. Dr. High is listed as a co-author of the report because her laboratory helped monitor the patients and provided proof for regulators that the virus would not insert its human gene into the patients’ sperm and make the change hereditary.

A serious problem with other delivery viruses is that they insert themselves randomly into chromosomes, sometimes disrupting a gene. The virus used by Dr. Nathwani’s team, known as adeno-associated virus-8, generally stays outside the chromosomes, so it should not present this problem. Still, patients will need to be monitored for liver cancer, a small possibility that has been observed in mice.

“I don’t think it’s a showstopper, but it’s a critical safety issue that has to be assessed,” Dr. High said.

Patients have little or no immunity to the adeno-associated virus, which infects rhesus monkeys. The virus has a propensity for making liver cells its target, which is good for the therapy because these cells are the natural producers of Factor IX. However, liver cells do not live forever and slowly replenish themselves, possibly limiting how long the therapy will last.

About 80 percent of hemophilia cases are of the type known as hemophilia A, which is caused by defects in a different blood-clotting agent, Factor VIII. Researchers have focused on hemophilia B, in part, because the Factor IX gene is much smaller and easier to work with.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions serious problems with other delivery viruses and that liver cancer had been observed in mouse studies.  The description of the one patient’s decline – and the fact that he can’t be injected again with the same virus “because his immune system is now primed to attack it” was also important.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A government committee of health experts yesterday opened the door to selling Orlistat, a prescription weight-loss drug in a reduced dosage directly to consumers.

While the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) still must approve the switch, the agency often follows the advice of its experts. If it does, Orlistat (xenical) -- currently sold only by prescription -- could be available over-the-counter (OTC) later this year. But it's important to know that the weight loss that's typical for users of the drug -- 5 to 10 percent of total weight -- will be less than many dieters expect. And many consumers may be put off by the drug's significant gastrointestinal side effects, including flatulence, diarrhea and anal leakage.

Nor is Orlistat a quick fix for unwanted pounds. To achieve any weight loss, users must also eat fewer calories and exercise more.

"It's not a miracle drug," notes Lawrence Cheskin, director of the Weight Management Center at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore, who conducted a study of Orlistat in adolescents. "None of these [weight loss] medications are."

Orlistat was approved as a weight loss and weight maintenance drug by the FDA in 1999 to treat obese and overweight people -- those with a body mass index of 30 or higher -- and overweight people (with BMI of 27 or higher) who already have weight-related health problems including diabetes, heart disease or high blood pressure.

More than 100 studies involving some 30,000 patients have been conducted with Orlistat, according to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) Consumer Healthcare, the maker of Orlistat, which has petitioned the FDA to permit OTC sales of the drug. The company says that 22 million people in 145 countries have taken the drug. "Orlistat is a very safe and effective drug with a long history of use around the world," says George Quesnelle, president of GSK Consumer Healthcare, North America.

In the longest study of Orlistat, participants who took the drug in addition to eating fewer calories and increasing exercise shed up to 12 percent of their body weight the first year. But by the fourth year of the study, they had regained some pounds. Overall, they lost about 7 percent of their body weight, compared to 4 percent for a control group that dieted and increased physical activity but didn't take the drug. The 7 percent figure works out to about 18 pounds for someone who weighs 250.

"That's little difference in weight, but significant in terms of medical benefits," notes Samuel Klein, director of the Center for Human Nutrition at the Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine. Those lost pounds translate to lower blood pressure, improved blood cholesterol levels and reduced risk of diabetes.

While Americans spend an estimated $1 billion on nonprescription weight loss products, few if any of those products have undergone the rigorous testing that is required by the FDA for prescription medications. Some weight loss experts say making Orlistat available directly to consumers broadens the proven options available to people trying to reach a healthier weight. "It's very exciting," Klein says.

But "the problem with Orlistat are the side effects," notes Johns Hopkins endocrinologist Aniket Sidhaye, co-author with Cheskin of a recent scientific review of Orlistat and other prescription weight loss drugs.

At the current recommended prescription dose -- 120 milligrams taken up to three times per day, for example up to 360 milligrams daily -- about 70 percent of users experience gastrointestinal complications, Klein says. They range from flatulence and increased bowel movements to diarrhea and anal leakage.

That's because Orlistat works by blocking fat absorption in the intestine. When fat that's eaten isn't absorbed, it must be eliminated. Thus, the gastrointestinal problems.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that about 70% of users experience gastrointestinal 
complications and lists some. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For those plagued with peanut allergies, protection may eventually come in the form of a patch worn on the skin, a new study suggests.

In the second phase of a drug trial, half of participants wearing the highest dose “peanut patches” for a year were able to consume the equivalent of four peanuts without reacting, researchers reported Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology.

It means that “they are not going to have to worry about traces of peanut in a package that came from a plant where peanuts were used or minor contamination of food in a restaurant,” said the study’s lead author, Dr. Hugh Sampson, a professor of pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine and director of the Jaffe Food Allergy Institute at Mount Sinai.

That's a potentially life-saving development. Consuming even trace amounts of a food allergen can cause a reaction. About 15 million Americans have food allergies, including 1 in 13 children, according to the Food Allergy Research and Education (FARE) group. Eight foods account for 90 percent of all reactions: milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, wheat, fish and shellfish.

Unlabeled allergens are a leading cause of food recalls in the U.S. and the number of food allergy-related visits to hospitals are on the rise, according to the Food and Drug Administration.

The FDA recently warned people with peanut allergies to avoid foods containing ground cumin, after traces of peanut powder were found in the ground spice.

In the skin patch trial, the international team of researchers randomly assigned 221 volunteers, ages 6 to 55, to wear a placebo patch or a patch containing peanut protein at one of three doses: 50 micrograms, 100 micrograms or 250 micrograms.

At the end of a year, 50 percent of those wearing the high-dose 250 microgram patch were able to tolerate consuming at least one gram of peanut protein. The same dose worked for nearly 54 percent of kids, 6 to 11.

The skin patch — intended to desensitize patients to peanuts by exposing them to tiny amounts of the allergen — may be particularly appealing to children who are too frightened to try oral or under-the-tongue therapy.

“Many have been told all their lives that if they ingest peanuts they will have a severe reaction and die," he said. "So it’s tough to get them to take it. With this you just slap a little patch on their backs.”

Although some volunteers experienced redness and itchiness at the site of the patch, there were no serious side effects. Just two dropped out because of flare-ups of eczema.

“The goal for most practicing allergists and for most parents is to get a child to the point where if there is an accidental ingestion of peanut it would not be as risky or life-threatening,” said Dr. Amy Stallings, an assistant professor of pediatrics in the division of allergy and immunology at the Duke University Medical Center who is not affiliated with the new study. “And the patch may be a way of doing this that is safer.”

The patch study's results are promising, although researchers need to continue following the participants for another year, Sampson said. It could be several more years before the patch will be available for consumers.

Researchers are trying to discover why food allergies have increased among children — the number of kids living with peanut or tree nut allergies tripled between 1997 and 2008, studies show — but there’s no clear answer. Allergies to peanuts and tree nuts tend to begin in childhood and are usually lifelong.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story handles this aspect well, by noting side effects of the patches and explaining the difficulties experienced by two participants forced to drop out of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After three years, teens with severe obesity who underwent stomach reduction surgery to lose weight also significantly improved their heart health.

A study published Monday in Pediatrics shows that blood pressure, cholesterol, inflammation and insulin levels all improved, particularly among those who lost the most weight.

"The potential impact of such risk reduction translates into a reduced likelihood of developing significant heart disease later in life, including atherosclerosis, heart failure and stroke," says study author Marc Michalsky, surgical director of the Center for Healthy Weight and Nutrition at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, in an email. "This study serves to reinforce the benefits of bariatric surgery as a safe and effective treatment strategy that should be considered sooner rather than later."

Younger adolescents in the study showed bigger improvements in their cholesterol and inflammation levels than the older teens. Even participants who had normal-range blood pressure, triglycerides or cholesterol levels before surgery saw improved measures.

Nearly a third of all children and teens are overweight or obese in the U.S., and an estimated 4 to 7 percent have severe obesity. The greater a person's obesity, the greater their risk of high blood pressure, heart disease, Type 2 diabetes and organ damage.

The findings are important because many of the participants in this study likely already had some level of cardiac damage, such as thickened arteries or heart walls, says Geetha Raghuveer, a pediatric cardiologist at Children's Mercy Kansas City in Missouri who was not involved in the study.

"If you have very high blood pressure or lipids [cholesterol] or diabetes, you do see cardiovascular changes even at a very young age," Raghuveer says. "They may not be having a heart attack or stroke in their teens and 20s, but they're closer to having those in their 30s and 40s."

Among 242 teens in the study, 161 of them underwent a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedure, 67 underwent a vertical sleeve gastrectomy and 14 received an adjustable gastric banding. The study authors had no part in which procedures the teens received. They collected data from the five participating medical centers for their observational study, and decisions about procedures depended on each center's clinical practices.

The teens, ages 15 to 18 when the study began, had a body mass index (BMI) between 34 and 88, with half over 51. Medical providers use BMI, the ratio of a person's weight to height, to estimate body fat. A BMI over 25 is considered overweight; over 30 is obese. The obesity classification with the highest risks of health problems is a BMI of 40 or higher.

The risk factors measured in the study included elevated blood pressure (above 120/80 mg/Hg), high cholesterol, high insulin levels in the blood and abnormally high levels of C-reactive protein, an indicator of inflammation in the body. The higher a person's insulin levels are, the more likely they are to have or develop insulin resistance, which can increase blood sugar levels and diabetes risk. High insulin levels may also contribute to increased blood pressure and increase the risk of atherosclerosis, when fat clogs the arteries.

Three years after surgery, teens who underwent a gastric bypass had a 27 percent drop in their BMI, similar to the 26 percent drop in those who had the sleeve gastrectomy. Those with the gastric band had an 8 percent drop in BMI.

Before surgery, only 3 percent of the teens had no cardiac risk factors at all, but three years later, just over half of them (52 percent) had no risk factors. Just 5 percent had all four cardiac risk factors before their surgeries, but none had all of them three years later. In fact, the majority of the participants — 83 percent — had only one or no risk factors three years after their surgeries. The proportion of participants with two or three risk factors also dropped substantially.

"One of the surprises was that almost all patients benefited as a result of the surgery," says M. James Lenhard, the medical director of Christiana Care Health System's Diabetes & Metabolic Diseases Center in Wilmington, Del., who was not involved in the study. The average BMI three years after surgery was 39, still considered very obese, he says. "And yet they still had significant improvements in cardiovascular risk factors," Lenhard says. "The results were impressive."

The study's biggest limitation is its very selective population. Most of the participants were female, most were white, and most received the gastric bypass. Children of color have the greatest risk of obesity, heart disease and Type 2 diabetes, but it's not clear whether they would see the same improvement with these procedures. Lenhard expects the "odds are very good" that they would, and Raghuveer "would be cautiously optimistic" that the findings would be similar regardless of sex or ethnicity.

The population also included only teens with the greatest obesity who were also unsuccessful trying other weight loss methods.

"Severe obesity is notoriously difficult to treat with anything other than surgery," Lenhard says. "The results of this study suggest that performing surgery at a BMI even lower than 52 would provide even better outcomes."

An estimated 1,600 adolescents undergo metabolic or bariatric surgeries each year, the study notes, but families should only consider such procedures after exhausting other treatment options.

"This is not a procedure you would consider for any obese patient who walks through the door," Raghuveer says. "It would be considered for the highly obese and those not responding to any behavioral modifications, physical activity or calorie restriction."

Before undergoing bariatric surgery, teens and their families receive extensive counseling, Michalsky says.

"Teens considering bariatric surgery should have a frank discussion with their family and primary care provider and seek detailed information from well-established bariatric surgery centers that are specifically dedicated to treating adolescents," he adds.

All three procedures carry the same risks as any surgical procedure, such as infections, blood clots and bleeding, Lenhard said, and a common risk of sleeve gastrectomy is bleeding where the stomach is reconnected. People who have a gastric bypass often have nutritional and vitamin deficiencies, Lenhard said. And gastric banding has low effectiveness and a risk of the band slipping down the stomach.

Getting longer term data is important, too. Three years is a good follow-up time for this type of study, and it has many more participants than similar studies.

"However, three years is not a long time overall in the life of a child," Raghuveer says. "I'd be curious what happens to these kids at 10 years, 15 years later."

Michalsky says the study is ongoing, and they expect to continuing gathering information for years to come.

Ideally, public health efforts should aim for better obesity prevention, including parent education and interventions when children are toddlers and preschoolers, according to Raghuveer. "A generational divide" has left fewer families knowing how to fix meals, she says, and more families need to learn to cook and avoid packaged foods and microwave dinners.

"The big question is, how do we prevent obese kids from getting to this point where they would need an invasive surgical procedure?" Raghuveer says. "The bigger message should be that we should get to a point in society where we are not managing obesity, but we are preventing obesity."

Tara Haelle is the co-author of The Informed Parent: A Science-Based Resource for Your Child's First Four Years. She's on Twitter: @tarahaelle
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that the weight-reduction procedures “carry the same risks as any surgical procedure, such as infections, blood clots and bleeding” as well as nutritional and vitamin deficiencies. It also states that gastric banding “has low effectiveness and a risk of the band slipping down the stomach.” Note: The most risky complications (problems arising from general anesthesia) were not mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People with diets short on omega-3 fatty acids – the kind found in fish oil – were more likely to experience accelerated brain aging, a new study found.

“People with lower levels of omega-3 fatty acids had lower brain volumes that were equivalent to about two years of brain aging,” said Dr. Zaldy S. Tan, a member of the UCLA Easton Center for Alzheimer’s Disease Research in the Department of Neurology.

The study was published Tuesday in the print edition of the journal Neurology.

Tan and his colleagues compared blood levels of two nutrients in omega-3 fatty acids with MRI brain scans and cognitive tests. They found people in the bottom 25% scored lower on such mental tests as problem solving, multi-tasking and abstract thinking.

Tan said the MRI images showed those with lower levels of omega-3 fatty acids were also more likely to have minute but significant structural changes in the brain. The MRIs showed higher white matter hyperintensity volume, tiny lesions in the brain, raising the risk for death, stroke and dementia for the low omega-3 fatty acids group.

Tan said the results were consistent with signs of damage to the intricate network of blood vessels in the brain. A third of the brain by volume is composed of blood vessels.

Tan’s team studied 1,575 people with an average age of 67 who were free of dementia. They controlled for such risk factors as age, smoking, gender, body mass index, physical activity and APOE, the one known gene linked to dementia risk.

Tan said the next step in the research is to follow these people to see if the risk factors they observed translates into a higher rate of cognitive deterioration.

Fatty fish like salmon offer a concentrated source of the omega-3 fatty acid nutrients Tan and his colleagues looked at eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).

Vegetable and canola oils, soybeans, flaxseed, walnuts and vegetables including spinach, kale and salad greens are also a source of omega-3 fatty acids. These contain alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), which the body partially converts to EPA and DHA.

Both types are thought to be beneficial. The typical American diet doesn't contain enough of either. Choose My Plate, the government’s dietary guidelines, recommends eating seafood twice a week.

“This is an important new finding that supports omega-3 for brain health and brain size,” said Dr. Majid Fotuhi, chairman of the Neurology Institute for Brain Health and Fitness and assistant professor of neurology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

Fotuhi recommends his patients get 1,000 mg per day of DHA, a nutrient that increases blood flow in the brain, reduces inflammation in the brain, heart and elsewhere, and reduces the toxic aggregation of amyloid in the brain.

DHA has the added benefit of improving mood and reducing symptoms of depression, he said. The only people who should avoid DHA are patients on a blood thinner like Cumadin, he added.

Neurology, published weekly, is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention that DHA has the potential to cause problems in people taking blood-thinning medication.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study, published Thursday in The , looked at what happened in before and after 1996, when the country began rolling out mammograms for women ages 50 to 69 along with special breast cancer teams to treat all women with breast cancer.

The study is not perfect. The ideal study would randomly assign women to have mammograms or not. But, cancer experts said, no one would do such a study today when mammograms are generally agreed to prevent breast cancer deaths. In the study, which is continuing, women were followed for a maximum of 8.9 years. It is possible that benefits may emerge later.

Nonetheless, the new study is “very credible,” said Dr. Barnett Kramer, associate director for disease prevention at the .

“This is the first time researchers used real populations to compare the effects of treatment and mammography in the modern era of treatment,” Dr. Kramer said. “It shows the relative impacts of screening versus therapy in an era in which therapy has been improving.”

Dr. Otis Brawley of the said in a statement that the investigators used “careful methodology.” The society, Dr. Brawley said, “believes that the total body of the science supports the fact that regular mammography is an important part of a woman’s .”

Dr. Carol Lee, a radiologist at and chairwoman of the breast imaging commission of the American College of Radiology, said the new study affirmed that mammography saves lives.

“Mortality from breast cancer is decreasing, and I have to believe that screening mammography has played a part,” Dr. Lee said.

In their study, the investigators analyzed data from all 40,075 Norwegian women who had received a diagnosis of breast cancer from 1986 to 2005, a time when treatment was changing markedly.

In that period, 4,791 women died. And, starting in 1996, Norway began offering mammograms to women ages 50 to 69 and assigning multidisciplinary treatment teams to all women with breast cancer, similar to the teams at many major medical centers in the . The question was, Did the program of mammograms and optimal new treatment with coordinated teams of surgeons, pathologists, oncologists, radiologists and nurses lower the breast cancer death rate?

The investigators found that women 50 to 69 who had mammograms and were treated by the special teams had a 10 percent lower breast cancer death rate than similar women who had had neither.

They also found, though, that the death rate fell by 8 percent in women over 70 who had the new treatment teams but had not been invited to have mammograms. And Dr. Kramer said he knew of no evidence that breast cancer was more easily treated in women over 70 than in women ages 50 to 69.

That means, Dr. H. Gilbert Welch of Dartmouth wrote in an additional analysis in an accompanying editorial, that mammography could have reduced the breast cancer death rate by as little as 2 percent, an amount so small that it is not really different from zero.

Two percent is an estimate, Dr. Welch said. But, he said, whatever the effect of mammograms is, “all the signals here are that it is much smaller than we believed.”

Dr. Laura Esserman, a professor of surgery and radiology at the in , said it tells her that “if you get the same treatment and the outcome is the same if you find it earlier or later, then you don’t make a difference when you find it early.”

And screening has a cost, Dr. Welch said. Screening 2,500 50-year-olds for a decade would identify 1,000 women with at least one suspicious mammogram resulting in follow-up tests. Five hundred would have biopsies. And 5 to 15 of those women would be treated for cancers that, if left alone, would have grown so slowly they would never have been noticed.

When the study was planned, the scientists expected that screening would be even more effective than it was in studies from decades ago. After all, mammography had improved and, in Norway, each mammogram was independently read by two radiologists, which should make it less likely that cancers would be missed. The researchers expected mammograms to reduce the breast cancer death rate by a third.

“We were surprised,” said Dr. Mette Kalager, the lead author of the paper who is a breast surgeon at University and a visiting scientist at the Harvard School of Public Health.

Marvin Zelen, a statistician at the Harvard School of Public Health and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, who was a member of the research team said even though the mammography benefit is small, if he were a woman he would get screened.

“It all depends on how you approach risk,” Dr. Zelen said. His approach, he says, is “minimax” — he wants to minimize the maximum risk — which, in this case, is dying of a cancer.

Dr. Kalager came to the opposite conclusion. She worries about the small chance of benefit in light of the larger chance of finding and treating a cancer that did not need to be treated.

“Since I’m a breast cancer surgeon, I know what being treated is like,” she says. The decision to be screened, she says, “is a matter of personal preference. Is it worth it to risk becoming a patient without it being necessary?”

Many women may still want mammograms, she says, and that is fine.

“I think we have to respect what women want to do.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The story notes that screening mammography exposes women to false alarms scares as well as the risks and harms of treating tumors that actually would not have become life-threatening.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Tammy Wade knew she had to try something else to lose weight when she stepped on the scale and saw the number: 203 pounds.

Wade, 50, of McCalla, Ala., is only 5 feet 3 inches tall. She had tried everything. Nothing worked.

"I had problems with my feet and ankles, and they were saying I was borderline diabetic," Wade says. "I'm like, well, I gotta do something, you know. So, I needed, really did need to lose the weight."

So Wade volunteered to help test Qnexa, an experimental drug pending before the Food and Drug Administration. She quickly noticed a big difference.

"I didn't feel ravenous, and I didn't want to snack all day long," she says.

Over the next year, Qnexa helped Wade slowly drop about 40 pounds, and keep it off for another year. "It makes you feel so much better," Wade says. "Your back don't hurt, your feet don't hurt."

But the FDA rejected Qnexa in 2010 because of concerns about side effects, especially possible heart problems and birth defects.

Qnexa's rejection came amid a flurry of failed attempts by drug companies to win approvals of new weight-loss drugs. The setbacks put a spotlight on how the FDA handles these drugs.

Even though obesity is at epidemic levels, the FDA hasn't approved any new weight-loss medicines since 1999.

"We have two-thirds of all Americans who are overweight or obese, and the costs are nearing $150 billion a year," says Christine Ferguson, a health policy professor at George Washington University. "The sheer magnitude of the problem really requires us to address it more aggressively and thoughtfully than we have."

Ferguson has been helping to organize a series of meetings involving public health experts, anti-obesity advocates, government officials and others to try to figure out what the FDA should do.

"We actually have this huge gap," says Joe Nadglowski of the Obesity Action Coalition, who has been participating in the meetings. "We go from Weight Watchers to bariatric surgery. And the fact that there isn't ... medical treatments for obesity, including pharmaceuticals, really is a challenge, considering how big the problem is in this country."

Part of what's going on is that the FDA has gotten a lot more cautious about approving new drugs in general after some serious drug-safety problems, such as heart problems linked to the painkiller Vioxx.

The FDA has been especially tough on weight-loss drugs because of previous problems with those drugs, such as the diet drug cocktail fen-phen.

"There's been a long history with obesity drugs that we've had to take off the market. You recall the fen-phen episode where a significant number of people got heart-valve defects," says Janet Woodcock, a top FDA official.

Woodcock argues that the agency has to be extra-careful with weight-loss drugs, because chances are it won't just be obese people taking them.

"When you're talking about a drug where it could go into literally tens of millions of Americans, there has to be attention to safety," Woodcock says.

What might look like a rare problem now could turn into another public health disaster, she says.

But some say the agency's aversion to accepting any risks is outdated. They say the FDA wrongly still tends to view weight-loss drugs as diet pills — something frivolous and used primarily for cosmetic purposes.

"We are not talking about medications to help someone lose five pounds to fit into their prom dress or wedding dress. We're talking about medications to help those who are struggling with the health impact of obesity," Nadglowski says.

So Nadglowski and others are pushing the FDA to take into consideration whether the risks of new drugs may be outweighed by their benefits beyond weight loss, such as reducing the risk for heart disease, diabetes and other complications of obesity.

Woodcock says officials realize they may have to think about things differently.

As the FDA works through this, many are watching how the agency handles Qnexa. An FDA advisory panel is scheduled to review Qnexa again on Feb. 22.

Barbara Troupin of Vivus, the company that is developing Qnexa, says the drug appears to do a lot more than just help people lose weight.

"We see decreases in blood pressure. We see decreased rates of progression to diabetes. We see improvements in sleep apnea. We see improvements in quality of life. Pretty much all of our data shows significant benefits," she says.

Vivus hopes the FDA will agree that those benefits will outweigh some of the risks, including the concerns about birth defects. The company is submitting new data it says show that the risk is lower than had been feared. Vivus also has a plan to minimize the chances that pregnant women will take it.

Some see Qnexa as a test of the FDA trying to recalibrate how it weighs risks and benefits for weight-loss drugs.

For her part, Wade just wants to be able to start taking it again. She's gained back half of the weight she lost.

"I need to lose 20 more pounds again," she says. "And I need the help."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story sidebar notes – from the FDA briefing documents: “The review noted continued concerns that Qnexa can increase the risk for several possible side effects, including increased heart rate, birth defects and thinking problems such as memory lapses and confusion.”
It also included these caveats:
“There’s been a long history with obesity drugs that we’ve had to take off the market. You recall the fen-phen episode where a significant number of people got heart-valve defects,” says Janet Woodcock, a top FDA official.
Woodcock argues that the agency has to be extra-careful with weight-loss drugs, because chances are it won’t just be obese people taking them.
“When you’re talking about a drug where it could go into literally tens of millions of Americans, there has to be attention to safety,” Woodcock says.
What might look like a rare problem now could turn into another public health disaster, she says.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drinking more than four cups of coffee may lower the risk of some head and neck cancers, according to a new study.

Researchers found that regular coffee drinkers – those who drank more than four cups of coffee a day – had a 39 percent decreased risk of two types of head and neck cancer: oral cavity and pharynx cancers. Coffee did not decrease the risk of a third type of oral cancer – laryngeal cancer. They looked at nine existing studies and analyzed how much coffee was consumed by more than 5,000 cancer patients and about 9,000 healthy people.

While these results are encouraging, it doesn't mean we should just go out and start drinking lots of coffee, says Mia Hashibe, lead researcher and an assistant professor in the department of family and preventive medicine at the University of Utah.

Hashibe points out that the main risk factors for oral cancers are smoking and drinking alcohol. She says the best way to prevent getting these cancers is to not smoke or drink alcohol, rather than drinking lots of coffee. "We wouldn't want to be encouraging people to drink that much [coffee], without people considering the other risks factors," Hashibe says. "Each person needs to think about how they metabolize caffeine or coffee."

In the past, there’s been a perception that coffee may be bad for you, according to Dr. Donald Hensrud, chair of preventive medicine at the Mayo Clinic. But he says that newer studies suggest that drinking coffee may actually be good for you. "Like many things, the evidence changes over time," says Hensrud. He adds that when it comes to the link between coffee and head and neck cancer, "the benefits outweigh the risks and this is just one more piece of that puzzle that supports that."

It’s not exactly known why coffee may help prevent these cancers. But coffee contains over 1,000 different chemical compounds, including cancer-fighting antioxidants, and it’s those antioxidants that may provide a “plausible explanation” for reducing the cancer risk, says Hensrud.

Other recent studies suggest coffee may have beneficial effects in other diseases like dementia, diabetes, liver and Parkinson's disease. However, coffee alone may not be the answer according to some experts. Dr. Dong Shin, a head and neck specialist at Emory Winship Cancer Institute says this new study suggests “there is a hint of beneficial outcomes" with coffee and oral cancer. But he is concerned that the side effects of coffee are not addressed in this study. Shin says when it comes to preventing cancer, the combination approach is best. He suggests “consuming coffee, tea, veggies, and fruits rather than doing just one thing."

Hensrud adds that there are some drawbacks to drinking too much coffee, including liver damage or increased blood pressure. Other possible side effects from drinking a lot of coffee include insomnia, reflux, heartburn, palpitations, urinary systems and increased fluid intake, says Hensrud. He says coffee can also be addictive and some people may suffer from withdrawal headaches. Too much coffee may make it harder to conceive and can increase the risk of miscarriage.

The study is published in the journal Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention.

Editor's Note: Medical news is a popular but sensitive subject rooted in science. We receive many comments on this blog each day; not all are posted. Our hope is that much will be learned from the sharing of useful information and personal experiences based on the medical and health topics of the blog. We encourage you to focus your comments on those medical and health topics and we appreciate your input. Thank you for your participation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: At least this story did what the WebMD story didn’t do in discussing some of the potential harms from drinking a lot of coffee. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- DNA testing for the human papillomavirus should replace the Pap smear as the main way to screen women for cervical cancer, according to Italian researchers.

Their recommendation is based on a study that found that the human papillomavirus (HPV) test prevented more cases of cervical cancer than the conventional Pap smear. Results of the study were published online Jan. 19 in The Lancet Oncology.

The HPV test should become the screening tool of choice for women 35 and older, the researchers said. It could be done less frequently than the Pap test, which could be used only in women who have tested positive for HPV, they said.

The Pap smear, first introduced in the 1950s, looks for changes in the cervix that could lead to cervical cancer. The HPV test works a step further back in the process, looking to see if women are infected with HPV.

HPV causes cervical cancer, which remains a significant health problem, particularly in less resource-rich areas of the world.

DNA testing for HPV, though, does have drawbacks -- namely that it is less specific, meaning it is likely to pick up more false-positives, than a Pap smear. This results in many more callbacks for women to undergo further testing.

Using HPV as a primary screening tool results in a callback rate of about 25 to 30 percent, said Dr. Mark Einstein, a gynecologic oncologist and director of clinical research at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City. By contrast, Pap smears have a callback rate of about 5 to 7 percent, he said.

For their study, the Italian researchers compared HPV testing alone with HPV testing plus a Pap smear in 94,370 women aged 25 to 60 years old.

During the first phase of the study, women 35 to 60 who tested positive for HPV were given a cervical examination, called a colposcopy. Younger women got a colposcopy if their Pap smear was abnormal or if HPV results were positive several times, indicating that their body had not been able to clear the infection.

Screening for HPV DNA appeared more effective in older women, but the testing in younger women led to over-diagnosis of a particular type of cervical lesion, the study found.

Not all experts agree, though, that current practice would change based on the study's findings alone.

"I don't think this is going to change any strategies we do now, but I do think it's more evidence that HPV testing can predict who's going to develop cervical cancer," said Dr. Jay Brooks, chairman of hematology/oncology at Ochsner Health System in Baton Rouge, La. "HPV testing, in certain populations, can really predict who would benefit from treatment."

Einstein had a somewhat different take on the findings. "This shows that the strategy does work," he said. "It does make sense, it's cost-effective and effective. This is happening in single-payer health systems which have national screening. We're behind in the U.S."

The strategy makes particular sense in less-developed countries, where women could do an HPV test themselves with a "self swab" and then send the swab in for analysis, Einstein said.

In the United States, cervical cancer screening guidelines were changed in November. Women now are being told that they should get their first screening for cervical cancer -- including a Pap test -- at age 21. The previous recommendation was to start Pap tests three years after becoming sexually active or at age 21, whichever came first.

And, rather than have an annual Pap test, most women need to be screened every other year or less, depending on their age, according to the new guidelines.

Cervical cancer rates have dropped more than 50 percent in the last 30 years in the United States, according to the guidelines. That decline has been largely attributed to widespread use of the Pap test.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on cervical cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story describes the potential harms of HPV DNA testing, most notably the high false positive rate – or the high number of tests that come back positive that would never progress on to cancer. Positive results require additional testing and follow-up, which in itself isn’t particularly dangerous, but could cause anxiety and requires time off work and additional costs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings suggest that the antidepressant Lexapro might make hot flashes a little less of a nuisance to women — adding to the mixed bag of results regarding that drug’s effect on menopause symptoms.

The study, of 205 women, found that those randomly assigned to take Lexapro (escitalopram) for eight weeks reported less daily “interference” from their hot flashes.

Compared with women given inactive placebo pills, they said hot flashes were taking less of a toll on their work, daily activities, sleep and general mood. Women on the placebo also improved over time, however.

The findings come from the same clinical trial that, last year, showed Lexapro halved the number of hot flashes women had each day. (See Reuters story of January 18, 2011.)

A separate study a few months later showed no such benefit, however. In two trials of 36 women, researchers found that Lexapro did not cut the number or severity of hot flashes over eight weeks. (See Reuters Health story of May 26, 2011.)

And the lead researcher on that study said these latest findings are “nothing to write home about.”

“The differences between the treatment and placebo groups are very small,” said Robert Freedman, a professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.

In general, studies of hot-flash remedies over the years have “virtually always found a large placebo effect,” Freedman noted in an interview.

That could mean that study participants’ hot flashes are just getting better over time, which they sometimes do.

“But my feeling is that it’s the placebo effect,” Freedman said, referring to the phenomenon of study participants on placebos improving because they believe they are getting a real treatment.

Hot flashes, which mostly affect women transitioning to menopause and already in that phase of life, involve a sudden sensation of heat, sometimes accompanied by sweating or visible reddening of the skin.

Their exact cause is unknown, but hormonal regulation of body temperature is thought to be involved.

Bouts of hot flashes can happen many times a day and past research has found they can continue for anywhere from a few months to up to 10 years.

So far, Freedman noted, the only hot-flash treatment that has consistently worked in studies is hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

And right now, HRT is the only treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for cooling hot flashes.

But women and doctors are wary of HRT these days — since a 2002 clinical trial linked the hormones to increased risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots.

So researchers have been looking for alternatives. And studies have suggested that a few antidepressants, used at low doses, can be helpful for some women — including paroxetine (Paxil), fluoxetine (Prozac) and venlafaxine (Effexor).

This latest study, reported in the journal Fertility & Sterility, focused on hot flash “interference” — the degree to which women feel hot flashes disrupt their lives.

That’s important because it gets at quality of life, according to the researchers, led by Janet S. Carpenter of Indiana University in Indianapolis.

The trial included 205 women who were having at least 28 bouts of hot flashes or “night sweats” a week. Carpenter’s team randomly assigned half to use Lexapro for eight weeks, while the other half were given placebo pills.

The women kept diaries to record their hot flash symptoms. And every four weeks, they filled out a questionnaire on hot-flash interference.

After four weeks, the study found, women on the antidepressant saw their score on the interference scale fall by half, on average. It remained there at week eight.

But women in the placebo group also improved, albeit more slowly and to a somewhat lesser degree.

In a separate analysis of the same study group, Carpenter’s team found that women on Lexapro also reported bigger improvements in sleep problems: half saw their insomnia symptoms drop by at least 50 percent, versus 35 percent of placebo users.

Those findings appear in a separate report in the journal Menopause.

Freedman said that the overall research on antidepressants and hot flashes is still inconsistent. “Overall, the picture is not optimistic.”

In his own study last year, Freedman used a different approach to measuring hot flashes: instead of asking women to record their symptoms in a diary, the researchers had them wear a “detector” to monitor objective measures of hot flashes.

It is possible for women’s hot flashes to remain unchanged objectively, but have their subjective experience of them change. “But that raises the question of why,” Freedman said.

And for now, he noted, it’s also not clear why antidepressants would have effects on hot flashes.

Lexapro, which costs about $125 a month, belongs to the group of antidepressants called selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They increase levels of the brain chemical serotonin, which may have a role in regulating body heat.

But no one knows if altering serotonin levels actually does affect women’s hot flashes. In fact, Freedman said, there’s some evidence that lowering serotonin levels does not worsen hot flashes — which would be expected if the “serotonin theory” is correct.

Antidepressants can also have side effects, like nausea, drowsiness, headache, constipation and dry mouth.

Right now, no antidepressant is specifically approved to treat hot flashes. But in the U.S., doctors are allowed to prescribe drugs “off-label” for conditions other than their approved uses.

Besides antidepressants, doctors sometimes prescribe certain blood pressure medications or the anti-seizure drug gabapentin, which some studies suggest may be helpful.

Hot flashes often need no drug treatment at all, though.

If they are not severe, experts say simple steps can be enough — like avoiding hot and spicy foods, turning down the thermostat, or trying relaxation techniques, such as yoga or meditation.

There are several herbal or “natural” products marketed for easing menopause symptoms, including black cohosh, soy, red clover and dong quai. But there is little evidence that they work, according to the North American Menopause Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article did discuss some of the side effects of antidepressants.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- For Carlton Davis, "the" always seemed to come out as "hte." Frequently having problems in school, he once threw a typewriter out of his fourth-floor window at college after making the "hte" mistake yet again.

Abby Schwartz can relate. She would often mix up the letters d and b, sounding out certain words to make make sense of them. Things have gotten better, but she'll still make the occasional "b-d" or "5-2" flip. Davis, now 66, also still mixes up the digits of phone numbers.

"(Reading) would be slow. It wouldn't be enjoyable. I would lose my place," said Abby, 13, of Lexington, Massachusetts. "There were times when I would yell at myself: 'I can't do this. I can't do this. I can't do this.' "

Abby and Davis, like an estimated 5 percent to 20 percent of the population, have struggled with dyslexia, a condition that, broadly speaking, hinders a person's ability to interpret language.

Scientists have recently made headway in understanding what's going on in the brain of a person with dyslexia, which has not been well understood. New research suggests it may be possible to tell from a brain scan whether a dyslexic child's reading ability will improve over a few years. It goes along with the general trend of personalized medicine, in which genetic tests, brain scans and other tests can increasingly help predict the conditions for which a particular individual is at risk.

And a separate recent study found that some dyslexics may have a heightened understanding of space, despite an impairment in language.

In dyslexia, also called developmental reading disorder, the brain doesn't properly recognize or process symbols. Children with this condition may find reading comprehension difficult because they don't connect sounds with letters and can't recognize words well. Celebrities including Whoopi Goldberg, Cher and Henry Winkler (the "Fonz") have made their dyslexia publicly known, and great artists such as Pablo Picasso are said to have had it.

Some children with the disorder can "compensate," or read fairly normally, but perhaps more slowly than their peers, by adulthood. It is hard to know who will be able to improve reading skills over time, and how much extra help is necessary.

A study led by Fumiko Hoeft, psychiatry researcher at Stanford University School of Medicine, used brain imaging to answer this question. Her study followed 25 children with dyslexia and 20 children without dyslexia over a 2½-year period.

The researchers found greater activation and connectivity in the brain's right hemisphere among dyslexic children who showed greater improvement in reading after the 2½ years. They used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study this phenomenon.

In general, much of the language comprehension and processing that goes on in the brain happens in the left hemisphere, but there is some right hemisphere involvement also. Hoeft's study suggests that people with dyslexia who go on to read fairly normally are using a part of the right hemisphere in reading tasks more than the average person would.

If made widely available, this kind of brain scan could be an important complement to the assessments -- based on reading and behavior -- already available for diagnosing dyslexia, Hoeft said. As this usage of fMRI becomes more useful and commonplace, the high cost per scan would go down, she said.

Rebecca Branstetter, psychologist who blogs at Notes from the School Psychologist, says this dyslexia brain scan could provide useful information, but it doesn't highlight environmental factors -- such as the quality of instruction in the child's classroom -- that could contribute to reading problems.

Abby's father, Edward Schwartz, fears that this tool would just add to a child's anxiety about the testing process. The potential to alarm a child isn't worth it, and he doesn't trust that this method would offer definitive information.

"The kids (are) much more likely to feel like they're broken in some way," Schwartz said. Abby, he recalls, "didn't like it to be referred to as a 'learning disability.' She was happy when people offered her alternative ways to think about it."

Guillermo Tilley, the father of 7-year-old Nate, who has dyslexia, similarly would not want his son to have the fMRI.

"It would taint my interpretation of who Nate is and his struggle with dyslexia," Tilley said.

Of course, the results of the study are only preliminary. Participants included 25 children with dyslexia and 20 children without dyslexia, which is too small a sample size to prove anything, although still respectable when it comes to neuroimaging studies. Another important limitation in the study is that some children in the study did receive tutoring or reading interventions, to which they were not randomly assigned. A larger trial that controlled for remediations would offer more conclusive results. But this one found that receiving a remediation did not appear to affect improvement in reading abilities.

Here's another insight about dyslexia: men with the condition may have enhanced visual-spatial abilities, according to a study in the journal Learning and Individual Differences. This was another small study -- 20 dyslexic volunteers and 21 participants without the condition -- testing how people identify shapes, navigate a virtual environment, and do other tasks involving spatial reasoning.

Davis, a noted architect and writer in the Los Angeles area, believes he fits that category. He gets thrown off by pure mathematics, but he's good at anything involving spatial relationships and design.

And those kinds of skills should be taken advantage of in school, said Wendy Weiner, principal of the arts-focused Conservatory Prep in Davie, Florida, and mother of a dyslexic child.

"If they can create projects -- instead of drawing a picture of a room, if they can make a model of a room -- they will generally do it pretty much to scale because they can visualize things very clearly," she said.

Because of this, Weiner said, three-dimensional letters and numbers, perhaps made out of plastic or clay, help a dyslexic child grasp the shapes better. Holding a "7" upright in your hand, you're less likely to view it sideways as a "V," she said.

The most important intervention is a direct, explicit teaching of phonics, or how symbols correspond with sounds, Branstetter said. The sooner it can be detected, the better. A child's personality can also factor in: Some persist despite frustration better than others. Parents should speak to their school psychologists about the best plan of action, she said.

For Abby, a breakthrough moment came at age 9: She started reading voraciously, and today reads well above the seventh-grade level. She'd had good tutors and plenty of support from her parents, but it also took self-confidence for her to make herself read on her own, she said.

As for Davis, he'd never heard of dyslexia until a friend brought it up when he was 34, and then went through training at a learning development center. Using computers for writing has helped him tremendously -- especially spell-check.

"I know a lot of people who have trouble reading, as I did when I was a kid, are dyslexic," he said. "It is an issue that certainly holds back a lot of kids, because of their inability to do certain things."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


MRI brain scans are generally considered to present little physical risk, so the issue here is really the potential negative effects of the information the test produces. At least the story raises that issue by including comments from parents who worry that this sort of scanning could further stigmatize children who have trouble reading or writing. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Gentle Cesarean: More Like A Birth Than An Operation

There are many reasons women need cesareans. Sometimes the situation is truly life-threatening. But often the problem is that labor simply isn't progressing. That was the case for Valerie Echo Duckett, 35, who lives in Columbus, Ohio. After receiving an epidural for pain, Duckett's contractions stopped. By late evening she was told she'd need a C-section to deliver her son, Avery. Duckett says she has vague memories of being wheeled into the operating room, strapped down and shaking from cold.

"They were covering me up with warm blankets,"she says. "I kind of slept in and out of it." Her only memory of meeting her newborn son for the first time was from some pictures her husband took.

This is the experience many women have. The cesarean section is the most common surgery in America — about 1 in 3 babies is delivered this way. But for many women, being told they need a C-section is unpleasant news. Duckett says she felt like she missed out on a pivotal moment in her pregnancy.

"It took me a long time even to be able to say that I gave birth to Avery," she says. "I felt like I didn't earn the right to say I gave birth to him, like it was taken from me somehow, like I hadn't done what I was supposed to do."

Duckett's reaction to her C-section is unfortunately a common one, says Betsey Snow, head of Family and Child Services at Anne Arundel Medical Center, a community hospital in Annapolis, Md.

"I hear a lot of moms say, 'I'm disappointed I had to have a C-section.' A lot of women felt like they failed because they couldn't do a vaginal delivery," says Snow.

Now some hospitals are offering small but significant changes to the procedure to make it seem more like a birth than major surgery.

In a typical C-section, a closed curtain shields the sterile operating field. Mothers don't see the procedure and their babies are immediately whisked away for pediatric care — a separation that can last for close to half an hour. Kristen Caminiti, of Crofton, Md., knows this routine well. Her first two sons were born by traditional cesarean. She was happy with their births because, she says, it was all she knew. Then, just a few weeks into her third pregnancy, Caminiti, who is 33, saw a post on Facebook about family-centered cesarean techniques catching on in England.

"I clicked on the link and thought, 'I want that,' " she says.

The techniques are relatively easy and the main goals simple: Let moms see their babies being born if they want and put newborns immediately on the mother's chest for skin-to-skin contact. This helps stimulate bonding and breast feeding. Caminiti asked her obstetrician, Dr. Marcus Penn, if he'd allow her to have this kind of birth. He said yes.

When Caminiti told Penn what she wanted, his first thought was it wouldn't be that difficult to do. "I didn't see anything that would be terribly out of the norm," he says. "It would be different from the way we usually do it, but nothing terrible that anyone would say we shouldn't try that."

Family-centered cesareans are a relatively new idea in the U.S., and many doctors and hospitals have no experience with them. Penn and the staff at Anne Arundel Medical Center quickly realized the procedure would require some changes, including adding a nurse and bringing the neonatal team into the operating room.

And there were a bunch of little adjustments, such as moving the EKG monitors from their usual location on top of the mother's chest to her side. This allows the delivery team to place the newborn baby immediately on the mother's chest. In addition, Penn says, the mother's hands were not strapped down and the intravenous line was put in her nondominant hand so she could hold the baby.

At the beginning of October, Caminiti underwent her C-section. She was alert, her head was up and the drape lowered so she could watch the delivery of her son, Connor. Caminiti's husband, Matt, recorded the event. After Connor was out, with umbilical cord still attached, he was placed right on Caminiti's chest.

"It was the most amazing and grace-filled experience to finally have that moment of having my baby be placed on my chest," Caminiti says. "He was screaming and then I remember that when I started to talk to him he stopped. It was awesome."

And the baby stayed with her for the rest of the procedure.

Changes like this can make a big difference, says Dr. William Camann, the director of obstetric anesthesiology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and one of the pioneers of the procedure in the U.S. At Brigham and Women's, their version of the family-centered cesarean is called the gentle cesarean. Moms who opt for it can view the birth through a clear plastic drape, and immediate skin-to-skin contact follows.

Camann says the gentle C-section is not a replacement for a vaginal birth; it's just a way to improve the surgical experience. "No one is trying to advocate for C-sections. We really don't want to increase the cesarean rate, we just want to make it better for those who have to have it," he says.

So why has the procedure been slow to catch on? Hospitals aren't charging more for it — so cost doesn't seem to be a major factor. What's lacking are clinical studies. Without hard scientific data on outcomes and other concerns like infection control, many hospitals may be wary of changing their routines. Betsey Snow of Anne Arundel Medical Center says the family-centered C-section represents a cultural shift, and her hospital is helping break new ground by adopting it.

"It is the first time we have really done anything innovative or creative with changing the C-section procedure in years," she says.

Kristen Caminiti says her hope is that these innovations become routine. She says she'd like nothing more than to know that other women having C-sections are able to have the same amazing experience she had.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although the story did not address specific harms per se, it did mention that there was a lack of clinical studies on this topic – implying that nobody really understands the potential risks of this approach compared to a typical C-section. The piece also pointed out that infection control is a potential concern with family-centered C-sections, and that hospitals would be slow to change their routines without hard evidence on infection rates. We think that’s enough to merit a satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Despite several safe drug therapies available to help smokers quit, three-quarters report relapsing within six months of a quit attempt. University of Pennsylvania researchers Rebecca Ashare and Heath Schmidt saw potential for a permanent cessation solution in a class of FDA-approved medications used to improve cognitive impairments from Alzheimer's disease.

In a study consisting of a rat trial and a human trial, Ashare and Schmidt studied the effects of two acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, or AChEIs, called galantamine and donepezil on overall nicotine intake. The rat component showed that pretreating the rodents with an AChEI decreased their nicotine consumption. Consistent with these effects, clinical trial participants taking the AChEI, not the placebo, smoked 2.3 fewer cigarettes daily, a 12 percent decrease, and noted feeling less satisfied with the cigarettes they did smoke.

"We're very interested in screening potential efficacy of anti-addiction medications in our models," said Schmidt, a professor in Penn's School of Nursing and Perelman School of Medicine. "For this study, we looked at potential smoking-cessation medications."

The research itself took a translational approach, what Ashare, a professor in Penn Medicine's psychiatry department, calls bi-directional. In other words, the preclinical data informed the clinical study and vice versa.

At Penn's Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Nicotine Addiction, work on smoking cessation has been ongoing since 2001. Specifically, research from Caryn Lerman, CIRNA's director and the Mary W. Calkins Professor in Psychiatry, concluded that people who quit smoking often report a decrease in what's commonly called their executive functions.

"They feel fuzzy. They're forgetful," Ashare said. "Those deficits are related to their ability to quit smoking. It was this clinical aspect of smoking cessation we thought would be useful to take further."

That's when they turned to the acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.

In the brain, the neurotransmitter called acetylcholine is important to cognitive functions like learning and short-term memory. When nicotine enters the body, it binds to the same receptors in the brain that acetylcholine binds to, resulting in smoking's rewarding and reinforcement effects. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors increase acetylcholine levels in the brain and, in effect, substitute nicotine's effects.

Schmidt had successfully employed such a model with other addictive substances like cocaine. He divided a group of rats into galantamine and donepezil cohorts. To mirror voluntary drug taking in humans, the rats self-administered nicotine using a lever pushed at will. Once nicotine-taking stabilized, the rats were pretreated with one of the two AChEIs.

For both drugs, "we were able to show a reduction in total nicotine self-administered," Schmidt said; however, there was a caveat.

"We know from the literature that upward of 30 percent of patients will report nausea and vomiting [when taking these drugs], and this will limit their compliance," he said. "We had seen that these drugs reduced nicotine self-administration, but we wanted to make sure it wasn't because the rats were sick."

Unlike humans who can verbally report when they don't feel well and whose bodies react to nausea, rats lack the reflex to vomit. In previous research, Matthew Hayes, who has appointments in Penn Medicine and Penn Nursing, had shown that in rats kaolin clay consumption coats the stomach like an antacid and quells any ill effects. Collaborating with Hayes, Schmidt offered the animals kaolin clay, then compared how much they ate normally and with the addition of the AChEIs.

"At the doses shown to reduce nicotine self-administration, the AChEIs did not make our animals sick," Schmidt said. The findings sparked the CIRNA clinical trial, which has to date studied 33 smokers ages 18 to 60.

People who were interested in quitting smoking signed on for 23 days. For the first two weeks, they continued to smoke but also took either galantamine or a placebo. Before the trial began, researchers assessed the smokers' cognitive function to get a baseline. Participants followed the regimen for two weeks and then were asked to not smoke for one full day. Two more assessments took place: after the two weeks on the cigarette-drug combination and again after that initial smoke-free day. Finally, the researchers asked the study subjects to do their best to not smoke for seven straight days, a time during which the participants still took either galantamine or a placebo.

"That week-long period is a proxy for longer-term cessation. The ability to quit smoking the first week after you make a quit attempt is highly predictive of long-term success," Ashare said.

She's still actively recruiting for the trial, with an aim of 80 people total. Once the trial reaches that number, she'll dig into overall quit data. What she's learned so far -- that smokers who used the FDA-approved galantamine smoked fewer cigarettes per day and enjoyed them less -- is promising, particularly given that those who don't smoke during that first crucial week are 32 times more likely to quit smoking permanently.

"Our goal in investigating these different repurposed medications is not to replace the medications that are already available," she said. "We know that they're effective. Our goal is to target different populations of smokers who may be more likely to experience these cognitive deficits."

There's no data to suggest that a clinician treating a smoker should prescribe one of these AChEIs now. But Ashare and Schmidt are forging a path, and, if it leads where they think it might, it could provide smokers yet another option to help them quit.

Ashare and Schmidt published their work in the Nature journal Translational Psychiatry.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that people may become ill when taking the AD drugs. A source is quoted in the release says, “We know from the literature that upward of 30 percent of patients will report nausea and vomiting [when taking these drugs], and that this will limit their compliance.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allergy treatments haven’t advanced much in decades, even as hundreds of millions around the world suffer from wheezing, itches, and rashes — and in severe cases, risk death — from exposure to allergens ranging from eggs to pollen to dog dander.

But hope may be on the way.

Scientists who study the immune system are beginning to understand the root cause of allergies — and are starting to work on next-generation therapies that could stop allergies in their tracks, rather than simply treating symptoms. Private investors and corporations are pouring money into the field.

Sean Parker, the internet mogul of Napster fame, donated $24 million to set up an allergy research center at Stanford University. Nestlé this month invested $145 million in a startup aimed at tackling peanut allergy. And the Broad Institute of Cambridge, Mass., recently launched a new initiative to unravel the basic biology of food allergy.

The potential market is huge: It’s estimated that 50 million Americans have allergies. As many as 10 percent of children suffer from hay fever, nearly 12 percent have skin allergies, and 5 percent have food allergies, most commonly peanuts, dairy, and shellfish, according to the 2014 National Health Interview Survey.

“I foresee that a lot of allergy therapies will become more and more specific and targeted, and more customizable to the individual patient,” said Andrew Long, the lead investigational drug pharmacist at Stanford’s Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy & Asthma Research.

The experimental treatment that may be closest to market is also one of the simplest. Bay Area startup Aimmune, backed in part by Nestlé with that $145 million investment, is creating a methodical peanut desensitization pill that slowly weans patients away from allergy.

The company has identified the peanut proteins that trigger allergic reaction and is filling little capsules with the stuff. Patients start out by taking half a milligram of peanut protein, and gradually work their way up — over the course of about six months — to the equivalent of eating a single peanut.

“The people who need it the most are the people who have the most profound and potentially life-threatening reaction,” said Dr. Daniel Adelman, chief medical officer of Aimmune.

The capsules are science’s answer to previous efforts from allergists, who would concoct “home brews” of peanut protein to desensitize patients under the table. Aimmune’s peanut powder is in Phase 3 trials — and, despite its relative simplicity, is still considered something of a trailblazer in allergy science.

Researchers at Stanford University are building on the concept of desensitization.

One of the drugs Long is excited about: omalizumab, a biologic drug made by Genentech under the trade name Xolair.

To understand how it works, you have to back up and look at why you get all itchy and wheezy when you encounter an allergen. Such responses make sense from an evolutionary standpoint: They initially came into being to protect our bodies against toxins, like snake venom, or to ward away parasites. But they can be deadly in the modern era.

Two types of immune cells — called mast cells and basophils — are the biggest culprits behind allergic reactions. When a person encounters an allergen, let’s say peanut protein, a type of antibody called immunoglobulin E, or IgE, gets activated. This stimulates the mast cells and basophils to release a storm of chemicals that provoke an allergic response to help exorcise peanut protein from the body.

Genentech’s drug is an engineered antibody that binds to human IgE, blocking it from triggering that chemical storm.

It was approved by the FDA in 2003 to treat a form of asthma often triggered by allergens, but Stanford researchers are now testing it on patients with food allergies — and finding that it might help speed along classic allergy desensitization therapy, in which patients are slowly introduced to escalating quantities of the allergen, via allergy shots or those “home brew” concoctions.

“Right now, the process of immunotherapy is painstakingly long — it takes not just weeks or months, but years, to treat a single allergy this way,” said Dr. Toshi Kawakami, a researcher at the La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology.

This timeline becomes untenable for patients with multiple allergies — and about 70 percent of people who have an allergy to one type of food will also be allergic to another, Long said.

So Stanford has paired Xolair with desensitization therapy to treat up to five different food allergens at any given time. Instead of taking years to gird a patient’s body against peanuts, they’re able to help her control her reactions to, say, hazelnuts, fish, dairy, and wheat as well.

Looking at IgE from a different angle, Harvard statistical geneticist Liming Liang has been hunting for new drug targets that might modulate how, exactly, the antibody is expressed. In a paper published last year in Nature, Liang’s team found 30 genes that are involved in kicking off the allergic response.

“We think we’ll be able to identify a potential drug target here for allergy reaction — but, of course, it’ll take quite a long time to turn that into a medicine used by patients,” Liang said.

Another compelling approach is being taken by Japan’s Astellas Pharma, which is developing a DNA vaccine meant to protect the body from cedar pollen. (Hay fever has been called a “national affliction” in Japan, affecting a quarter of the population.)

The underlying research, from Immunomic Therapeutics and Johns Hopkins University, involves attaching a fragment of DNA from, say, cedar pollen to a template vaccine that can embed itself inside the cell. Once there, it revs up an aggressive immune response and imprints an “immunological memory,” which means the immune system will respond even more quickly to future exposures to the allergen.

The idea is to create resistance to an allergen without ever having to expose the patient to that substance. If it works, it’d be fairly easy to swap out the cedar pollen DNA for a different allergen — for instance, the genetic material that codes for peanut or cat antigens — and tack it onto this vaccine template.

“The beauty of this is that, unlike food desensitization or skin patches, patients aren’t exposed to the circulating antigen,” Long said. “That hypothetically decreases the risk for adverse events.”

For all the research on allergies, none of the drugs in the pipeline is a sure thing.

For a cautionary tale, look no further than Circassia Pharmaceuticals, which has been working on an experimental immunotherapy drug to forestall cat allergies. Interest in Circassia had been sky-high — the small biotech’s market value had shot up to $1 billion earlier this year on speculation that its drug would prove effective.

But in a Phase 3 study, it turned out that the placebo effect was as effective as the drug itself. The company’s stock plummeted on that news this past June.

It’s not just that solving allergies is hard. Current medications — such as Benadryl, Claritin, and epinephrine (best known for powering the EpiPen) — do a decent job controlling symptoms in most patients, so there’s little incentive to innovate.

“There’s a dearth of new allergy products because antihistamines work so well,” said Dr. Todd Brady, CEO of Aldeyra Therapeutics, a startup in Lexington, Mass., that’s developing a drug to reduce eye irritation from allergies.

“They’re generic, they’re cheap, they’re safe, and easy to use — but unfortunately, a lot of patients suffer because of that phenomenon, because not everyone responds to antihistamines,” Brady said.

Another reason for the hesitancy: liability concerns. It’s a risky proposition to give patients the foods they’re deathly allergic to — inducing anaphylactic reactions simply to test drugs in clinical trials.

“At the end of the day, it’s a fairly 19th-century approach,” said Dr. Wayne Shreffler, a researcher at Massachusetts General Hospital who is working on the Broad Institute’s Food Allergy Science Initiative. “There’s really no doubt that there have been cold feet in the industry about this issue.”

But investigators around the world have shown they can carry out these “food challenge” trials safely — which could help hasten the development of new drugs.

“In school, we didn’t learn anything about allergy treatment, except antihistamines and epinephrine,” Long said. “But now, we’re seeing this whole new spectrum of treatments. It’ll be interesting to see how this translates into making it into a pharmacy, and into the hands of patients.”

Correction: A previous version of the story misstated some aspects of Aimunne’s work on peanut allergies.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Particularly for the new-style food-desensitization therapies under development, the article explains potential (and even deadly) risks associated with them and it alludes to some of the downsides of immunotherapies (“allergy shots,” for instance) that can take months or years to work. But it says essentially nothing about the potential or actual adverse effects of a DNA vaccine under development, noting only that it “hypothetically decreases the risk for adverse events.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alcoholics see hope in new pill Migraine drug may curb drinking but comes with some side effects

CHICAGO — A migraine pill seems to help alcoholics taper off their drinking without detox treatment, researchers report, offering a potential option for a hard-to-treat problem.

The drug, Topamax, works in a different way than three other medications already approved for treating alcoholism.

Experts said the drug is likely to appeal to heavy drinkers who would rather seek help from their own doctors, rather than enter a rehab clinic to dry out. The drug costs at least $350 a month, plus the price of doctor's visits.

It's unclear whether the findings will make a dent in an addiction that affects millions of Americans.

Addiction specialists not involved in the study said the findings are promising, although side effects such as trouble concentrating, tingling and itching caused about one in five people to drop out of the study. Drowsiness and dizziness are also problems.

"The size of the treatment effect is larger than in most of the other medications we've seen," said Dr. Mark Willenbring of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. "And all the drinking variables changed in the right direction."

The study, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, was funded by the maker of the drug, Johnson & Johnson Inc.'s Ortho-McNeil Neurologics.

The study followed 371 heavy drinkers for 14 weeks. About half were randomly assigned to take Topamax, also called topiramate, in gradually increasing doses. The others took dummy pills.

All volunteers were encouraged — but not required — to stop drinking.

At the start of the study, they drank, on average, 11 standard drinks daily. That's about two six-packs of beer each day, or two bottles of wine, or a pint of hard liquor.

By the end of the study, 27 of the 183 people, or 15 percent, who took Topamax had quit drinking entirely for seven weeks or more. That compared to six out of 188, or 3 percent, in the placebo group.

Others cut back. The Topamax group cut back to six drinks a day, on average, assuming everyone who dropped out of the study relapsed into heavy drinking. That compared to seven drinks a day for the placebo group.

"You can come in drinking a bottle of scotch a day and get treatment without detox," said Dr. Bankole Johnson of the University of Virginia, who led the study, which was conducted at 17 U.S. sites from 2004-2006.

It's unclear how many relapsed after quitting the pill.

Tom Wolfe, 44, a carpenter from Earlysville, Va., said he felt "a little light-headed" at first until he got used to the drug. "It's been a miracle to me," Wolfe said.

The drug works by inhibiting dopamine, the brain's "feel-good" neurotransmitters that are involved in all addictions, said Stephen Dewey, a neuroscientist at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did mention some of the unpleasant side effects that people taking the drug experienced; although it did not provide information about how frequently they occurred, it mentioned that 20% of the people dropped out of the study which provides a composite of sorts.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a small, phase I clinical trial, Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center researchers say they show for the first time that the experimental drug guadecitabine (SGI-110) is safe in combination with the chemotherapy drug irinotecan and may overcome resistance to irinotecan in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Results of the study are expected to be presented April 17 at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Annual Meeting 2016 in New Orleans (abstract CT017).

Guadecitabine works to reverse a so-called epigenetic change in cancer cells known as methylation, which may alter genetic activity in cells in a way that can block the action of tumor-suppressing genes, pushing cells to become cancerous and resistant to therapy. By reversing this change in cancer cells, the drug restores cancer cells' vulnerability to drugs such as irinotecan.

The clinical trial included 22 patients with metastatic colorectal cancer who had been treated previously with irinotecan and whose disease was progressing. The patients were divided into four groups, each receiving different doses of guadecitabine in combination with irinotecan, over an average period of four months.

During the study, 15 patients had at least one imaging scan to retest the extent and location of their cancers -- with 12 patients experiencing stable disease -- for more than the four-month period, on average, and one patient experiencing a partial response to the treatment (measured as at least a 30 percent reduction in the size of the tumors.)

Although the study's main purpose was to test the safety rather than the effectiveness of guadecitabine doses, "we were very happy to see some patients who benefited from the combination of the therapies for many months to more than a year," says Nilofer Azad, M.D., professor of oncology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

The study also showed signs that guadecitabine reduced methylation among the cancer cells. "We did see that giving a higher dose of the drug seemed to produce a better methylation response among patients," says Valerie Lee, M.D., a fellow at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center. "However, it seemed that patients were responding at all levels of the drug."

Among the side effects of the combined treatment, 16 patients experienced neutropenia, a low count of the infection-fighting white blood cells called neutrophils; five patients with neutropenia had fevers; three patients became anemic; and two patients developed thrombocytopenia, a lowered count of blood-clotting platelets. Other side effects included diarrhea (three patients), fatigue (two patients) and dehydration (two patients). There was one death during the study, possibly resulting from febrile neutropenia caused by the treatment.

The current study was based on previous studies in the laboratory of Nita Ahuja, M.D., director of the Sarcoma and Peritoneal Surface Malignancy Program and professor of surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, which showed that guadecitabine limited the growth of colorectal cancer cell lines when combined with irinotecan, says Azad.

The drug combination is being tested in an ongoing phase II clinical trial (NCT01896856) in a larger group of metastatic colorectal cancer patients at multiple institutions to determine the effectiveness of the dual therapy compared with chemotherapy regimens that do not include guadecitabine, says Azad.

Scientists leading the new study will also look for biomarkers in patients that could help determine which of them are most likely to benefit from guadecitabine and irinotecan. Lee says the research team will measure the amount of methylation in patients' cells when they begin their treatment and the presence of genes associated with irinotecan resistance, among other possible biomarkers.

In 2015, there were more than 130,000 people in the U.S. diagnosed with colon cancers. Five-year survival rates among people with localized colon cancers are more than 90 percent, but they are only 20 percent in those with metastatic cancer.

Guadecitabine is an experimental drug that has not been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. It is manufactured by Astex Pharmaceuticals, a supporter of the Johns Hopkins-led study. The research was also supported by the Van Andel Research Institute SU2C/AACR Epigenetics Dream Team.

Other scientists who contributed to the research include Judy Wang, Anup Sharma, Zachary Kerner, Stephen Baylin, Ellen Lilly, and Thomas Brown from Johns Hopkins; Anthony El Khoueiry from the University of Southern California; Henk Verheul and Elske Gootjes from Vrije Universiteit in the Netherlands; and Peter Jones from the Van Andel Research Institute.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The headline is problematic, but we’ll talk about that under the “Unjustifiable Language” criterion. The rest of the release does a good job of describing potential harms. The release discusses eight potential harms, defines them and offers numbers on all of them (e.g., “two patients developed thrombocytopenia, a lowered count of blood-clotting platelets”). That’s very good. Two things would have made it even better. First, the release could have included an explanation of what the observed adverse effects actually mean. For example, how severe was the thrombocytopenia? And how much of a risk does that pose to a patient’s health — are we talking about the potential for bruising easily? Or a high risk of bleeding to death? Second, it wasn’t clear if the dose of guadecitabine was related to observed effects. I.e., were patients who received higher doses of guadecitabine more likely to exhibit adverse effects?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Epclusa to treat adult patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) both with and without cirrhosis (advanced liver disease). For patients with moderate to severe cirrhosis (decompensated cirrhosis), Epclusa is approved for use in combination with the drug ribavirin. Epclusa is a fixed-dose combination tablet containing sofosbuvir, a drug approved in 2013, and velpatasvir, a new drug, and is the first to treat all six major forms of HCV.

“This approval offers a management and treatment option for a wider scope of patients with chronic hepatitis C,” said Edward Cox, M.D., director of the Office of Antimicrobial Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

Hepatitis C is a viral disease that causes inflammation of the liver that can lead to diminished liver function or liver failure. There are at least six distinct HCV genotypes, or strains, which are genetically distinct groups of the virus. Knowing the genotype helps inform treatment recommendations and the duration of treatment. Approximately 75 percent of Americans with HCV have genotype 1; 20-25 percent have genotypes 2 or 3; and a small numbers of patients are infected with genotypes 4, 5 or 6. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, HCV infection becomes chronic in approximately 75 to 85 percent of cases. Patients who suffer from chronic HCV infection over many years may have complications, such as bleeding, jaundice (yellowish eyes or skin), fluid accumulation in the abdomen, infections, liver cancer and death.

The safety and efficacy of Epclusa for 12 weeks was evaluated in three Phase III clinical trials of 1,558 subjects without cirrhosis or with compensated cirrhosis (mild cirrhosis). Results demonstrated that 95–99 percent of patients who received Epclusa had no virus detected in the blood 12 weeks after finishing treatment, suggesting the patients’ infections had been cured. The safety and efficacy of Epclusa was also evaluated in a clinical trial of 267 subjects with decompensated cirrhosis (moderate to severe cirrhosis), of whom 87 subjects received Epclusa in combination with ribavirin for 12 weeks, and 94 percent of these patients had no virus detected in the blood 12 weeks after finishing treatment.

The most common side effects of Epclusa include headache and fatigue. Epclusa and ribavirin combination regimens are contraindicated for patients for whom ribavirin is contraindicated.

Epclusa carries a warning for patients and health care providers that serious slowing of the heart rate (symptomatic bradycardia) and cases requiring pacemaker intervention have been reported when amiodarone is used with sofosbuvir in combination with another HCV direct-acting antiviral. Co-administration of amiodarone with Epclusa is not recommended. Epclusa also carries a warning not to use with certain drugs that may reduce the amount of Epclusa in the blood which could lead to reduced efficacy of Epclusa.

Epclusa was reviewed under the FDA’s priority review program, which provides for an expedited review of drugs that treat serious conditions and, if approved, would provide significant improvement in safety or effectiveness.

Epclusa is manufactured and marketed by Gilead Sciences, Inc., of Foster City, California.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency is also responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the most common side effects of Epclusa are headache and fatigue. It also explains that Epclusa carries a warning that “serious slowing of the heart rate (symptomatic bradycardia) and cases requiring pacemaker intervention have been reported when amiodarone is used with sofosbuvir in combination with another HCV direct-acting antiviral.” The FDA also warns that certain drugs may reduce the amount of Epclusa in the blood which would reduce its effectiveness.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women who take bone drugs for several years have a slightly increased chance of suffering an unusual type of thigh fracture, according to a large Canadian study.

The findings add to earlier concern over the medicines, called bisphosphonates, whose U.S. labels have been required since October to include a warning about the thighbone fracture risk.

However, researchers stress the drugs are effective at preventing fractures of the hip or spine, which are much more common in elderly people with the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis.

And the actual risk of having one of the unusual fractures was low, said Laura Y. Park-Wyllie, of St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, who worked on the new study.

“Women with osteoporosis who are at high risk of fractures should not stop taking their treatment,” she told Reuters Health.

Some 10 million Americans currently suffer from bone thinning, according to the National Osteoporosis Foundation. The majority are postmenopausal women.

Park-Wyllie and colleagues tapped into data on more than 205,000 Ontario women at least 68 years old who had taken the bone drugs. Their findings appear in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Overall, 716 women suffered the unusual type of thighbone fracture after starting the bone drugs, and nearly 10,000 had typical hip fractures.

The risk of a thighbone fracture differed depending on how long the women had been taking the medicine. After taking bone drugs for five years, about one in 1,000 women went on to suffer a thigh fracture over the next year.

That works out to nearly three times the risk of those who’d taken the drugs for roughly three months or less, after accounting for other risk factors.

On the other hand, longer treatment was tied to a 24-percent decrease in hip fractures, which along with wrist and spine fractures affect about half of all people with osteoporosis.

There are several alternative ways to treat osteoporosis, including hormone treatment for women. And one preliminary study, published along with the Canadian findings in JAMA, hints that the common heart medication nitroglycerin might also boost bone health.

So far, however, the cheap and effective bisphosphonate bone drugs remain the most popular treatment option. But some experts worry that negative media coverage might have led to more fractures and possibly deaths by dissuading patients from taking the drugs.

“The bad news is that overstating the levels of risk of side effects with these drugs — which the media have been doing for some time now — has led people to stop the drugs when they should be taking them,” said Dr. Ethel S. Siris, who heads the Toni Stabile Osteoporosis Center at Columbia University in New York.

Apart from atypical fractures, the most serious side effect of the bone drugs is bone death, or osteonecrosis, of the jaw. But that’s a very rare problem, experts say, which only affects about one in 100,000 people on bisphosphonates.

“If you’re taking the drugs and you’ve been on them for a while, but aren’t sure if you’re at high risk, you should ask your doctor about it,” Park-Wyllie advised.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, recommends screening all women over 65 for osteoporosis.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of telling the reader how few women suffered the unusual thigh fracture. They further give some context by explaining how those on the drugs reduced their harm from more-typical fractures by 24 percent.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Note: A media teleconference with researchers and patients from Johns Hopkins and New York University will be held on Wednesday, Nov. 30, from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. ET. To participate, U.S.-based media may call 855-698-2663; international media should dial 011-646-754-2524. The access code is 48330192. Phone lines open at 10:50 a.m., and all media should place speakers on mute unless posing a question. Reporters wishing to ask a question should email their name and outlet to david.march@nyumc.org during the briefing so they may be placed in a queue; the moderator will call on individual media members to ask a question in the order names and outlets were received.

In a small double-blind study, Johns Hopkins researchers report that a substantial majority of people suffering cancer-related anxiety or depression found considerable relief for up to six months from a single large dose of psilocybin -- the active compound in hallucinogenic "magic mushrooms."

The researchers cautioned that the drug was given in tightly controlled conditions in the presence of two clinically trained monitors and said they do not recommend use of the compound outside of such a research or patient care setting.

The Johns Hopkins team released its study results, involving 51 adult patients, concurrently with researchers from New York University Langone Medical Center, who conducted a similarly designed study on 29 participants. Both studies are published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology on Dec. 1.

The Johns Hopkins group reported that psilocybin decreased clinician- and patient-rated depressed mood, anxiety and death anxiety, and increased quality of life, life meaning and optimism. Six months after the final session of treatment, about 80 percent of participants continued to show clinically significant decreases in depressed mood and anxiety, with about 60 percent showing symptom remission into the normal range. Eighty-three percent reported increases in well-being or life satisfaction. Some 67 percent of participants reported the experience as one of the top five meaningful experiences in their lives, and about 70 percent reported the experience as one of the top five spiritually significant lifetime events.

"The most interesting and remarkable finding is that a single dose of psilocybin, which lasts four to six hours, produced enduring decreases in depression and anxiety symptoms, and this may represent a fascinating new model for treating some psychiatric conditions," says Roland Griffiths, Ph.D., professor of behavioral biology in the Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and of Neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. He notes that traditional psychotherapy offered to people with cancer, including behavioral therapy and antidepressants, can take weeks or even months, isn't always effective, and in the case of some drugs, such as benzodiazepines, may have addictive and other troubling side effects.

Griffiths says his team's new study grew out of a decade of research at Johns Hopkins on the effects of psilocybin in healthy volunteers, which found that psilocybin can consistently produce positive changes in mood, behavior and spirituality when administered to carefully screened and prepared participants. The study was designed to see if psilocybin could produce similar results in psychologically distressed cancer patients.

"A life-threatening cancer diagnosis can be psychologically challenging, with anxiety and depression as very common symptoms," says Griffiths. "People with this kind of existential anxiety often feel hopeless and are worried about the meaning of life and what happens upon death."

For the study, the investigators recruited 51 participants diagnosed with life-threatening cancers, most of which were recurrent or metastatic. They were chosen from a total of 566 individuals reached through flyers, web advertisements and physician referrals. Most participants had breast, upper digestive, GI, genitourinary or blood cancer, and each had been given a formal psychiatric diagnosis, including an anxiety or depressive disorder.

Half of the participants were female with an average age of 56. Ninety-two percent were white, 4 percent were African-American and 2 percent were Asian.

Each participant had two treatment sessions scheduled five weeks apart, one with a very low psilocybin dose (1 or3 milligrams per 70 kilograms) taken in a capsule and meant to act as a "control" placebo because the dose was too low to produce effects. In the other session, participants received a capsule with what is considered a moderate or high dose (22 or 30 milligrams per 70 kilograms).

To minimize expectancy effects, the participants and the staff members supervising the sessions were told that the participants would receive psilocybin on both sessions, but they did not know that all participants would receive one high and one low dose. Blood pressure and mood were monitored throughout the sessions. Two monitors aided participants during each session, encouraging them to lie down, wear an eye mask, listen to music through headphones and direct their attention on their inner experience. If anxiety or confusion arose, the monitors provided reassurance to the participants.

In addition to experiencing changes in visual perception, emotions and thinking, most participants reported experiences of psychological insight and often profound, deeply meaningful experiences of the interconnectedness of all people.

The researchers assessed each participant's mood, attitude about life, behaviors and spirituality with questionnaires and structured interviews before the first session, seven hours after taking the psilocybin, five weeks after each session and six months after the second session. Immediately after the sessions, participants completed questionnaires assessing changes in visual, auditory and body perceptions; feelings of transcendence; changes in mood; and more.

Structured clinical interviews, such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, and patient questionnaires, like the Beck Depression Inventory and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, assessed depression and anxiety. Other questionnaires assessed quality of life, death acceptance, meaningful existence, optimism and spirituality -- generally defined as a search for the meaning of life and a connection to something bigger than one's self. To measure the changes in attitudes, moods and behavior over time, the researchers administered a questionnaire that assessed negative or positive changes in attitudes about life, mood and behavior.

With regard to adverse effects, Griffiths says 15 percent of participants were nauseated or vomited, and one-third of participants experienced some psychological discomfort, such as anxiety or paranoia, after taking the higher dose. One-third of the participants had transient increases in blood pressure. A few participants reported headaches following the session.

"Before beginning the study, it wasn't clear to me that this treatment would be helpful, since cancer patients may experience profound hopelessness in response to their diagnosis, which is often followed by multiple surgeries and prolonged chemotherapy," says Griffiths. "I could imagine that cancer patients would receive psilocybin, look into the existential void and come out even more fearful. However, the positive changes in attitudes, moods and behavior that we documented in healthy volunteers were replicated in cancer patients."

Up to 40 percent of people with cancer suffer from a mood disorder, according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

Anticipating wide interest in the psilocybin research from scientists, clinicians and the public, the journal solicited 11 commentaries to be co-published with the study results written by luminaries in psychiatry, palliative care and drug regulation, including two past presidents of the American Psychiatric Association, a past president of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology, the former deputy director of the U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the former head of the U.K. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority. In general, the commentaries were supportive of the research and of using these drugs in a clinical setting as tools for psychiatry.

Additional authors included Matthew Johnson, Michael Carducci, Annie Umbricht, William Richards, Brian Richards, Mary Cosimano and Margaret Klinedinst, all of The Johns Hopkins University.

The study was funded by grants from the Heffter Research Institute, the RiverStyx Foundation, William Linton, the Betsy Gordon Foundation, the McCormick family, the Fetzer Institute, George Goldsmith, Ekaterina Malievskaia and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (R01DA03889).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job here, stating that “15 percent of participants were nauseated or vomited, and one-third of participants experienced some psychological discomfort, such as anxiety or paranoia, after taking the higher dose. One-third of the participants had transient increases in blood pressure. A few participants reported headaches following the session.” Well done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Patients who have robot-assisted surgeries on their kidneys or prostate have shorter hospital stays and a lower risk of having a blood transfusion or dying — but the bill is significantly higher, a study found.

The analysis, which appeared in the Journal of Urology, compared increasingly common robotic surgery with two other techniques for the same surgery and found that direct costs can be up to several thousand dollars higher for the robotic type.

Touted as less invasive and more efficient, robotic surgeries typically use a laparoscopic or “keyhold surgery” approach, in which tools and a tiny video camera are inserted into the body through one or two small incisions.

Robotic surgery replaces a surgeon’s hands with ultra-precise tools at the ends of mechanical arms, all operated by the surgeon from a console.

“I think the take home message is that robotic (surgery), looking at our study, had certain beneficial outcomes compared to open and laparoscopic procedures,” said study leader Jim Hu at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

Hu and his team analyzed surgery data from a national government database to see if the costlier robotic surgeries were cost effective with extra benefits over older techniques.

During the last three months of 2008 — the most recent data available that allowed a comparison among robotic, open and laparoscopic surgeries — more than half of all prostate removals involved robot-assisted surgery.

About three percent of prostate patients had standard laparoscopic surgery and 44 percent had open surgery. Open and laparoscopic surgeries were still more common than robotic surgeries for kidney repairs and removals.

Among patients who had their prostate removed, none died from laparoscopic or robotic surgery, whereas two out of every 1,000 died after the open procedure.

About five percent of the men who had open surgery needed a blood transfusion, compared to less than two percent of men who had robot-assisted surgery. The open-surgery group also stayed in the hospital about one day longer than the robotic group.

The results were similar for people who had kidneys removed.

The trade-off was the cost, with robotic prostate removal costing about $10,000 on average, roughly $700 more than laparoscopic surgery and $1,100 more than open surgery.

For kidney removal, robotic surgery cost $13,900, which was $2,700 more than laparoscopic and $1,300 more than open surgery.

David Penson, a surgeon at Vanderbilt University Medical Center who was not part of the study, said more consideration should have been given to the state of patients afterwards. Emphasis should be lmited on procedure, he said, as opposed to surgical skill.

“Years ago, this was thought to be the be-all-end-all operation, particularly with prostate surgery. We were going to get patients out of the hospital quicker, have better potency and incontinence outcomes,” he told Reuters Health.

"And the reality of it is that... there are some benefits -- but not as much as we had hoped." SOURCE: bit.ly/zZIYa1
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: As with the benefits criterion above, the details provided were adequate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force on Sunday issued new guidance for the use of cholesterol-busting statin drugs. The report greatly expands the universe of people who should be screened to see if they need the medication to everyone over age 40 regardless of whether they have a history of cardiovascular disease.

The recommendations also support the position of the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association, which in 2013 radically shifted their advice from suggesting that doctors focus on the level of a patient’s low-density lipoproteins (LDL) or “bad cholesterol” to looking at a more comprehensive picture of risk based on things such as weight and blood pressure, as well as lifestyle factors.

“People with no signs, symptoms, or history of cardiovascular disease can still be at risk for having a heart attack or stroke,” said Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, who chairs the task force.

[Could these new cholesterol drugs save many people from heart attacks?]

The task force, which is made up of independent experts but commissioned by the government, concurred after a comprehensive review of the evidence on the topic determined that a broader evaluation of risk is needed. But it puts a greater emphasis on age than the ACC and AHA did in determining who might benefit from the medication in preventing heart attack or stroke. It is also slightly more conservative when it comes to determining the benefits of taking the medications, which include Lipitor, Crestor and Zocor.

The new guidelines, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, suggests that people ages 40 to 75 who have one or more risk factors — such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes or smoking that put them at a 10 percent or greater risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 10 years — should be on statins. The group also said that people with a 7.5 percent to 10 percent risk “may also benefit” but did not definitively recommend they take them. “People in this group should make an individual decision with their doctor about whether to start taking statins,” the task force advised.

In contrast, the ACC and AHA recommend that people with a 7.5 percent or greater risk take the drugs.

[Who should take statins? A vicious debate over cholesterol drugs.]

Another important difference between the groups is that the task force withheld a recommendation about starting statins in adults who are 76 and older, saying that “the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms.” In a commentary accompanying the recommendations, Philip Greenland and Robert Bonow note that there is “uncertainty and hesitation” in the guidelines regarding older people but said it appears that it is not necessary to stop taking statins at age 76 if you are already on them.

The task force and AHA groups carry tremendous influence in medical practice and in what insurance companies will cover. Medicare typically follows USPSTF guidelines in determining coverage and the Affordable Care Act specifies that USPSTF recommendations rated at the strongest levels must be used as a floor for coverage for private insurers. In the case of statins, this would apply to the use of the drug by those who are 40 to 75 years old with one or more risk factors for cardiovascular disease and who have a 10 percent or greater risk — but not those with 7.5 to 10 percent risk.

Individual doctors are free to take the advice or leave it, and in recent months there has been a lot of debate about what the scientific evidence really shows regarding the therapy.

There is a consensus among experts that people at substantial risk for heart disease benefit from statins but considerable disagreement about those at lower risk. Last month, National Institutes of Health Director Francis Collins wrote in the journal Lancet that “it’s a force for good.” But Rita Redberg, a cardiologist at the University of California at San Francisco and editor of JAMA Internal Medicine, and others have been vocal about their belief that the drugs are overprescribed and that the side effects — which range from muscle pain and cataracts to possibly an increased risk for diabetes in women — should be taken more seriously.

In an opinion piece Sunday, Redberg and Mitchell Katz, deputy editor of JAMA Internal Medicine, advised everyone to take “a step back” and ask “why this debate is so contentious.” They suggest that the estimates of the benefits of statins may be inflated, that the drugs as an intervention are “weak,” and that the reports of adverse events are incomplete.

“In deciding on any therapy, it is important to understand the risks and benefits, particularly for healthy people,” they wrote.

The two U.S. guidelines are notably more aggressive in recommending drugs than reports issued by their counterparts in other parts of the world, including the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (which recommends statins in men 40 and older but only after age 50 in women, and the U.K. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, which recommends discussing lifestyle modification before offering statin therapy). The European Society of Cardiology focuses more on managing LDL.

Statins are among the best-selling drugs in the United States, with a 2011 study showing at least 32 million Americans were taking them. The 2013 ACC and AHA guidelines recommend an estimated 24 million more people should be on them.

The task force’s recommendations come on the heels of an important new study, published Saturday, that shows that people who use statins survive heart attacks better than those who do not. They are more likely to not only get to the hospital and survive until they are discharged but also survive in greater numbers a year after their hospitalization than those who do not use statins.

This post has been updated.

Statin intolerance is real, researchers find. Another (more costly) drug may get around the problem.

2013: New guidelines could have far more Americans taking statin drugs for cholesterol
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It mentions “muscle pain and cataracts [and] an increased risk for diabetes in women.” This is sufficient, but the story would have been stronger if it had discussed frequency of these side effects, and mentioned the more serious (and thankfully more rare) risks of rhabdomyolysis and muscle breakdown.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two drugs already on the market — an antifungal and a steroid — may potentially take on new roles as treatments for multiple sclerosis. According to a study published in Nature today, researchers discovered that these drugs may activate stem cells in the brain to stimulate myelin producing cells and repair white matter, which is damaged in multiple sclerosis. The study was partially funded by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), part of the National Institutes of Health.

Specialized cells called oligodendrocytes lay down multiple layers of a fatty white substance known as myelin around axons, the long “wires” that connect brain cells. Myelin acts as an insulator and enables fast communication between brain cells. In multiple sclerosis there is breakdown of myelin and this deterioration leads to muscle weakness, numbness and problems with vision, coordination and balance.

“To replace damaged cells, the scientific field has focused on direct transplantation of stem cell-derived tissues for regenerative medicine, and that approach is likely to provide enormous benefit down the road. We asked if we could find a faster and less invasive approach by using drugs to activate native nervous system stem cells and direct them to form new myelin. Our ultimate goal was to enhance the body’s ability to repair itself,” said Paul J. Tesar, Ph.D., associate professor at Case Western Reserve School of Medicine in Cleveland, and senior author of the study.

It is unknown how myelin-producing cells are damaged, but research suggests they may be targeted by malfunctioning immune cells and that multiple sclerosis may start as an autoimmune disorder. Current therapies for multiple sclerosis include anti-inflammatory drugs, which help prevent the episodic relapses common in multiple sclerosis, but are less effective at preventing long-term disability. Scientists believe that therapies that promote myelin repair might improve neurologic disability in people with multiple sclerosis.

Adult brains contain oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), which are stem cells that generate myelin-producing cells. OPCs are found to multiply in the brains of multiple sclerosis patients as if to respond to myelin damage, but for unknown reasons they are not effective in restoring white matter. In the current study, Dr. Tesar wanted to see if drugs already approved for other uses were able to stimulate OPCs to increase myelination.

OPCs have been difficult to isolate and study, but Dr. Tesar and his colleagues, in collaboration with Robert Miller, Ph.D., professor at George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences in Washington, D.C., developed a novel method to investigate these cells in a petri dish. Using this technique, they were able to quickly test the effects of hundreds of drugs on the stem cells.

The compounds screened in this study were obtained from a drug library maintained by NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS). All are approved for use in humans. NCATS and Dr. Tesar have an ongoing collaboration and plan to expand the library of drugs screened against OPCs in the near future to identify other promising compounds.

Dr. Tesar’s team found that two compounds in particular, miconazole (an antifungal) and clobetasol (a steroid), stimulated mouse and human OPCs into generating myelin-producing cells.

Next, they examined whether the drugs, when injected into a mouse model of multiple sclerosis, could improve re-myelination. They found that both drugs were effective in activating OPCs to enhance myelination and reverse paralysis. As a result, almost all of the animals regained the use of their hind limbs. They also found that the drugs acted through two very different molecular mechanisms.

“The ability to activate white matter cells in the brain, as shown in this study, opens up an exciting new avenue of therapy development for myelin disorders such as multiple sclerosis,” said Ursula Utz, Ph.D., program director at the NINDS.

Dr. Tesar and his colleagues caution that more research is needed before miconazole and clobetasol can be tested in multiple sclerosis clinical trials. They are currently approved for use as creams or powders on the surfaces of the body but their safety administered in other forms, such as injections, in humans is unknown.

“Off-label use of the current forms of these drugs is more likely to increase other health concerns than alleviate multiple sclerosis symptoms. We are working tirelessly to ready a safe and effective drug for clinical use,” Dr. Tesar said.

This work was supported by the NINDS (NS085246, NS030800, NS026543), the New York Stem Cell Foundation and the Myelin Repair Foundation, New York City.

The NINDS is the nation’s leading funder of research on the brain and nervous system. The mission of NINDS is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease.

The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences is a distinctly different entity in the research ecosystem. Rather than targeting a particular disease or fundamental science, NCATS focuses on what is common across diseases and the translational process. The Center emphasizes innovation and deliverables, relying on the power of data and new technologies to develop, demonstrate and disseminate advancements in translational science that bring about tangible improvements in human health. For more information, visit http://www.ncats.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Dr. Tesar provides a cautionary note related to the potential harms of this approach; “Off-label use of the current forms of these drugs is more likely to increase other health concerns than alleviate multiple sclerosis symptoms.” Given the stage of research, we think this is sufficient to rate this criterion as satisfactory
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 7, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An investigational drug called pridopidine seems an effective and safe treatment for people with the progressive movement disorder Huntington's disease, researchers report.

Huntington's patients have an imbalance in the signaling chemical dopamine. The new drug stabilizes dopamine signaling in areas of the brain that control movement and coordination.

According to the study authors, this is the first drug shown to improve patients' loss of ability to move their muscles voluntarily. The only drug currently approved for Huntington's is tetrabenazine, which treats only involuntary movements and can cause serious side effects.

The results of the phase 3 clinical trial, conducted by Spanish researchers led by Dr. Justo Garcia de Yebenes, of the department of neurology, Hospital Ramon y Cajal in Madrid, appear in the Nov. 7 online edition of The Lancet Neurology.

The study included 437 Huntington's disease patients from eight European countries. The participants took either pridopidine (45 milligrams once daily or 45 mg twice daily) or a placebo for 26 weeks.

After six months of treatment, patients taking the higher dose of pridopidine showed improvements in motor function -- specifically in eye and hand movements, involuntary muscle contractions (dystonia), and gait and balance -- compared with patients taking the placebo.

More than 70 percent of the patients taking the higher dose of the drug showed a significant benefit, according to the researchers. Side effects among patients taking the drug were similar to the placebo group.

"Pridopidine has the potential to complement available treatments by improving a different range of motor deficits. Its lack of severe side-effects . . . suggests that pridopidine might be useful even for those patients who are treated at sites that are not centers of excellence for Huntington's disease," the researchers concluded.

One U.S. neurologist agreed that the drug seems promising against a disease with few treatment options.

"There has been a great deal of attention for this drug, as it is one of the few molecules that in preliminary studies was found to have some efficacy in Huntington's disease," said Dr. Alessandro Di Rocco, professor in the department of neurology and chief of the division of movement disorders at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

"However, this is the first large study to show evidence of a positive result in treating the motor symptoms of this devastating disease. And, though the compound is apparently well tolerated without significant side effects, the benefit is modest and limited to the motor symptoms of the disease and it is unknown how long the improvement observed could last," he added.

Still, pridopidine does not get at the underlying cause of Huntington's disease, Di Rocco said.

"Unfortunately, Huntington's is a progressive disease and this drug is not a treatment of the disease itself but only improves some of its symptoms," he explained. "Nevertheless, it is a welcome addition because there is very little else yet available to treat the symptoms. The challenge for scientists and clinicians is to discover therapies that actually slows or halts the progression of the disease."

Another expert agreed that new treatment options for patients are sorely needed.

"A well-tolerated drug that produces even small benefits for patients with Huntington's disease would be a very welcome addition to the currently available treatments for this debilitating disorder," Andrew Feigin, from The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in New York City, wrote in an accompanying commentary.

The study was funded by European pharmaceuticals company NeuroSearch A/S.

We Move has more about Huntington's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes, “Side effects among patients taking the drug were similar to the placebo group.” Dr. Alessandro Di Rocco also agrees with this statement, since the “compound is apparently well tolerated without significant side effects.” However, the story could have been more thorough in letting the reader know exactly what those side effects are.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 16, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Stimulating a specific set of nerves that are nestled along the spine may deliver relief to those who suffer from chronic back pain and cut the need for opioid painkillers, new research suggests.

The therapy, which targets the root ganglion nerves, is more effective than other spine stimulation procedures because it places tiny leads precisely at the area where pain originates, unlike other devices that provide more generalized stimulation, the researchers said.

"In certain patients who have not gotten relief from other treatments, this therapy may give sustained pain relief and may allow them to reduce opioids for at least 18 months and perhaps longer," said lead researcher Robert McCarthy. He's a professor of anesthesiology at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago.

The dorsal root ganglions are nerve cells, on both sides of each of the spine's vertebra, and are the gateway to pain between nerves in different parts of the body, spinal cord and brain. Stimulating this area interrupts pain signals between the painful area and the brain, the researchers explained.

A pacemaker-like device implanted under the skin in the lower back sends small electronic pulses through a wire placed near the specific dorsal root ganglion associated with the pain, McCarthy said.

The pulses replace pain with tingling or numbness. The strength of stimulation, programmed by a doctor, is based on the patient's level of pain, he said.

The treatment has two advantages over spinal cord stimulation, McCarthy said. In spinal cord stimulation, a wire runs along the spinal cord sending pulses along the entire spine, but the pulses don't target the specific pain source.

In addition, dorsal root ganglion stimulation requires significantly lower levels of electric current to quell pain, McCarthy said.

The goal of this study, he said, was to judge the effectiveness of the therapy over a long period. McCarthy and his colleagues implanted the device in 67 people suffering with chronic back pain and followed them for three to 18 months. Among the participants, 17 had the device for over a year.

Before receiving the device, most patients rated their pain as an 8 on a scale of one to 10, with 10 being the worst. For most patients, the device reduced pain by 33 percent, which was significant, the researchers reported.

In addition, patients said they experienced a 27 percent reduction in disability or limitations on daily activities caused by pain. In all, 94 percent of the participants said the treatment was beneficial.

The procedure was not without complications. Five patients needed to have the wires implanted again, two patients had them removed because they were infected, and one had the device removed because of a complication.

McCarthy said the therapy is not widely available, even though it was approved by the FDA in 2016. At the moment, its use is confined to more advanced medical centers where doctors have been trained in how to implant and regulate the device.

Also, the procedure isn't covered by all insurance companies, so out-of-pocket costs to patients can be very high. It is, however, covered by Medicare, he said.

For uninsured patients, the cost of having spine stimulation devices can range from $15,000 to $50,000 or more, according to a 2008 report funded by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries.

Spine stimulation is usually approved only after patients have not responded to other treatment, according to Blue Cross Blue Shield. Other insurance companies may have varying policies.

McCarthy hopes that more doctors will be trained in the procedure and that it will become more available, especially because it has the potential to allow patients to stop taking opioids to control their pain.

One pain specialist not involved with the study saw the benefits of this procedure.

"The results of this study are very significant," said Dr. Kiran Patel, director of neurosurgical pain at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

It shows long-term data that patients experienced significant pain relief and functional improvements, she said.

"In my pain practice and career, dorsal root ganglion stimulation therapy has been one of the most effective technologies available to combat chronic pain," Patel said.

"I encourage chronic pain patients to seek out physicians who are trained and experienced in the application of dorsal root ganglion stimulation therapy to determine if they are a candidate," she said.

The findings were presented Sunday at the American Society of Anesthesiologists annual meeting, in San Francisco. Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke for more on back pain.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story said the procedure “was not without complications. Five patients needed to have the wires implanted again, two patients had them removed because they were infected, and one had the device removed because of a complication.”
The story didn’t describe the complication, which was a foot drop. It could have also gone a step further by cautioning that the FDA often does not require new medical devices to prove that they are safe or effective in order to be used in people.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Through an article in Forbes I saw that a new study has been published about the safety of Gardasil, a vaccine for prevention of certain strains of human papillomavirus, or HPV.

HPV is a virus that can lead to genital warts, many types of cancer, and cervical cancer in women, which kills 4,000 women every year in the U.S. alone.

The Gardasil vaccine, on the other hand, caused some people to faint after getting it, and others got mild skin infections—both of which occur somewhat rarely with other vaccines too, as you might expect.

Which sounds worse to you?

The study, published in the Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, looked at the published data about effects from the vaccine and found that it has a “favorable safety profile.” This study comes after many other previous studies that show essentially the same thing. There is no correlation between getting the Gardasil vaccine and seriously adverse effects such as “autoimmune diseases (including Guillain-Barre Syndrome and multiple sclerosis), anaphylaxis, venous thromboembolism, and stroke.”

Mind you, all these things and more have been used by people who attack vaccines as an argument against it. And, just like essentially every claim made by the anti-vaccination movement, these arguments are wrong.

That doesn’t stop them from making them, or from them getting attention by mainstream media; attention they most assuredly do not deserve.

It’s very frustrating; mounds of data show these vaccinations are incredibly low-risk, but it only takes a little bit of doubt and fear to make vaccine rates drop. For example, a young girl died tragically not long after getting the vaccine, and it got a lot of press, but it was later found that she died of a completely unrelated cause. This, sadly, is expected; more than 178 million doses of Gardasil have been given worldwide, and given that huge number it’s a statistical certainty that some young people will die not long after getting them. But as the saying goes, correlation is not causation. The vaccines are not to blame here.

Even more frustrating about this vaccine is that it’s being fought by an unusual group of people; while most anti-vax leanings are not affiliated with any particular political persuasion, Gardasil gets attacked additionally by conservatives who think that girls getting it will become more promiscuous, because HPV is a sexually transmitted disease.

However, this has been shown to be false. Worse, these same people tend to promote abstinence-only education, which has been shown conclusively to be the worst possible sex education; kids taught his way tend to have more pregnancies and more STIs than ones who are taught progressive, healthy sex ed.

It’s like Bizarro world, where everything is backward. All the evidence shows Gardasil to be safe and to be effective against a virus that causes horrific illnesses. It also shows that the claims made by anti-vaxxers are wrong, and that people fighting the vaccine because of their own sexual biases are making things far worse.

And yet they dig in. They insist real science is wrong, that their anecdotes are better, that the entire medical industry is on the take (which is silly beyond reason).

But that’s where we are. When it comes to health issues, especially ones tied to sexuality, reason goes out the window and emotions take over.

That’s why I am very, very clear about this: I and my family are all up to date with our vaccinations, and my daughter has had all three stages of the Gardasil vaccine (we’d have done that if she had been a boy, too). As a parent, as someone who knows and loves someone with an autoimmune disorder, and as a person who knows just how truly awful so many diseases are and how easily and safely they can be prevented, I am a strong advocate for vaccinations.

It’s your body, but it affects literally everyone around you. Don’t listen to the anti-vaxxers, who just want to scare you. Get the facts. And please, talk to your board-certified doctor and find out if there are any vaccinations you need.

How many lives will you save when you do?

Tip o’ the virion to the Refutations of Anti-Vaccine Memes group on Facebook.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes the vaccine is not associated with serious adverse effects sometimes attributed to it (e.g. multiple sclerosis). It mentions that syncope and possibly skin rash are thought to be side effects of the vaccine. Ideally, the story would have provided more information about how frequently these effects are seen (the main objective of the study being reported on).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among older adults with an unstable ankle fracture, the use of a modified casting technique known as close contact casting (a molded below-knee cast with minimal padding) resulted in similar functional outcomes at 6 months compared with surgery, and with fewer wound complications and reduced intervention costs, according to a study appearing in the October 11 issue of JAMA.

The number of older adults sustaining ankle fractures is increasing. Treatment of unstable fractures is either surgical or nonsurgical (using externally applied casts). Neither method yields an entirely satisfactory outcome in older adults. Traditional casting techniques are associated with poor fracture alignment and healing, as well as plaster-related sores. Surgery is often complicated by poor implant fixation (bone healing), wound problems, and infection. A modified casting technique has been developed, close contact casting, which uses minimal padding compared with traditional casting and achieves fracture reduction by distributing contact pressure by close anatomic fit.

Keith Willett, M.B.B.S., F.R.C.S., of the University of Oxford, United Kingdom, and colleagues randomly assigned 620 adults older than 60 years with acute, unstable ankle fracture to surgery (n = 309) or casting (n = 311). Casts were applied in the operating room under general or spinal anesthesia by a trained surgeon.

Among the 620 adults (average age, 71 years; 74 percent women) who were randomized, 96 percent completed the study. Nearly all participants (93 percent) received assigned treatment; 52 of 275 (19 percent) who initially received casting later converted to surgery. At 6 months, casting resulted in measures of ankle function equivalent to that with surgery. Infection and wound breakdown were more common with surgery (10 percent vs 1 percent), as were additional operating room procedures (6 percent vs 1 percent).

Radiologic malunion (abnormal healing of a fracture) was more common in the casting group (15 percent vs 3 percent for surgery). Casting required less operating room time compared with surgery. There were no significant differences in other secondary outcomes: quality of life, pain, ankle motion, mobility, and patient satisfaction.

"Close contact casting was delivered successfully for most participants, substantially reducing the number of patients requiring invasive surgical procedures at the outset and additional operations during a 6-month period," the authors write.

The researchers add that close contact casting may be an appropriate treatment for older adults with unstable ankle fracture.

Editor's Note: Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

"The results reported by Willett et al demonstrate that most unstable ankle fractures in older patients can be treated with a cast without the need for surgery," writes David W. Sanders, M.D., M.Sc., F.R.C.S.C., of Western University, London, Ontario, Canada, in an accompanying editorial.

"However, many patients who were initially treated by casting subsequently required repeat casting or surgery. Further studies are needed to help identify which patients will not benefit from casting. Although close contact casting may be unfamiliar to some orthopedic surgeons, it can avoid surgery for older patients with ankle fractures, yet result in equivalent functional outcomes. This technique is worth considering when treating this challenging clinical problem."

Editor's Note: The author has completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.

To place an electronic embedded link to these articles in your story These links will be live at the embargo time: http://jama. http://jama.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: A release devotes a fair amount of space to harms from casting as compared with surgery:
“Radiologic malunion (abnormal healing of a fracture) was more common in the casting group (15 percent vs 3 percent for surgery). Casting required less operating room time compared with surgery. There were no significant differences in other secondary outcomes: quality of life, pain, ankle motion, mobility, and patient satisfaction.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Treating more Americans with statins is worth the small risk of side-effects and would be cost-effective, a new report finds.

New guidelines from the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology in 2013 broadened the definition of who should get cholesterol-lowering statins, which are among the most widely prescribed drugs in the world. One of the recommendations was that statins should be prescribed to anyone with a 7.5 percent risk or higher of developing heart disease over the next 10 years.

Patients and doctors alike complained that the new guidelines were confusing. But in the new report, Dr. Thomas Gaziano of the Harvard School of Public Health and colleagues say they’re in fact simpler than the old guidelines, which advised people to aim for a total cholesterol level of less than 200, keeping “bad” LDL cholesterol to 130 for average people and under 100 for those considered at risk of a heart attack.

There’s an online tool that people or their doctors can use to calculate their risk of heart disease, which is based on age, sex, blood pressure and cholesterol levels.

Gaziano and colleagues created a computer simulation to see if giving statins to more people would be worth the risk of side-effects and the extra cost.

It would be, they report in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

“You have to be at extremely low risk before the risk of statins outweighs their significant, profound benefits,” Gaziano said.

Experts estimate that another 8 million to 13 million Americans would get statins if everyone used the new criteria -– with just under half of all adults aged 40 to 75 eligible.

Statins, which include Lipitor, Mevacor, Crestor and Zocor, are extremely popular. They’re prescribed to about 15 percent of U.S. adults, at a cost ranging from about $4 a month for the cheapest generic version to $600 for a pricey name-brand.

They can damage muscle in 5 to 15 percent of patients. In 2012, the Food and Drug Administration updated labeling on statins to include warnings about confusion and memory loss, elevated blood sugar leading to Type 2 diabetes, and muscle weakness.

But even with those risks, it’s worthwhile, Gaziano’s team found. And if even more people were given statins -- if they were given to people with a 3 percent risk of developing heart disease over 10 years -– another 160,000 heart attacks and strokes would be prevented, they estimated.

Limiting factors should be a patient's own preference about taking a daily pill, price and the risk of diabetes, they said.

“There is no longer any question as to whether to offer treatment with statins for patients for primary prevention, and there should now be fewer questions about how to treat and in whom,” Dr. Philip Greenland, an expert in preventive medicine at Northwestern University and a senior editor of the journal, and Dr. Michael Lauer of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute wrote in a commentary.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: NBC did a better job than the Times in answering the question about risks. NBC wrote that statins “can damage muscle in 5 to 15 percent of patients. In 2012, the Food and Drug Administration updated labeling on statins to include warnings about confusion and memory loss, elevated blood sugar leading to Type 2 diabetes, and muscle weakness.” This is a nice addition to the overall coverage of the new statin studies and a step we wish more reporters had taken.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drugs To Prevent Weak Bones Linked To Unusual Fractures In Women

There's fresh evidence pointing to a troubling link between commonly used osteoporosis drugs and a rare type of thighbone fracture.

When a hip bone breaks because of osteoporosis, the fracture usually involves either the ball at the top of the femur or the narrow neck just below the ball. The unusual fractures that may be associated with certain osteoporosis drugs called bisphosphonates occur lower on the bone. Ironically, that's where the femur, the longest bone in the body, is usually strongest.

These unusual fractures can occur suddenly without any trauma, such as a fall. And they can be complex breaks that are difficult to fix and slow to heal.

In the study, published in current issue of JAMA, researchers looked at 716 of these fractures in more than 200,000 Ontario women who had taken bisphosphonates.

Women who had taken the drugs for five years or longer had nearly a three times higher risk of suffering atypical fractures compared with women who had only transient exposure to such drugs.

That's called the relative risk, and it seems alarming. But the "absolute risk" of these unusual fractures is still pretty low — 13 fractures per year for every 10,000 people taking bisphosphonates for five years or longer. That is, long-term users have a risk of about a tenth of 1 percent.

Moreover, the study verified that long-term use of bisphosphonate drugs reduces the risk of typical osteoporosis fractures by 24 percent. That's obviously a lot more benefit than risk.

"The big message really is the number of typical hip fractures is much, much larger than the number of unusual thigh fractures," says Dr. Gillian Hawker of St. Michael's Hospital in Ontario, an osteoporosis specialist and study author. "So although we believe there is an increased risk of these unusual fractures, it doesn't outweigh the benefit" of taking osteoporosis drugs.

Merck, which makes Fosamax, the original and leading bisphosphonate drug, criticizes the new study. The company said in a statement to Shots that women who had atypical fractures were different from those who didn't. For instance, they started out with a history of more fractures, so the comparison isn't valid.

"Merck believes that the results must be interpreted with caution and should not be overstated," says the company's statement.

Still, the accumulating evidence that there is a risk of these serious, unusual fractures associated with bisphosphonates is getting a lot of attention in the medical community.

Last fall the Food and Drug Administration issued a "safety update" urging doctors and patients to be on the lookout for the problem. Often, the FDA says, an atypical fracture is preceded by pain in the thigh, apparently from a small stress fracture that signals bone weakness. "Although it is not clear if bisphosphonates are the cause, these unusual femur fractures have been predominantly reported in patients taking bisphosphonates," the FDA says.

The concern is heightened by another, even rarer possible side effect – osteonecrosis of the jaw. Basically, it means that part of the jawbone dies.

Some reports – including one published earlier this month in the Journal of Dental Research — have found a higher risk of the jaw problem in dental patients taking bisphosphonates.

Again, Merck disputes the connection. Earlier this month it convinced a New Jersey jury that Fosamax did not cause one woman's jaw problems.

Amid all the debate, many specialists are wondering if women on bisphosphonates should take a "holiday" from the drug from time to time. The idea is that perhaps they'd get the osteoporosis benefit without the risks of osteonecrosis and unusual fractures. "You could do five years on, five years off," Dr. Clifford Rosen, a bone specialist at Maine Medical Center, tells Shots. "Some people are doing three on and three off."

But at some point, should these patients start taking the drug again? "I don't think anybody knows," Rosen says. "The thought is you would have to put them back on at some time."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: NPR does a good job of parsing the harm described in the JAMA article. Extra credit for including the notion of a “drug holiday” that is a practical reaction from treating physicians to a confusing landscape of discoveries about these drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, April 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For men who believe size matters -- and that their penises don't measure up -- success can be found in certain non-surgical penile lengthening treatments, a new study analysis by Italian researchers contends.

Concerned that patients were seeking out unproven and potentially dangerous ways of lengthening the penis, the researchers examined the medical literature to see whether popular non-surgical methods had any scientific basis.

In a review of five evidence-based surgical studies of 121 men and six non-surgical studies of 109 men published between 2000 and 2009, the researchers found that penile extenders -- which stretch the organ over a period of months through traction -- were the most effective among non-invasive methods.

But one expert cautioned that men are playing with fire if they tinker with their penis size simply for vanity's sake. Dr. Elizabeth Kavaler, a urologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said functional issues resulting from conditions such as birth defects or prostate cancer surgery may warrant penile surgery, but such cases are unusual.

"It's a very fragile organ to begin with," Kavaler said, "and if you start to do all these things to it you can disfigure it... They should leave it alone."

Study co-author Dr. Paolo Gontero said urologists are constantly approached by men concerned about their penis size, despite the fact that the majority are average, with a flaccid length of 1 to 4 inches.

"However, most men complaining of inadequate penile size do have associated sexual problems even if their penile dimensions fall within the normal range -- so-called dysmorphophobic penis," said Gontero, an associate professor of urology at the University of Turin. "No study has, however, specifically addressed the extent and type of sexual bother in this patient category."

Dysmorphophobia "is a condition consisting of an imaginary flaw in the physical appearance," the study noted.

Writing in the April issue of the British Journal of Urology International, Gontero and his colleagues found that penile extenders work better than techniques such as vacuum devices, exercises and Botox injections, and that psychological satisfaction is equally as important as any physical changes.

A review of surgical techniques showed they increased phallus size an average of about a half-inch to 1 inch, but Gontero cautioned that the safest surgery -- which cuts the suspensory ligament of the penis to lengthen it -- often yields poor results.

"On the contrary, more complex lengthening procedures are to be considered experimental and potentially dangerous," he said.

"All procedures aimed to increase the penile girth should be considered unsafe, leading to potentially poor cosmetic and functional results," Gontero added. "I have come across such cases that I had to re-operate in order to remove additive substances injected around the penis."

The men studied ranged in age from 24 to 56 and were followed between three and 16 months.

More than 70 of them used penile extenders, with six experiencing minor problems such as bruising, pain and itching. These devices yielded average flaccid length increases of between 0.2 inches and 1 inch, Gontero said, and men achieving better results noted their satisfaction.

"Application of progressive and constant traction forces is a very old-fashioned technique used by the ancestors and currently by some tribal populations to elongate the penis or the neck," he said.

Gontero noted that cognitive behavioral therapy might help build confidence in some men.

Long-term vacuum treatments did not appear effective, producing no significant physical changes after six months, Gontero said, but did provide a degree of psychological satisfaction.

He and his colleagues found no scientific evidence to support penile-lengthening exercises.

Dr. E. Douglas Whitehead, director of New York Phalloplasty and associate clinical professor of urology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City, said suspensory ligament surgery to increase penis length can be more effective when combined with stretching techniques.

"The human body, even bone, can be stretched," he said. "So stretching the penis, when done long enough, will work. If anything, libido and desire are even better because you look better and feel better about yourself."

For more about penis size, visit Psychology Today.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Harms are mentioned here, and we appreciate that. We do think, though, that some hard numbers should have been put to the risks associated with more of the enhancement procedures. We give it a pass, though, for at least providing harms data for the penile extenders that are touted as the method with the biggest benefit. It says, “More than 70 of them used penile extenders, with six experiencing minor problems such as bruising, pain and itching. These devices yielded average flaccid length increases of between 0.2 inches and 1 inch, Gontero said, and men achieving better results noted their satisfaction.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 27, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Brilinta, an experimental anti-clotting medication currently awaiting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, performed better than the industry standard, Plavix, when used in tandem with low-dose aspirin, a new study finds.

Heart patients who took Brilinta (ticagrelor) with low-dose aspirin (less than 300 milligrams) had fewer cardiovascular complications than those taking Plavix (clopidogrel) plus low-dose aspirin, researchers found.

However, patients who took Brilinta with higher doses of aspirin (more than 300 milligrams) had worse outcomes than those who took Plavix plus high-dose aspirin, the investigators reported.

Antiplatelet drugs are used to prevent potentially dangerous blood clots from forming in patients with acute coronary syndrome, including those who have had a heart attack.

Brilinta has already been approved for use in many other countries. In July 2010, an FDA panel voted 7-to-1 to approve the use of Brilinta for U.S. patients undergoing angioplasty or stenting to open blocked arteries, but the approval process is still ongoing.

The panel's recommendation was based in part on prior findings from this study, called the Platelet Inhibition and Patient Outcomes (PLATO) trial.

In this latest analysis of PLATO findings, researchers found that patients who took Brilinta with low-dose aspirin were 16 percent less likely than those who took Plavix with low-dose aspirin to have a heart attack or stroke, or to die within a year.

The findings were reported Monday in an American Heart Association online conference.

One expert said the new information is valuable.

"The study highlights that if one chooses to use ticagrelor in subjects with acute coronary syndromes, it would be logical to use aspirin 81 milligrams per day (and not 325 mg daily)," said Dr. Jeffrey S. Berger, assistant professor of medicine and director of cardiovascular thrombosis at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City. "Of note, there is little reason to ever use aspirin 325 mg except in the acute setting of a heart attack or stroke," he added. "A higher aspirin dose (325 mg versus 81 mg) increases the risk of bleeding without increasing the efficacy of the drug."

A study author agreed that for most patients, using the drug with a lower dose of aspirin is usually warranted.

"Patients with acute coronary syndrome have options to prevent recurrent events," study lead author Dr. Kenneth W. Mahaffey, co-director of cardiovascular research at the Duke Clinical Research Institute, and associate professor of medicine at Duke University Medical Center, said in an AHA news release. "Physicians choosing to use ticagrelor in countries where it is approved and available should consider using a low-dose of maintenance aspirin with the drug."

The data and conclusions of the research should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The American Academy of Family Physicians outlines medicines used to treat patients with acute coronary syndrome.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: In the setting of heart attacks, the major harms of the drugs are related to their benefits — how well they prevent future cardiovascular tragedies. However, all the drugs in this article, including aspirin, impart a risk of bleeding, which is part of the comparison in PLATO and this follow-up analysis. It was good that the article gives a mention, albeit a brief one in the quote from Dr. Berger, of the increased risk of bleeding with higher doses of aspirin. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
HOUSTON, Feb. 23, 2017 - stroke patients receiving clot-busting medications before arriving at the hospital have a lower risk for disability afterward, according to research presented at the American Stroke Association's International Stroke Conference 2017.

Researchers analyzed results from 658 stroke patients who were treated with tPA - a drug that dissolves blood clots. About half of the participants received the clot-busting drug at the hospital, and half received it while still in the ambulance.

This preliminary study showed that three months after stroke, 182 out of every 1,000 patients treated before arriving at hospital were less disabled, including 58 patients who had zero disability, compared to people who received treatment after reaching the hospital.

"Time is brain in acute stroke after vascular collaterals fail, and faster treatment yields better outcomes," said May Nour, M.D., Ph.D., lead researcher, interventional neurologist and director of UCLA's Mobile Stroke Rescue Program. "Our study shows pre-hospital clot-busting is a promising, evolving approach to providing tPA stroke therapy. Its better outcomes could offset the increased costs of a mobile stroke unit."

Past research showed the sooner that a clot-busting tPA drug is given after an ischemic stroke - one in which a clot is blocking blood flow - the better patients fare. But tPA is not indicated and could hurt a patient's chances if they are having a hemorrhagic stroke, in which a blood vessel ruptures. That is why patients need a CT scan to confirm the type of stroke before receiving tPA.

Every second counts, in the current standard of care, patients who experience stroke-like symptoms and call 9-1-1 arriving to the hospital by ambulance are assessed by clinical examination and imaging (CT or MRI scan) in the Emergency Department. This takes a certain amount of time from the patient's symptom onset which prompted the 9-1-1 call.

In a mobile stroke unit, a specialized ambulance is equipped with a CT scanner, a paramedic, a critical care nurse, a CT technologist and a neurologist in person or by telemedicine. The ambulance arrives, does the CT on-site, gives the clot-busting drug if indicated and then transports the patient to the hospital.

Nour's team used data from Berlin's PHANTOM-S study, which took place from 2011 to 2015 and included 427 participants (median age 72) which were compared to 505 patients who received conventional care with in-hospital clot busting. Researchers analyzed information about patients' disabilities to determine how many needed to be treated in the mobile stroke unit to yield a greater benefit in disability outcomes when compared to patients who received tPA at the hospital.

The findings bordered on statistical significance, suggesting that future clinical trials with a greater number of patients are needed to show similar benefits.

"People should know the warning signs of stroke and call 9-1-1 as soon as they observe stroke signs," said Nour. "Treatment then needs to happen as quickly as possible, and a mobile stroke unit may allow that to happen."

Author disclosures are on the abstract.

The study was funded by the Arline and Henry Gluck Foundation.
• Any available downloadable video/audio interviews, B-roll, animation, graphics, and images related to this news release are on the right column of the release link http://newsroom. .
• Video clips with researchers/authors of the studies will be added to the release link as available.

Statements and conclusions of study authors that are presented at American Heart Association scientific meetings are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect association policy or position. The association makes no representation or warranty as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations are available at http://www. .

Note: Actual presentation is 8:12 a.m. CT/9:12 a.m. ET, Thursday, Feb. 23, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does raise risks in a meaningful way. It says:
“But tPA is not indicated and could hurt a patient’s chances if they are having a hemorrhagic stroke, in which a blood vessel ruptures. That is why patients need a CT scan to confirm the type of stroke before receiving tPA.”
However, that statement could have gone further and noted that some patients with a negative CT scan may have a hemorrhage after getting tPA.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The publication notes that approximately 9,000 people aged 50 and older were enrolled and randomized in an efficacy study designed to compare Flublok Quadrivalent to a traditional quadrivalent vaccine. People who were given Flublok Quadrivalent were over 40% less likely to develop culture-confirmed influenza. This data satisfies both pre-specified criteria for non-inferiority and superiority of Flublok over the traditional egg-based quadrivalent inactivated vaccine. Flublok Quadrivalent was approved by the FDA in October 2016 and will be available nationwide in prefilled syringes for the upcoming flu season.

"This study shows that Flublok® Quadrivalent, produced with modern recombinant technology can provide better protection against confirmed influenza-like illness among older adults than standard-dose quadrivalent influenza vaccine produced with traditional technology," said Lisa Dunkle MD, Chief Medical Officer of Protein Sciences. "We demonstrated statistically significantly better protection by Flublok based on considerably fewer people contracting the flu after vaccination with Flublok Quadrivalent. Today, we announce that these peer-reviewed results have been published in the highly respected New England Journal of Medicine. Furthermore, physicians are eligible for up to 1 hour AMA PRA category 1 CME credit for reading the article. Clearly, Flublok represents a major step forward in combating influenza on a global scale."

Flublok is the only flu vaccine made without the use of eggs and therefore is not subject to the mutations that are sometimes introduced into the vaccine during the process of egg adaptation that can cause the traditional vaccines to be ineffective (see Skowronski et al. (2014) PLOS ONE 9(3), e92153). Flublok contains three times more active ingredients than traditional vaccines and produced significantly higher immune responses to the A strains of influenza (especially H3N2) in the Flublok Quadrivalent study. Furthermore, Flublok Quadrivalent is the first and only high antigen-content quadrivalent flu vaccine that with its high efficacy makes it ideal for older adults and those with a compromised immune system. Flublok is highly purified and does not contain influenza virus, antibiotics, formaldehyde, preservatives, egg protein, latex, gluten or gelatin unlike other flu vaccines. Flublok Quadrivalent is FDA approved for adults 18 and older.

For more information about Flublok, please visit www.flublok.com.

About Protein Sciences 

Protein Sciences is a world leader in vaccine development and protein production. Our mission is our inspiration: to save lives and improve health through the creation of innovative vaccines and biopharmaceuticals.

About Flublok® 

Flublok, the world's first recombinant protein-based vaccine for the prevention of seasonal influenza disease, is approved for all adults over 18 years. FDA approved the quadrivalent formulation ("Flublok Quadrivalent") in October 2016 that will be commercially available for everyone over 18 years for the 2017/18 influenza season. Flublok is the only flu vaccine made in a 100% egg-free system using modern cell culture technology, making it unnecessary to use an infectious influenza virus, antibiotics or harsh chemicals (e.g., formaldehyde) in manufacturing. Flublok is highly purified and does not contain any preservatives (e.g., thimerosal - a form of mercury), egg proteins, gelatin or latex. In addition, Flublok contains three times more antigen than traditional flu vaccines (3x45mcg hemagglutinin protein versus 3x15mcg hemagglutinin protein). In a 2014/15 post-marketing study of 9,000 adults 50 years and older, people who received Flublok were over 40% less likely to develop cell culture confirmed influenza than people who received a traditional flu vaccine. Flublok is an exact copy of the influenza virus coat protein and is not subject to the egg-adapted mutations associated with low vaccine effectiveness (see Skowronski et al. (2014) PLOS ONE 9(3), e92153).

Healthcare professionals in the U.S. wishing to order Flublok should contact one of the following distributors:

Learn more at www.proteinsciences.com and www.flublok.com.

Flublok Safety Information 

Flublok is approved for people 18 and older to prevent influenza disease. The most common side effect from Flublok is pain at the site of injection. Headache, fatigue or muscle ache may occur. Tell the doctor if you have ever experienced Guillain-Barré syndrome (severe muscle weakness) or have had a severe allergic reaction to any component of Flublok vaccine. Vaccination with Flublok may not protect all individuals. Please see the complete Package Insert available at www.flublok.com or call 203-686-0800 for more information.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release includes a section on the safety of the new vaccine that offers substantial relevant information, as well as how to obtain more detailed information if desired.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A patient's own heart cells can be used to regrow new heart tissue and help undo damage caused by a heart attack, according to early research published on Monday.

Scientists at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles and Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore were able to treat 17 heart attack patients with cells grown from their own heart tissue. Not only did this show that the procedure was safe, it also showed that the cells can help reduce scarring and even cause new heart muscle to grow.

When a person suffers a heart attack, he or she is often left with huge areas of scarring in the heart. Scarred heart muscle doesn't pump blood as well as it used to, putting stress on other parts of the heart to make up for the deficit. The damaged area also doesn't conduct electric current as well, leading to an abnormal heart rhythm, which can cause more problems. Heart attack patients often go on to develop heart failure.

 

 "This is the first instance of therapeutic regeneration," says Dr. Eduardo Marbán, director of the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute.

He says while nature abounds with examples of spontaneous regeneration of limbs or tissues - like a salamander's new tail or a human liver regrowing to full size if partially damaged - doctors have not been able to help patients regrow heart tissue. This could change in the future if larger clinical trials and longer patient outcomes confirm the results of this early research published Monday in the journal The Lancet.

Marbán and his colleagues first presented this research at an American Heart Association conference in November.

To qualify for this clinical trial, patients had to have suffered a recent heart attack and "had to have a significant amount of damage to begin with and weren't squeezing [blood into the body] as well as they should have," says Dr. Peter Johnston, one of the study authors who injected the new heart cells into patients treated at Johns Hopkins Hospital.

A total of 25 patients participated in the clinical trial, which was designed to determine if it was safe to have cells grown from one's own heart tissue injected back into the heart. Seventeen patients received the stem cell transplants, while the other eight patients were given conventional post-heart attack therapy.

In an outpatient procedure under local anesthesia, doctors funneled a catheter into the patient's heart and removed peppercorn-sized bits of tissue from the part of the patient's heart that was unaffected by the heart attack. Using a procedure invented by Marbán, heart stem cells were isolated from the tissue and then millions of new cells were grown in a petri dish.

About four to six weeks after having suffered the heart attack, the patients had either 12 million or 25 million heart-derived cells injected back into the their hearts.

Marbán says when the first patient data came in, he and his colleagues were relieved to see the procedure was safe. After 12 months, researchers report only one patient appeared to have a serious side effect that may have been connected to the experimental cells.

Six months after the first patient was injected with his cells grown from his own heart tissue, Marbán says there was dramatic shrinking of scar tissue and new tissue had grown. "That was unprecedented" he says. "No one had demonstrated that before."

All patients were followed for six months and researchers have 12-month data for 21 patients. In patients who received the cell transplant, Marbán says about half of their scar tissue dissolved and the reduction in scar size appears to get bigger after the first six months. He says that why this is happening is still unclear.

Marbán says the amount of new heart tissue that grew was not subtle. [On average] "22 grams (about .78 ounces) of new heart tissue grew," which he says is quite remarkable considering this had never been done before and the average weight of the part of the heart that is responsible for pumping the blood through the body is about 150 grams (about 5.3 ounces).

Patients in the control group, those who didn't get a cell transplant, did not regenerate any tissue and the amount of scar tissue they had remained the same.

Sonia Skarlatos, Ph.D and deputy director of the Division of Cardiovascular Sciences at the NIH’s National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute says this early research is very exciting and a move in the right direction. She cautions that this procedure has to be tested on many more patients and they have to be observed for longer periods than in the current study, but she says these results are all very positive. She is hopeful further studies will confirm these early results.

"By preventing the consequences of a heart attack you may be able to prevent further down the heart failure that happens in [many of these] patients." Skarlatos says.

She was not involved in the research but the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute did help fund it.

Skarlatos also says it's still not clear exactly what is making the heart regenerate and scar tissue disappear. Is it the cells themselves or proteins and other factors produced by these newly introduced cells that help fix the heart? Further research will hopefully also help answer those questions, she says. The study authors say based on these results, further research is warranted.

Marbán, who began his research at Johns Hopkins, says "we did see a glimmer [of regeneration] in animal testing," but the results in humans were much better. "That doesn't usually happen this way in research."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story at least mentioned harms. Another story on the study, by WebMD, did not. This one says, “After 12 months, researchers report only one patient appeared to have a serious side effect that may have been connected to the experimental cells.” Competing coverage discussed a broader group of patients who had bad outcomes, although it is not clear that all of those outcomes were a result of the treatment. Pinpointing the cause of a side effect can be tricky, and given the lead researcher’s financial interest in this stem cell therapy, we think stories should err on the side of providing more information about potential harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
If mass mammography screening for breast cancer worked well, fewer women would die from the disease.

And yet, a new study published in JAMA Internal Medicine has found something that may seem counterintuitive: More breast cancer screening didn't actually save lives. Screening did however lead to more "overdiagnosis," detecting cancers that would not have been fatal or even harmful.

The research, led by Richard Wilson of Harvard University, revealed that in more than 500 US counties, mammography screening programs were linked with more diagnoses of smaller breast cancers — but not with fewer deaths or with fewer larger breast cancers (which theoretically would be prevented by finding the disease early through screening).

You can see this clearly in the chart below: The number of diagnosed breast cancers rose with more screening, yet the number of deaths from breast cancer 10 years later remained stubbornly stable.

To be clear: Mass screening is different from using technologies like ultrasounds to diagnose people at risk of a disease or who have symptoms that require investigation. And not all mass screening programs are bad. Colorectal cancer screening, for example, has been shown to save lives as a result of early detection, and the Pap test transformed cervical cancer into a treatable disease.

But this isn't the first study to call into question the benefits of mammography and whether women are too often the victims of overdiagnosis. 



The trouble with overdiagnosis is that while the cancers doctors find wouldn't have harmed their patients, the treatment and stress that result from the diagnosis probably will.

We have to find a better way to screen women for breast cancer

The medical community has known about overdiagnosis and overtreatment for years, documenting the problem in a range of cancers — in breast, prostate, lung, and thyroid (which you can see in the chart above).

This raises a tough question: What should the medical community do about overdiagnosis? In a related commentary in the journal, a pair of doctors from the University of Washington School of Medicine note that the estimates of overdiagnosis of breast cancer are "frustratingly broad" — from less than 10 percent to 50 percent or more of women who get screened. In other words, we don't actually know how bad the problem is.

"Sadly," they write, "we are left in a conundrum. Women will increasingly approach their physicians with questions and concerns about overdiagnosis, and we have no clear answers to provide."



The authors of the newest study don't advocate no screening. Instead, they note that the benefits of screening will probably be more favorable when screening is directed at people with a high risk of the disease — such as those with a family history of breast cancer.



The US Preventive Services Task Force, which analyzes the best available evidence to create guidelines for doctors, now recommends biennial mammography screening for the general population in women ages 50 to 74. For women under 50 and over 75 — who aren't at a high risk of breast cancer — the benefits of mass screening are less clear.

There are small things doctors can do that still don't happen often enough. For example, most women aren't told about the potential downsides of mammography screening — even though they're almost always briefed on the benefits.

For now, it's up to patients to talk to their doctors about their particular risk profiles and how to screen accordingly. We also need to remember that in medicine, more often than not, we generally overestimate the benefits and underestimate the harms.

WATCH: The naked mole rat might help us cure cancer
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story is mainly about harms and the fact that increased breast cancer screening was not associated with lower mortality rates in the study — suggesting that there is a high rate of overdiagnosis of breast cancer. “The trouble with overdiagnosis is that while the cancers doctors find wouldn’t have harmed their patients, the treatment and stress that result from the diagnosis probably will,” the story says. The story adds that estimates of the scope of the problem are “frustratingly broad — from less than 10 percent to 50 percent or more of women who get screened. In other words, we don’t actually know how bad the problem is.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
According to a U.S. government advisory panel, almost no one should get screened for prostate cancer. But a new study this week reflects the continued view of many physicians — that screening does help to catch tumors earlier. To screen or not to screen: here's why experts still can't agree

If you’re wondering why experts still can’t agree on prostate-cancer screening, you’re not alone.

Just two months ago, a major U.S. government panel said that basically no one should get screened for prostate cancer, claiming the simple blood test for prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, does more harm than good. Now, a new study looks at government data and finds that, without PSA testing, the U.S. would have three times as many patients each year diagnosed with advanced-stage prostate cancer — and the vast majority of those cases would be fatal.

“Almost all men with clinically apparent metastases at initial diagnosis will die from prostate cancer,” urologist and study author Edward Messing told reporters, as he explained the importance of his study.

The new study reflects a broader divide in the medical community, between public health experts who have largely turned away from PSA screening, and many practicing clinicians who feel the test has helped their patients immensely.

No one denies that PSA tests can help to catch prostate cancer early. But two issues are still unresolved. One is how well screening can actually work to prevent cancer deaths; the other is what kind of negative effects screening brings along with its benefits.

On the first issue, there is still some uncertainty. In the U.S., a large randomized trial found no mortality benefit of screening. But an even larger randomized clinical trial in Europe has found a benefit. In its latest results published this spring, the European study team said that men who undergo routine testing have significantly lower risk of prostate-cancer death after 11 years.

Still, the real crux of the debate on PSA testing is the second issue: the possible negative effects of screening. No diagnostic test is 100% accurate, and if a PSA test comes back positive for prostate cancer, the patient will usually be referred for a biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. That test can have side effects. Then, if the patient does have cancer, the available treatments for it — surgery, radiation, as well as other options — also have side effects, chief among them impotence, incontinence, and urinary incontinence. The same European trial that found lower cancer mortality with PSA testing also found that, to save just one life through screening, an extra 37 men would need to be diagnosed with prostate cancer and treated. Many health experts think that’s too much risky treatment to justify the results.

So when the government advisory panel — the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force — recommends against routine PSA testing, it’s making a judgment call. It’s saying that, for most men, the (albeit small) risk of sexual dysfunction and urinary leakage from eventual treatment is not worth it, given the even smaller chance that PSA testing could save your life. But that decision does remain a judgment call. It depends on how much you value certain quality-of-life measures versus how much you value having any life at all.

As for the new paper this week, which suggests that three times as many men would be diagnosed each year with metastatic prostate cancer if it weren’t for PSA testing, that study is published in the journal Cancer — and its numbers deserve a little explanation. To calculate the total number of metastatic cases we’d get without screening, the study takes today’s population of the United States and applies the rates (broken down by age and race) of advanced-stage prostate cancer that were observed before PSA testing was introduced — that is, the rates way back in 1983-85.

In other words, it tells us what the current U.S. population would look like if today we faced the same risks that Americans faced in the ’80s; it finds we’d have roughly 25,000 U.S. men diagnosed with advanced-stage prostate cancer each year compared to just 8,000 today. But is going back in time 30 years really the same thing that we’d get if we abolished PSA testing today? Who knows? The rate of new diagnoses of all cancer types combined has been falling consistently in recent years. However, prostate cancer is one of the few cancers that’s not strongly linked to smoking (and falling cigarette consumption over the past 40 years is a major reason for falling cancer rates). It is, however, linked to obesity, which has been on the rise since the 1980s.

One further fact to keep in mind is that PSA testing works to cut the number of newly diagnosed advanced-stage cancers — but it does so by increasing the number of cancers that are caught early. And, as the debate over PSA testing shows us, early diagnosis is only useful if early treatment can help patients live longer and healthier lives, preventing progression to advanced-stage cancer down the line, but without increasing the risks of other health problems too much in the process. That’s what experts can’t agree about.

Many doctors do have very strong opinions, though. As a patient, if you’re deciding whether to get a PSA test, or whether not to get a PSA test, remember you do have a right to your own opinion too. There’s no easy answer.

MORE: Prostate Cancer Screening: What You Need to Know
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: WebMD’s story quantified the potential harms in a more helpful way.
We also take issue with the statement that it is an “albeit small risk of sexual dysfunction and urinary leakage from eventual treatment.”
The discussion of harms was incomplete.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With calcium, adolescent girls may be the only group that is getting too little, the panel found. Older women, on the other hand, may take too much, putting themselves at risk for . And there is evidence that excess calcium can increase the risk of heart disease, the group wrote.

As for vitamin D, some prominent doctors have said that most people need supplements or they will be at increased risk for a wide variety of illnesses, including heart disease, and autoimmune diseases.

And these days more and more people know their vitamin D levels because they are being tested for it as part of routine physical exams.

“The number of vitamin D tests has exploded,” said Dennis Black, a reviewer of the report who is a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at the .

At the same time, vitamin D sales have soared, growing faster than those of any supplement, according to The Nutrition Business Journal. Sales rose 82 percent from 2008 to 2009, reaching $430 million. “Everyone was hoping vitamin D would be kind of a panacea,” Dr. Black said. The report, he added, might quell the craze.

“I think this will have an impact on a lot of primary care providers,” he said.

The 14-member expert committee was convened by the Institute of Medicine, an independent nonprofit scientific body, at the request of the and Canadian governments. It was asked to examine the available data — nearly 1,000 publications — to determine how much vitamin D and calcium people were getting, how much was needed for optimal health and how much was too much.

The two nutrients work together for bone health.

Bone health, though, is only one of the benefits that have been attributed to vitamin D, and there is not enough good evidence to support most other claims, the committee said.

Some labs have started reporting levels of less than 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood as a deficiency. With that as a standard, 80 percent of the population would be deemed deficient of vitamin D, Dr. Rosen said. Most people need to take supplements to reach levels above 30 nanograms per milliliter, he added.

But, the committee concluded, a level of 20 to 30 nanograms is all that is needed for bone health, and nearly everyone is in that range.

Vitamin D is being added to more and more foods, said Paul R. Thomas of the Office of Dietary Supplements at the National Institutes of Health. Not only is it in orange juice and milk, but more is being added to breakfast cereals, and it now can be found in very high doses in supplement pills. Most vitamin D pills, he said, used to contain no more than 1,000 international units of it. Now it is easy to find pills, even in places like , with 5,000 international units. The committee, though, said people need only 600 international units a day.

To assess the amounts of vitamin D and calcium people are getting, the panel looked at national data on diets. Most people, they concluded, get enough calcium from the foods they eat, about 1,000 milligrams a day for most adults (1,200 for women ages 51 to 70).

Vitamin D is more complicated, the group said. In general, most people are not getting enough vitamin D from their diets, but they have enough of the vitamin in their blood, probably because they are also making it naturally after being out in the sun and storing it in their bodies.

The American Society for Bone and Mineral Research and other groups applauded the report. It is “a very balanced set of recommendations,” said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a endocrinologist and the society’s president.

But Andrew Shao, an executive vice president at the Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group, said the panel was being overly cautious, especially in its recommendations about vitamin D. He said there was no convincing evidence that people were being harmed by taking supplements, and he said higher levels of vitamin D, in particular, could be beneficial.

Such claims “are not supported by the available evidence,” the committee wrote. They were based on studies that observed populations and concluded that people with lower levels of the vitamin had more of various diseases. Such studies have been misleading and most scientists agree that they cannot determine cause and effect.

It is not clear how or why the claims for high vitamin D levels started, medical experts say. First there were two studies, which turned out to be incorrect, that said people needed 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood, the upper end of what the committee says is a normal range. They were followed by articles and claims and books saying much higher levels — 40 to 50 nanograms or even higher — were needed.

After reviewing the data, the committee concluded that the evidence for the benefits of high levels of vitamin D was “inconsistent and/or conflicting and did not demonstrate causality.”

Evidence also suggests that high levels of vitamin D can increase the risks for fractures and the overall death rate and can raise the risk for other diseases. While those studies are not conclusive, any risk looms large when there is no demonstrable benefit. Those hints of risk are “challenging the concept that ‘more is better,’ ” the committee wrote.

That is what surprised Dr. Black. “We thought that probably higher is better,” he said.

He has changed his mind, and expects others will too: “I think this report will make people more cautious.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that, contrary to the claims of many advocates for increased supplemental vitamin D, there is evidence that high levels of vitamin D may have adverse effects, such as increased risk for fractures and an increase in the overall death rate. The story also explained that too much calcium has been linked to increased risk of kidney stones and, more tentatively, heart disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"But the study offers evidence that targeting beta-amyloid can benefit patients," she says. Larger studies in many more patients are needed before the drug will be available, though, she says.

The benefit is small and studies have been inconsistent, says researcher Rachelle Doody, MD, head of Alzheimer’s disease research at Baylor College of Medicine.

Called solanezumab, the drug attaches to a protein called beta-amyloid that builds up and clumps together to form sticky plaques that riddle Alzheimer's patients' brains. The drug is designed to prevent those clumps from forming.

Oct. 8, 2012 (Boston) -- An experimental Alzheimer ’s treatment slowed memory loss by about one-third in people with mild Alzheimer's , offering hope that the drug can alter the course of the progressive disease.

Maria Carrillo, PhD, a neuroscientist and vice president for medical and scientific relations for the Alzheimer’s Association, calls the results "encouraging" and says she hopes development will continue.

"While [beta-amyloid] is the leading hypothesis of what causes the disease, that has remained unproven. This study may not have hit on everything, and it is not the home run we wanted, but it is the first time we’ve seen cognitive benefit with an amyloid treatment," she says.

The latest results come from a combined analysis of a 1,012-patient study and a 646-patient study, both of which involved people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease.

When the findings of the two studies were looked at individually, patients given solanezumab for 18 months didn’t do better on either a test used to measure patients' symptoms or a measure of how well patients are functioning than patients given a placebo.

Combining the two studies to give them more statistical power showed that patients on solanezumab didn’t lose their memories as quickly as those on placebo.

The results really became clear when the researchers looked only at those patients with mild, early-stage disease. In the analysis, those given solanezumab had a 34% reduction in memory loss and other mental symptoms compared with those on placebo. There was even a hint that the drug helped to slow the decline in functioning.

Asked if the 34% improvement in cognitive decline is meaningful to a patient, Carrillo said, "I have a family member with AD. I would be happy with a sustained cognitive benefit for my mother-in-law."

The only side effect that happened more often in people on solanezumab than patients on placebo was chest pain: 1.1% vs. 0.2%.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story included more detail than the AP story about rates of chest pain, reporting that just over 1% of trial participants taking the active drug reported chest pain, compared to just 0.2% of those in the placebo group. We do take some issue with the description as chest pain when the report describes it as angina.  However, this story did not mention the cases of brain swelling and or small bleeding in the brain that were included in the AP report. Nonetheless, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study “has wide-reaching implications,” said Dr. Louise Wilkins-Haug, director for maternal-fetal medicine and reproductive genetics at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, who was not involved in the research. “Individuals need to be careful” to ensure that companies use rigorous laboratory procedures and support accuracy claims with data, she added.

One potential worry is that women might abort fetuses of an undesired sex. Several companies do not sell tests in China or India, where boys are prized over girls and fetuses found to be female have been aborted. While sex selection is not considered a widespread objective in the United States, companies say that occasionally customers expressed that interest, and have been denied the test. A recent study of third pregnancies in the journal Prenatal Diagnosis found that in some Asian-American groups, more boys than girls are born in ratios that are “strongly suggesting prenatal sex selection,” the authors said.

At least one company, Consumer Genetics, which sells the Pink or Blue test, requires customers to sign a waiver saying they are not using the test for that purpose. “We don’t want this technology to be used as a method of gender selection,” said the company’s executive vice president, Terry Carmichael. Sex-determination tests are part of a new frontier of fetal DNA testing, which can be used to determine paternity and blood type, and is being used to develop early screening tests for genetic diseases or disorders like Down syndrome.

The new study found that to be reliable, the sex-determination tests had to be performed after at least seven weeks of gestation. Most tests that were highly accurate were conducted on a mother’s blood, not urine. And certain rigorous laboratory procedures had to be followed. For the blood tests, women prick their fingers and send blood samples to labs. If the Y chromosome is detected, the fetus is male. Absence of a Y chromosome would probably mean the fetus is female, but could mean that fetal DNA was not found in that sample.

The tests are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration because they are not used for medical purposes, a spokeswoman said, but the agency is investigating the explosion of home genetic tests like these and genome-sequencing kits.

Dr. Diana Bianchi, executive director of the Mother Infant Research Institute at Tufts Medical Center in Boston and the lead author of the sex-determination report, said, “A very important aspect of the study is how this advances prenatal care.”

But there are potential concerns too, she said, including that women may spend more than $250 for the tests when they don’t have insurance for prenatal care. A typical blood test like Pink or Blue, for example, costs $25 for the kit. Lab fees and shipping costs, which vary, bring the total expense to $265 to $330.

Dr. Bianchi is conducting another study to “try to find out why people are buying these things and what are the consequences,” she said. “It’s very important to educate health care providers that pregnant women are buying these tests.”

Another type of test not studied by the researchers has become popular because it is cheaper and can be done at home. These tests analyze hormones in women’s urine, a method that several experts said has not been studied as rigorously as DNA. Rebecca Griffin, a founder of the biggest seller, Intelligender, said two independent studies found it 90 percent accurate at 10 weeks.

Another company, TrovaGene, has developed a DNA test using urine, which, according to Gabriele Cerrone, TrovaGene’s co-founder and director, is 95 percent accurate at predicting boys at seven weeks, and 88 percent accurate at predicting girls. TrovaGene is also developing a test for Down syndrome.

Most DNA tests on the market use blood.

Raylene Lewis, 34, of College Station, Tex., had a frustrating experience with a now-defunct company, Acu-Gen, which guaranteed 99.9 percent accuracy with its blood tests. In 2005, she was told she was having a boy, and she chose a name, bought boy clothes and told everyone. When an ultrasound revealed she was carrying a girl, “I was absolutely shocked,“ she said. She was not unhappy, she said, but “it was like the baby boy disappeared.”

When the Lewises complained to Acu-Gen’s president, they were told, “We are very sure that genetically you are having a male,” she said, reading a transcript of the conversation, which they recorded. The official suggested that the baby might be “what a baby girl looks like on the outside,” but that “we’re giving you the results on the inside.”

Ms. Lewis, who sued Acu-Gen, said she ultimately received a refund. Lawyers for Acu-Gen could not be reached for comment.

The Pink or Blue test, which claims 95 percent accuracy at seven weeks and gives refunds for wrong results, appears to meet the standards described in the new study.

Chelsea Wallace, 23, of Okeechobee, Fla., was thrilled early this year when the test she took at seven weeks said she was having a boy, a result confirmed weeks later by ultrasound. Ms. Wallace, who has a 3-year-old daughter, said she also would have been happy with a girl, but that since she and her fiancé could not agree on a boy’s name, finding out early gave them time to choose the name Layton. It also helped her plan, she said.

“As soon as I found out I was pregnant,” said Ms. Wallace, whose son is due in September, “I wanted to know what I was having.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Yes, the story lists potential harms. These range from inaccuracy, because the tests are unregulated and the laboratories don’t have to meet medical standards, to the potential for abortions based on fetal gender.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A swollen lymph node on the neck was the only symptom Karen Anderson noticed.

The 47-year-old pre-school teacher from Eugene was stunned when her biopsy came back positive for melanoma –the most life-threatening form of skin cancer. Malignant cells had spread throughout her body.

Surgeons removed affected lymph nodes but within months tumors appeared in her liver, breast, skull and other lymph nodes. "My oncologist said this is going to kill you and you need to think about preparing for that," Anderson says.

Two years ago, she gained access to an experimental immune-enhancing treatment in clinical trials at Providence Cancer Center in Portland. Called ipilimumab, it unleashes an all-out immune system attack on cancer cells. At first, the injections caused only side-effects: widespread itching, fatigue, and diarrhea. Worse, Anderson says, "I could feel the tumors getting bigger. They felt hot to me."

Then after several months the tumors began to shrink. After one year, the once palpable tumors were no longer detectable in diagnostic scans. While far from a cure, the treatment is the first to improve survival in people with melanoma that has spread, or metastasized, says Dr. Walter Urba, director of cancer research at the Providence Cancer Center. Urba is a co-author of the

on ipilimumab published in the New England Journal of Medicine Saturday.

Success in a cancer as deadly and difficult to treat as advanced melanoma is raising hopes that the treatment may also prove useful in staving off other tumors, including lung and prostate cancer. Drug companies are racing to develop competing versions of the immune-enhancing therapy, an antibody produced through genetic engineering.

"I would not be here today without it," says Anderson, who is undergoing a second round of treatment for resurgent tumors. "It's given me time with my kids, my husband, my family – and it's been quality time."

Melanoma is a rare skin cancer, but accounts for most of the 66,000 annual deaths from skin cancer worldwide. If caught early, before cancer cells break off and spread, surgery can stop melanoma. But most people diagnosed after melanoma has metastasized die within a year.

"For years and years, we've been looking for an effective therapy," Urba says.

Ipilimumab, nicknamed Ippy, is one of the first antibody-based therapies that use the body's immune defenses to destroy cancer cells. The antibodies bind to a specific protein studding the surface of T cells, immune system cells that seek and destroy virus-infected and cancerous cells. The surface protein works like a switch, inactivating T cells after a few days to prevent the immune system from running amok and destroying healthy tissue. The antibodies temporarily jam the switch, allowing T cells to continue attacking cancer tissue for weeks or months – for as long as patients continue to receive injections of the engineered antibody.

More than 600 melanoma patients took part in the ipilimumab clinical trial at 125 cancer centers in 13 countries. All patients had inoperable cancers with widespread tumors after conventional treatment. Some patients received ipilimumab alone, others it combined with a cancer vaccine called gp100, and a third group received only the cancer vaccine.

Ipilimumab appeared to double survival compared with the gp100 vaccine alone. After one year, nearly half of patients given ipilimumab alone or in combination remained alive, compared with one quarter of patients given only the vaccine. After two years, 24 percent of patients treated with ipilimumab were alive, 22 percent of patients treated with the combination, while survival dropped to 14 percent among patients treated with the vaccine alone.

"Some of the people are now out 44 months and still remain free of disease," Urba says.

Serious side effects also became clear. Nearly two-thirds of patients on ipilimumab experienced side effects caused by over-active immunity, such as severe itching, intestinal irritation and diarrhea. Researchers linked 14 deaths to the study drugs, half caused by immune-system reactions.

Still, the study stands as "a major landmark in cancer immunotherapy," says Dr. Bernard Fox, president of the International Society for Biological Therapy of Cancer. He says the results highlight the potential for using the same approach to treat other cancers. Already, early studies in patients with lung cancer and prostate cancer have produced positive, though inconclusive results.

"There is no reason it can't be applied to any of the common tumor types," Urba says. "They all have antigens on their surface that T cells can recognize." Ongoing trials are testing ipilimumab with other cancer drugs, in different doses and against different cancers.

Drug company Bristol-Myers Squibb told investors the drug could gain regulatory approval as early as next year and become available to cancer patients in 2012. Ipilimumab was developed by Medarex, a New Jersey company owned by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Other drug companies are at work on competing versions of the immune-enhancing antibody therapy.

For now, federal regulators have authorized

to people who have serious or immediately life-threatening, inoperable melanoma that has spread, who have no alternative treatment options, and whose physicians believe the drug is appropriate. Providence Cancer Center is the only site in Oregon offering compassionate use of the drug. The Northwest's other participating centers are the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance and Swedish Cancer Institute in Seattle, Providence Cancer Center in Spokane, and Multicare Health System in Tacoma.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good job on harms as well – "Serious side effects also became clear. Nearly two-thirds of patients on ipilimumab experienced side effects caused by over-active immunity, such as severe itching, intestinal irritation and diarrhea. Researchers linked 14 deaths to the study drugs, half caused by immune-system reactions."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About one in 20 men is estimated to have Peyronie’s, but figures are not precise because people with the condition tend not to discuss it publicly.

Although the company selling Xiaflex will be Auxilium Pharmaceuticals of Malvern, Pa., the F.D.A. approval was a belated triumph for the drug’s original developer, BioSpecifics Technologies of Lynbrook, N.Y., on Long Island. Founded in 1957, it struggled for decades to find uses for the product, almost going out of business before licensing the drug to Auxilium in 2004.

“It sort of proves to people that if you really believe in a drug you should never give up,” said Matthew Geller, a biotechnology investment banker who is a member of the BioSpecifics board.

Shares of BioSpecifics closed Monday at $27.61, up from $1 as recently as late 2006.

Some people treated with Xiaflex in clinical trials for the Dupuytren’s hand condition said it had made a big difference in their lives, and had allowed them to avoid painful surgery.

“When I looked down and saw my finger straightened out, I cried,” said Kenneth Nelson, 65, of Indianapolis. “It was to me just like a miracle.”

Xiaflex is an enzyme produced by a gangrene-causing bacterium, Clostridium histolyticum, which uses it to eat away the tissues of its victims. The enzyme, called collagenase, breaks down collagen, a major component of the body’s connective tissue that is found in skin, tendons, cartilage and other organs.

But collagenase by itself does not cause gangrene. And there are times doctors need to break down collagen, such as when an excess builds up in the hand or penis, causing Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. The ailments are named for French surgeons who described the conditions in the 18th and 19th centuries.

The enzyme was first extracted from the bacteria around 1950 by Ines Mandl, a young biochemist at Columbia University. Edwin H. Wegman, a Long Island entrepreneur, learned about Dr. Mandl’s work and set up a company called Advance Biofactures, which later became BioSpecifics, to turn collagenase into a drug.

In 1965, the company won approval of an ointment containing collagenase for use in removing dead tissue from skin ulcers and burns. The ointment, sold by licensees under the name Santyl, was a modest success, but the company never truly prospered.

So in the 1970s the company began developing what it thought would be a bigger money-maker, an injectable collagenase. It tested that drug for numerous uses, including herniated disks. Finally, in the early 1990s, two professors of orthopedics at the nearby State University of New York at Stony Brook suggested using the drug for Dupuytren’s.

The professors, Dr. Lawrence C. Hurst and Marie A. Badalamente, injected the drug into the tails of rats, as a stand-in for human fingers. They found they could dissolve the collagen in tendons, making the tails floppy, without harming nearby nerves and arteries. Then they organized clinical trials in patients and got federal grants to help pay for the work. The professors and Stony Brook will share a royalty of one half of 1 percent of sales of Xiaflex for use in treating Dupuytren’s.

But work was slowed by lack of money, and by 2004, BioSpecifics was about out of cash. In desperation, Ed Wegman’s son Mark, a top computer scientist at I.B.M., called a childhood friend, Laurence Korn, who had been the chief executive of a successful biotechnology company now known as PDL BioPharma.

With Dr. Korn’s help, BioSpecifics licensed the drug to Auxilium in a matter of weeks, receiving $5 million initially.

Auxilium was interested because of Peyronie’s disease. It already was selling a gel for men with low testosterone and had learned from urologists about the need for better treatments for bent penises.

“From talking with surgeons and patients who have Peyronie’s, neither of them wants to do the surgery,” said Will Sargent, a spokesman for Auxilium.

Two years ago, the drug giant Pfizer, which sells the erectile dysfunction drug Viagra, licensed the European rights to Xiaflex from Auxilium for an initial payment of $75 million. BioSpecifics got $6.4 million of that amount and will receive 8.5 percent of additional payments of up to $410 million that Pfizer might make.

Auxilium sought approval for treating Dupuytren’s first because it was easier to measure success in straightening fingers. But the company hopes to begin late-stage trials of Xiaflex for Peyronie’s disease later this year. In a midstage trial, injections of Xiaflex into the collagen plaque in the penis reduced the curvature. But the drug did not reduce pain or discomfort during intercourse by a statistically significant amount.

While collagenase itself is not patented, the companies do have patents on the use of the enzyme to treat Dupuytren’s and Peyronie’s. They are also shielded from competition for seven years under a federal law aimed at spurring development of drugs for rare, or “orphan,” diseases — even though newer estimates suggest these two diseases are not as rare as thought when the drugs were given orphan status.

Auxilium and BioSpecifics hope that the half-century-old collagenase might eventually become as versatile as Botox, another bacterial product. They are looking at uses that range from loosening up immobile “frozen shoulders” to eliminating fat bulges and cellulite.

With its belated success, BioSpecifics has sold off its ointment business. It now has only five employees and a business of collecting a roughly 11 to 12 percent royalty on sales of Xiaflex.

“We will be a cash machine going forward,” said Thomas L. Wegman, the president and the other son of the company founder. “We don’t have to pay for marketing. We don’t have to pay for manufacturing.”

The Wegman family — the two sons and the founder’s 75-year-old wife, Toby — controls about 25 percent of the company’s stock.

Ed Wegman, the company’s founder, did not live to see the F.D.A. approval, dying at age 87 in 2007. On Feb. 2, the day the drug was approved, one BioSpecifics director sent an e-mail message to the others saying, “Well done. Hope Ed is looking on.”

Meanwhile, Dr. Mandl, the biochemist who first isolated collagenase from the bacteria, is nearing 93. Last year, when BioSpecifics stock rose above $30, she sold the last 1,000 shares she had been given for serving as a consultant to the company over the years.

Unfortunately, she had sold most of her holdings years earlier for a relative pittance. “If I still had what I originally had,” she said. “I’d be very rich.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The sidebar mentions that Xiaflex can rupture tendons "in rare circumstances" and that the injections "often" cause temporary pain and bruising and "sometimes" cause allergic reactions.  We wish that the story had been a bit more precise in its quantification of these adverse effects, but we feel the descriptions provided are enough to paint a reasonably accurate portrait of the drug’s potential harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 16, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug appears to reduce the risk of bone fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis better than a placebo and the currently available drug, a new study finds.

In this phase 3 trial funded by the drug's maker, Radius Health, fewer women on the injectable drug abaloparatide had spine fractures (0.58 percent) than women receiving a placebo (4.22 percent) and slightly fewer than those taking a similar injectable drug, teriparatide (Forteo) (0.84 percent).

"If this gets approved, and there is no reason to think it won't, this will be the second drug available for the treatment of high-risk osteoporosis," said lead researcher Dr. Paul Miller of the Colorado Center for Bone Research.

Forteo has been in use for the past 16 years, he said. Abaloparatide works differently from Forteo and improves bone density more than Forteo, Miller said.

Women taking abaloparatide also had fewer other types of fractures (2.7 percent) than those who got a placebo (4.7 percent) and slightly fewer than those on Forteo (3.3 percent), the researchers found.

Miller said many spine fractures are painless. Patients are often unaware they have happened until a doctor measures their height and finds they are up to an inch shorter than before, he said.

Abaloparatide and Forteo are synthetic peptides that help grow and strengthen bone, Miller said.

Along with building bone density, they are the only ones that increase bone quality, he said. "Bone quality is an important aspect of bone strength -- the ability to withstand a break," Miller said.

He predicts that when abaloparatide is on the market, it will compete with Forteo, driving down the price of both drugs.

"I am hoping that having a second drug available, that it will help reduce the cost," he said. "Forteo costs about $2,500 a month if you don't have insurance." Even if a patient is insured, monthly copays can range from $30 to $400. Forteo is covered by Medicare, Miller said.

The report was published Aug. 16 in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

A study based on 2010 U.S. Census data estimated that more than 3 million women between the ages of 50 and 69 have osteoporosis. A 60-year-old woman has a 44 percent lifetime risk of fracture due to low bone density.

For the study, Miller and colleagues randomly assigned nearly 2,500 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis to receive daily injections of abaloparatide, Forteo or a placebo for 18 months. Their average age was 69.

Among the nearly 2,000 women who completed the trial, increases in bone mineral density were greater with abaloparatide than placebo, the researchers found.

In addition, fewer cases of hypercalcemia (abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood) occurred among women taking abaloparatide (3 percent) than Forteo (6 percent). Hypercalcemia can weaken bones, cause kidney stones and interfere with heart and brain function.

There were no differences among the groups in other serious side effects, such as nausea and heart palpations, Miller said.

Dr. Caroline Messer, director of the Center for Pituitary and Neuroendocrine Disorders at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, is eager for further research. There needs to be a large head-to-head trial between Forteo and abaloparatide, she said, to really see which drug is better.

"Everybody is going to want to know if this is inferior or superior to Forteo," she said, adding that this is an early study. "It shows more bone building and fewer fractures than Forteo, but whether it will replace that drug is still up in the air."

An editorial accompanying the study said which drug is selected may be less important than identifying and starting an approved treatment.

"The bar is high for any preventive treatment -- in the efforts to prevent a fracture that may or may not ever occur, prescribers do not want to prescribe a therapy that causes a new problem. The way forward for fracture prevention involves not only the development of better therapies . . . and easier delivery systems, but also improved adoption of existing osteoporosis therapies for patients with prior fractures and minimization of adverse effects, particularly those associated with long-term use," the editorial said.

The editorial was co-written by Dr. Anne Cappola of the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, associate editor of JAMA, and Dr. Dolores Shoback of the University of California, San Francisco.

To learn more about osteoporosis, visit the American College of Rheumatology.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story lists nausea and heart palpitations among the serious side effects of both abaloparatide and Forteo.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, March 10, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A thyroid-derived cholesterol-lowering drug that could be an alternative to the widely used statin medications has done well in a small, early trial, Swedish and American researchers report.

In the trial, various doses of the drug, eprotirome, a laboratory-engineered version of thyroid hormone, were added to statin treatment for 168 people whose high levels of LDL cholesterol had not been lowered by previous use of statins. The combination did lower cholesterol levels in the 12-week trial and, most importantly, did not cause the feared side effects on the heart and other organs that have plagued similar thyroid-based treatments.

"There was no doubt that eprotirome would lower LDL cholesterol. Thyroid hormone is nature's own statin," said Dr. Paul W. Ladenson, a professor of endocrinology and metabolism at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and lead author of a report on the trial, published in the March 11 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. "But this is a demonstration of lipid-lowering effect without thyroid toxicity."

Dr. Bo Angelin, a professor of clinical metabolic research at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, where the drug was developed, said that the trial demonstrated that careful targeting of the drug's effect within the body could obtain the benefits of thyroid hormone on blood cholesterol levels, without causing damaging side effects. The trial was funded in part by Karo Bio, a small commercial spinoff of the institute.

"We knew that thyroid hormone could lower lipid [cholesterol] levels but would have side effects on the circulation and bones and cause diarrhea," Angelin said. "Even if the lipid levels were OK, it would be overall negative for patients."

However, he added, "if we can get the thyroid effect in the liver [where cholesterol is metabolized] but not in other organs, we would be OK."

Frequent monitoring showed no ill effects on the hearts and bones of those taking the drug, the report said.

And though statins are widely used and most often successful, an alternative to them would be welcome, Ladenson said. Statins are not effective in up to a quarter of potential users because of unacceptable muscle pain or simple failure to lower cholesterol levels, he said.

"The first importance of the trial is that it shows hepatic [liver] targeting of hormonal action," Ladenson said. "The second exciting part is its impact on lipids other than LDL cholesterol."

Though statins lower LDL ("bad") cholesterol, they have no effect on other blood fats, such as lipoprotein A, which is believed to be equally damaging, Ladenson said. He said that significant reductions of blood levels of those fats were seen in the trial.

Larger and longer studies are needed to determine whether eprotirome will have the hoped-for effect on blood fat levels without side effects and will ultimately reduce the risk of heart attacks and other cardiovascular diseases, both Ladenson and Angelin said, adding that such trials now are in the planning stages.

At best, results would not be available for "at least two to three years," Angelin said.

If eprotirome does pass all the anticipated tests successfully, its use at first probably would be in combination with a statin, Angelin said. Use as a single drug treatment for elevated cholesterol levels could follow, first in selected patients, then more widely, he said.

It's best to move cautiously, agreed Dr. Robert M. Califf, vice chancellor for clinical research at Duke University.

"The effects on LDL cholesterol and lipoproteins are pretty exciting," Califf said. "But if there is one thing we've learned about drugs in this arena, it's that we need large trials to see how they measure up in terms of risk and benefit."

The trial's researchers were careful to list indications of possible harmful side effects, such as a reduction in levels of HDL ("good") cholesterol, Califf said. But he echoed the thought that a longer-term and larger test is needed to determine the incidence of some possible major side effects, such as impotence.

"I'm not sure I'd want to sign up for that one before I had longer-term results," Califf said. "Being impotent is no fun."

The American Heart Association has more on cholesterol-lowering drugs.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that the drug " did not cause the feared side effects on the heart and other organs that have plagued similar thyroid-based treatments." But can these side effects be expected to show up in a small, short-term trial? 
Nonetheless, because of the strength of the concluding comments by the independent expert – "But if there is one thing we’ve learned about drugs in this arena, it’s that we need large trials to see how they measure up in terms of risk and benefit…I’m not sure I’d want to sign up for that one before I had longer-term results. Being impotent is no fun."- we’ll give this story the benefit of the doubt. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Sometimes, Ellis Glover would be forced to leave her friends and sit at a lunch table where no one was eating peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.

"I wanted to sit with my good, good friends, but I couldn't," the 10-year-old said. "If you're a kid and you have a food allergy, it's harder on you. You're missing out on a lot of stuff other children can have. I always want to try peanut stuff."

Mom Monica Glover said the family discovered Ellis' peanut allergy when she was about 3. The tipoff: a skin reaction around her mouth after she was given food with a small amount of peanuts in it. "We were lucky to have discovered it that way. That was a mild reaction," Glover said, and a doctor confirmed the allergy through tests.

The discovery was "distressing," Glover said. Accidental exposure to peanuts has happened, resulting in "severe stomach cramps and vomiting," she said. "Essentially, we have to live in fear all the time of Ellis being inadvertently exposed to peanuts and having a reaction that is potentially life-threatening."

Glover seized the opportunity to participate in a study on the safety and effectiveness of an experimental treatment that could give her daughter protection against accidental exposure to peanuts. Despite the risk, it was "a gift," she said, adding that her family hoped their efforts might help "lots of other children."

The risk paid off: Two-thirds of the kids in the study were able to eat the equivalent of two peanuts without any symptoms after following the months-long experimental treatment regimen, the researchers found.

Ellis is one of the majority of children for whom the treatment works. "It's been a huge success," her mother said.

"It does not make the allergy to go away," Vickery said. "The purpose is not to get them to be no longer peanut allergic and allow them to eat whatever they want."

"I'm telling patients when I see them that my hope is that patients will have access by late next summer, something like that," Vickery said. He added that although the study proved the treatment's effectiveness and safety only in children, adults would probably benefit in the same way.

To test the experimental therapy, 66 research centers in 10 countries recruited 551 participants who ranged in age from 4 to 55 and who all had a peanut allergy. Most -- 499 participants -- were between the ages of 4 and 17.

"We were extremely well-informed about the entire process," Glover said. "You start at a super low dose and work your way up. You take it at the hospital under observation. Then, you take it at home every day. "

Three-quarters of the study participants were given the treatment in increasing amounts every two weeks until reaching maintenance, when they received the equivalent of one peanut daily. The remainder of the participants were given a placebo. At the conclusion of the study after a year, all of the participants faced an "exit food challenge": They ate, under a doctor's supervision, the equivalent of two peanuts.

Two-thirds of the treatment participants were able to tolerate this exit dose without a severe reaction. Half tolerated even twice that amount: a four-peanut dose.

Overall, participants experienced fewer side effects during the study than the researchers had anticipated. "It's intuitive that that process would trigger some allergic symptoms in many patients," Vickery said. A third completed the study with no more than mild side effects, such as stomachache.

Ellis experienced stomach cramps and vomiting multiple times during the study, usually on days when her dose was increased to raise her tolerance. "Having stomach cramps did not feel very good," she said. Still, she usually vomited, and the cramps passed quickly.

Once, she felt her throat constrict, and "it was harder for me to breathe," she said. She'd gone into anaphylaxis, a severe allergic reaction. The hospital staff reacted immediately and gave her a shot of epinephrine. "I felt safe with all the doctors and nurses around me. They can help you get through it," she said.

A little more than 11% of the children dropped out of the study due to severe side effects. Among children receiving the treatment, 10% required rescue epinephrine during the exit challenge, compared with 53% in the placebo group.

"These treatments really have the potential to transform people's lives," Vickery said, "and I have seen it happen firsthand: the sense of relief [families] get when a child becomes desensitized."

Trying to be 'bite safe'

"It's what a lot of families call trying to be 'bite safe.' it's not that you're curing the allergy; it's not that you're going to be able to eat peanut butter sandwiches," said Sicherer, who was not involved in the study. "It's really just to have a better threshold so that if you accidentally ate something that had a little bit of peanut in it, maybe you wouldn't have a reaction or the reaction wouldn't be so bad."

Though the immunotherapy treatment is simply a matter of gradually increasing your tolerance to peanuts, you could have a severe reaction at home. "This is not something to try at home," Sicherer said.

Aimmune has made peanut into a "pharmaceutical-grade" product, he said. "Most people think of it as medicinalized food." Doctors and patients both know exactly how much you're getting, he said, "and that's important because if you're reactive to, say, a 50th of a peanut, you don't want to have a mistake where you're suddenly getting a 10th of peanut."

Assuming the treatment wins FDA approval, Sicherer said, the conversation between doctors and patients will be, "Is it better to just avoid the food and ask a lot of questions at restaurants and be real careful, or do something like this and still don't eat the food and ask the questions in the restaurant, but at least know you have a bit of a safety valve?"

There are more than a few caveats when it comes to the treatment regimen. For one, it's "a commitment," he said. You cannot take a dose before exercising, and you can't skip doses, or you might have a severe reaction when you pick it up again.

Glover noted, "It's somewhat disruptive. You have to do it every day. Generally, we would take it after dinner." After giving the medicine, she added, parents must carefully monitor their children, preventing them from becoming too active or too hot.

Sicherer said, "The family that does this really, really, really has to be a rule follower. It's not easy." It would still be worth it to many, he said.

If this ends up being the first approved treatment, if it is covered by insurance and if details of whom it works for best were all worked out and the risks and benefits were clear, "that would be so amazing, because we haven't really had anything like that before," he said.

"It's not everything we would hope for, but it's still fantastic to be able to raise someone's threshold from a teeny tiny amount of peanut to a couple of peanuts or more," said Sicherer, who believes that other allergy products will be developed in time: "I can tell my patients that this might be the right thing for them, but if not, we're looking at things that might be easier and better down the road."

Glover acknowledges that "it's not a perfect solution. I would say it's been some work to go through this study, just in terms of a time commitment." Still, if it had taken twice the amount of time, she would have done it: "It's peace of mind."

Even though she dislikes the medicine's taste, Ellis also believes it is worth it. "It's definitely better," she would say to another kid with peanut allergy: "You know you can be around your friends when they have peanut butter on them."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story describes harms through the profile of one patient: “Ellis experienced stomach cramps and vomiting multiple times during the study,” and once she had an anaphylactic reaction which required medical attention. And this was a successful patient story.
The story also reports that 11% of participants dropped out of the study as a result of side effects.
However, it left out important issues such as the higher dropout rate — around 20%, mainly due to adverse events — among those who received the treatment, and unknown long-term effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 17, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Because of stringent tonsillectomy guidelines, some kids who could benefit from tonsil removal surgery aren't getting it, two new reviews suggest.

To qualify for the surgery, a child must have many recurring throat infections within a short span of time or severe sleep disturbances, said Dr. Sivakumar Chinnadurai, a co-author of the reviews.

An evaluation of current medical evidence suggests more kids would receive significant short-term improvement in their daily life if the guidelines were relaxed, said Chinnadurai, a pediatric otolaryngologist with Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville.

Children experienced nearly half as many sore throats when they underwent a tonsillectomy, even if they didn't meet the guidelines, Chinnadurai and his colleagues found. The kids also missed fewer days of school and were less likely to need medical care.

However, this strong benefit only applies to the first couple of years following surgery, Chinnadurai said. By the third year, there was no clear benefit in terms of the number of throat infections. Also, there was limited research on long-term results.

"The decision about whether those children should have tonsillectomy for that temporary benefit is really tied to what those children need or what they're suffering with," Chinnadurai said. Kids who miss a lot of school or need frequent trips to the doctor due to sore throats could benefit from the surgery, he said.

There's an even clearer benefit for kids whose sleep is disturbed due to inflamed tonsils, Chinnadurai said.

"In a child with a diagnosis of sleep apnea, we can see a benefit in sleep-related quality of life," he said. The kids get better sleep, and thus exhibit better everyday behavior and pay more attention in school.

The medical approach to treating tonsil infections has evolved over recent decades.

Tonsillectomy is the third most common surgery performed on U.S. children, with 530,000 such procedures completed each year, according to the American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery.

Thirty years ago, nine out of 10 tonsillectomies in children were performed to treat recurring throat infections. These days, the procedure is done 20 percent of the time for infections and 80 percent of the time for sleep problems, according to the academy.

Swollen tonsils can block the airway during sleep, causing breathing problems that range from simple snoring to obstructive sleep apnea, the researchers said in background notes.

Guidelines say a tonsillectomy to treat throat infections is justified if a child had seven or more sore throats during the previous year; five or more sore throats two years running, or three or more sore throats for three years in a row, according to the background notes.

The researchers decided to review whether the throat infection guidelines are too stringent, ruling out patients who potentially could benefit but don't meet the high threshold of recurring infections, Chinnadurai said.

There aren't strong guidelines regarding the use of tonsillectomy to treat sleep disorders, so the doctors reviewed the evidence to see whether the surgery outperformed so-called watchful waiting -- monitoring the situation.

The study results showed "there may be new evidence that supports expanding the criteria and opening up the procedure to more individuals," said Dr. Alyssa Hackett, an otolaryngologist with the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai in New York City.

"In the right child with the right indications, these are really wonderful procedures that can be life-changing for both the child and the family," said Hackett, who wasn't involved with the new research.

"If you need your appendix out, you need your appendix out," Hackett said. "But for the tonsils and adenoids, there are great quality-of-life benefits that are evident for the surgery, but no child has ever died because they haven't gone through the surgery." (Adenoids, glands at the roof of the mouth, are often removed along with tonsils.)

Still, Chinnadurai and Hackett warned against automatically choosing the surgery for every sore throat.

About 3 percent of kids who undergo the procedure experience bleeding during the two-week recovery period, Hackett said.

"Though a tonsillectomy is low-risk, it is not risk-free, and those risks need to be weighed against the benefits for each individual child," Chinnadurai said.

"We're talking about a child who has significant sleep-related issues," Hackett said. "We don't want people to say my child snores, they need to have their tonsils out. That's not what this study says at all."

The two reports were published online Jan. 17 in the journal Pediatrics.

For more on tonsillectomy, visit the American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the story a satisfactory rating for including the following statements:
“About 3 percent of kids who undergo the procedure experience bleeding during the two-week recovery period, Hackett said. “Though a tonsillectomy is low-risk, it is not risk-free, and those risks need to be weighed against the benefits for each individual child,” Chinnadurai said.
The story would have been stronger if it had named the risk of infection following surgery and that general anesthesia carries its own important risks.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study: Honey better than drugs for kids' coughs For kids' coughs, silence is golden and sweet

Parents might consider giving their coughing child honey instead of medicine, according to a study released Monday.

Buckwheat honey — a dark variety sold in most grocery stores — relieved children's coughs and helped them sleep better than dextromethorphan, the drug in most over-the-counter cough suppressants, according to a report published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Honey also beat out no treatment at all.

"(Honey) is a cheap and effective treatment," said Dr. Ian Paul, lead investigator for the study. "Consider using this as a treatment before going to the pharmacy to pick up an over-the-counter cough and cold medicine."

Honey has long been used by some parents as an alternative treatment for cough, although it should not be given to children under 1 year old.

The study comes at a time when parents are on the lookout for new ways to give sick children relief. A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended last month that children under the age of 6 not be given over-the-counter cough and cold medicines.

For the study, 105 children ages 2-18 with upper respiratory tract infections that kept them awake at night were given either a dose of buckwheat honey, honey-flavored cough syrup or no treatment half an hour before bedtime.

One dose measured one-half teaspoon for children aged 2-5, one teaspoon for children aged 6-11 and two teaspoons for children aged 12-18.

Parents of the 35 children who received honey, given either on its own or with a non-caffeinated drink, reported they coughed less and slept better than those who gave their children nothing. The group that used honey also reported more favorable results than those who used cough syrup, but since the study group was small, those differences weren't statistically significant.

One local pediatrician said she wouldn't discourage parents from trying honey with their children, but more studies are needed to draw solid conclusions.

"In older children, if it makes them comfortable and it helps them sleep at night, then there may be a potential benefit," said Dr. Sara Rizvi, assistant professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine who also works at a primary care clinic at Texas Children's Hospital. "I would be reluctant to routinely recommend to all parents that they give honey, because in some rare cases children can have reactions to honey."

Paul, a pediatrician who practices at Penn State Children's Hospital and teaches at the university's College of Medicine, said he began the study because he was frustrated no treatment had been proven beneficial to relieve the common children's cough. Several years ago, he led another study that showed over-the-counter cough medicine was no more effective than placebos.

Honey is not only cheap and readily available, it's also generally safer than cough medicine, which can have side effects or be administered in the wrong dose.

Honey should not, however, be given to children under the age of 1 because it sometimes contains a bacteria that causes botulism, a rare paralytic illness that can result in death. Unlike older children, infants can't fight the bacteria.

Paul's group tested buckwheat honey instead of the lighter, more popular varieties because it's known to have more antioxidant and antimicrobial effects, which have been shown in other studies to help wounds heal. Honey may suppress cough because its sweetness causes salivation that coats the throat, authors of the study suggested.

"It's kind of amazing that something so simple could be an answer," Paul said.

The study was paid for by the National Honey Board, an industry-funded agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Under the provisions of the grant, the group was not involved in the study or the published results, Paul said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that honey may cause an allergic reaction and that, rarely, it contains bacteria.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Women who take hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to ease menopause symptoms like hot flashes and night sweats may be no more likely to die prematurely than women who don’t take hormones, a new study suggests.

Many women have been reluctant to use hormones for menopause symptoms since 2002, when the federally funded Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study linked the treatments containing man-made versions of the female hormones estrogen and progestin to an increased risk of breast cancer, heart attacks and strokes.

The current study, however, looked at longer-term data from the WHI study and found no increased risk of death from all causes, or from cancer or cardiovascular issues in particular, associated with hormone use.

“Women seeking treatment for distressing hot flashes, night sweats or other menopausal symptoms may find the mortality results reassuring,” said lead study author Dr. JoAnn Manson of Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Women go through menopause when they stop menstruating, typically between ages 45 and 55. As the ovaries curb production of the hormones estrogen and progesterone in the years leading up to menopause and afterward, women can experience symptoms ranging from irregular periods and vaginal dryness to mood swings and insomnia.

For the study, researchers looked at data on 27,347 women ages 50 to 79 who joined two WHI trials between 1993 and 1998 and were followed through 2014. One trial tested estrogen alone against a placebo, or dummy pill, while the other trial tested estrogen taken in combination with progestin.

Women were 63 years old on average when they joined the trials and had already gone through menopause. They took hormones or a placebo for five to seven years and were followed for a total of 18 years altogether.

Death rates were similar - at about 27 percent - among women who took hormones and women who didn’t, researchers report in JAMA.

Younger women in the study appeared to have better survival odds with HRT. Over the initial five to seven years when women were randomly assigned to take hormones or a placebo, death rates were about 30 percent lower among women aged 50 to 59 when they took HRT than when they didn’t.

For women who started hormones in their 60s or 70s, however, there wasn’t a meaningful difference in death rates according to whether they got the treatment or a placebo during the initial years of the study.

After 18 years, including both the treatment period and a decade or more of follow-up, women’s age when they joined the study no longer appeared to significantly influence death rates.

One limitation of the study is that the WHI didn’t look at different dosages of hormone pills, and the findings may be different for other dosages or different types of therapy such as gels or creams or skin patches.

Still, the current study should ease concerns raised by earlier results from the WHI trials that an increased risk of breast cancer or heart attacks might translate into higher long-term mortality rates, said Dr. Melissa McNeil, author of an accompanying editorial and a women’s health researcher at the University of Pittsburgh.

Taking a combination of estrogen and progestin is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, but advances in screening and treatment since the WHI started now mean these tumors are unlikely to be fatal, McNeil said by email.

With additional years of follow-up, it also appears that the increased heart attack risk associated with HRT in the initial results from the WHI trials is limited to older women, McNeil added.

“Hormone therapy has been in and out of favor - first it was good for all menopausal women, then it was dangerous for all women,” McNeil said. “The take-home message now is that for the right patient, hormone therapy is safe and effective.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of outlining the complicated history of findings from hormone replacement studies, and the harms and risks, and uses numbers to explain the risks.
There is great nuance in the findings, which can be interpreted differently for women of different ages seeking HRT. Women bring different life risks of cardiovascular disease or breast cancer with them into any discussion of HRT.
The conclusion quoted in the story may be less-than-reassuring, but is here:
“Hormone therapy has been in and out of favor – first it was good for all menopausal women, then it was dangerous for all women,” McNeil said. “The take-home message now is that for the right patient, hormone therapy is safe and effective.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using the immune system to beat cancer is quickly becoming a promising new strategy for battling tumors. But most of the success so far has been with blood cancers like lymphomas and leukemias. Immunotherapy, as it’s called, has yet to prove itself with solid tumors like breast, prostate, lung, colon and brain cancers.

But in a report published in the , researchers led by Dr. Behnam Badie from the City of Hope Beckman Research Institute and Medical Center say that the same immune-based therapy that is successful against blood cancers also helped a patient with advanced brain cancer.

The 50-year-old man with glioblastoma, a particularly aggressive type of brain tumor, had already been treated with surgery, radiation and anti-tumor drug therapies. Despite these treatments, his cancer had returned and also spread to other parts of his brain and spinal cord. Badie and his team extracted immune cells from him, then engineered them to express proteins on their surface that would recognize and destroy glioblastoma tumor cells. After surgery to remove the bulk of the brain tumor, Badie and his colleagues directly injected the site with the modified immune cells (called chimeric antigen receptor T cells, or CAR T cells) six times, and the remaining part of this tumor stopped growing.

Other smaller growths in the brain continued to grow, however, so the patient received 10 more doses of the CAR T cells injected into the cavities in the brain, called the ventricles. This is the first time that immune cells have been injected into these brain regions, because introducing anything into the ventricles can cause dangerous and possibly deadly inflammation. The man did not develop such serious complications, however, and after about four months, these tumors too started to shrink. By six months, almost all had disappeared.

If the patient had not received the CAR T therapy, he likely would only have survived a few weeks after his cancer recurred, says Badie. But after being treated with the immune therapy, his cancer did not grow or recur for nearly eight months. “If we can do the same for other patients, that would be an amazing accomplishment that many decades of work and research on glioblastoma have never done,” says Badie, whose own father passed away a decade ago from glioblastoma.

The patient is one of nine in the trial, and so far, many of the other people are having similar experiences on the therapy. Based on this man’s case, his team is hoping to now inject not just the tumor site but also the ventricular space in the brain, since that may help control spread of the cancer.

It’s also becoming clear that more than one type of modified immune cells may have to be enlisted. The tumors in the first patient remained under control for almost eight months, but the cancer returned after that in new parts of the brain. Badie says it’s not obvious why, but his analysis showed that these tumors did not contain much of the protein targeted by the CAR T cells that were injected. It’s possible that the immune cells had destroyed most of the cancer cells expressing the original protein, so other cancer cells with other proteins began to proliferate and survive.

Badie is hoping to take advantage of this information and introduce immune cells with different tumor-targeting proteins. Eventually, these proteins would also be tailored to be specific to each patient’s cancer — a precision medicine approach to controlling cancer. These results are the first encouraging sign that the immunotherapy that is helping more people with blood cancer might also be effective for people with solid tumors like brain cancers.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article duly notes that CAR-T cell therapy has potentially dangerous side effects when used the way it was in in this trial, and acknowledges surprise on the part of the investigators as to why the patient did not develop them. The story might have been stronger if it had noted that the treatment is well known for serious side effects in experiments on patients with other forms of cancer. (See our tips for reporting accurately about the harms, side effects and risks of immunotherapy.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 3, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new study finds that people with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who haven't done well on other treatments may find relief with Xeljanz (tofacitinib), a drug currently used to treat arthritis.

Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease. It affects about 700,000 Americans, according to the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation (CCF).

The illness causes inflammation, irritation, swelling and sores on the lining of the large intestine. Symptoms include diarrhea with blood or pus and abdominal discomfort, according to CCF.

"There is still a substantial unmet need for new treatments for patients with ulcerative colitis," said study lead author Dr. William Sandborn. He is professor of medicine and chief of the division of gastroenterology at the University of California, San Diego.

Xeljanz targets certain proteins involved in the body's inflammatory and immune responses that other so-called biologic drugs don't, the researchers said.

"Treatment with oral tofacitinib is potentially a new treatment option for patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis, pending review by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," Sandborn said.

The study was funded by Pfizer, Inc., the maker of Xeljanz. Sandborn said he has received research grants from the company and served as a consultant for Pfizer.

Whether Xeljanz should be used as a first treatment is still not clear, said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Because Xeljanz comes as a pill, it could have an advantage for patients, Swaminath said. But so far it has only been tried with patients who have not responded to other treatments, he said.

"How it is used in the real world may be different than how it was used in these studies," Swaminath said. "I am not going out on a limb and say this should be the first choice, because we don't have enough data to say that's the way it should be positioned."

The researchers randomly assigned more than 1,700 people with ulcerative colitis to one of three phase 3 trials.

The first two trials looked at more than 1,100 patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who had failed with conventional treatment or treatment with newer "tumor necrosis factor antagonist" drugs, such as Remicade (infliximab). They received Xeljanz or a placebo twice a day for eight weeks.

In the third trial, nearly 600 patients who responded to Xeljanz were assigned to a maintenance dose (one group with 5 milligrams [mg] and another group with 10 mg) of the drug, or placebo for a year.

In the first trial, nearly 19 percent of the patients taking Xeljanz experienced a remission of their condition in eight weeks. That compared to just 8 percent of patients receiving placebo.

In the second trial, almost 17 percent of those taking Xeljanz had a remission, compared with nearly 4 percent of those taking placebo, the researchers found.

In the third trial, more than 34 percent of patients taking 5 mg of Xeljanz had disease remission after one year. Forty percent of those taking a 10-mg dose of the drug had remission at a year. Only 11 percent of patients on placebo saw a remission.

However, in all of the trials, more patients taking Xeljanz suffered from infections, such as shingles, than those receiving placebo, researchers found.

In addition, five patients taking Xeljanz developed nonmelanoma skin cancer, compared with one patient receiving placebo. Five patients taking the drug experienced heart problems compared with no one on the placebo.

Also, compared with placebo, Xeljanz was associated with an increase in levels of cholesterol.

The report was published May 4 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Dr. Sonia Friedman is an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. She's also the author of an editorial accompanying the study.

"Tofacitinib is a promising new class of medical therapy that has efficacy in ulcerative colitis. It is an oral, small-molecule drug that is different from current biologic therapies, such as infliximab [Remicade], adalimumab [Humira], golimumab [Simponi] and vedolizumab [Entyvio]," Friedman said.

An advantage of Xeljanz is that it is a pill. Other biologic drugs are given by infusion or injection. In addition, patients cannot develop antibodies to Xeljanz as they can with other biologic drugs, Friedman said.

"Tofacitinib may be used in the future as rescue therapy from failure of biologics," she said. "Only future studies will determine whether it can be used as initial therapy for ulcerative colitis and what patients it would help the most."

For more information on ulcerative colitis, visit the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Over the course of three paragraphs, the story discusses a variety of adverse health effects experienced by patients participating in the clinical trials, including infections, nonmelanoma skin cancer, “heart problems,” and an increase in cholesterol levels.
As with benefits, the story compares the number of adverse health events in those taking Xeljanz with the number of adverse events in those taking placebo — which is useful for helping readers place the risk in context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON, September 26, 2016 -- High dose stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) for men newly-diagnosed with low- or intermediate-risk prostate cancer results in shorter treatment times, low severe toxicity and excellent cancer control rates, according to research presented today at the 58th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO). The study is the first large, multi-institutional study of SBRT in prostate cancer with long-term follow-up.

Although prostate tumors generally respond well to radiation therapy (RT), the possibility of radiation exposure to healthy tissue in the genitourinary (GU) and gastrointestinal (GI) systems can be of concern. SBRT is an advanced technique that precisely targets high doses of RT to the tumor in a small number fractions, simultaneously avoiding surrounding tissue and reducing toxicity to non-cancerous cells. The technique has become the standard of care for many non-surgical lung cancer patients, as it limits exposure to the heart and surrounding lungs. When treating tumors in the prostate, SBRT avoids the adjacent bladder, sex organs and rectum.

“Single-institution studies on the use of SBRT as the primary treatment for prostate cancer have illuminated the treatment as a cost-effective and faster alternative to IMRT,” said Robert Meier, MD, lead author of the study and a radiation oncologist at Swedish Medical Center in Seattle. “Our study is the first to contribute multi-center data that support the use of SBRT as front-line therapy for men with prostate cancer.”

A total of 309 men with newly diagnosed prostate cancer were enrolled in the trial at 21 community, regional and academic hospitals across the U.S. Eligible patients had either low-risk disease (CS T1-T2a, Gleason 6, PSA < 10) (n = 172) or intermediate-risk disease (CS T1c-T2b with either Gleason 7 and PSA < 10, or Gleason 6 and PSA 10-20). All of the men received SBRT via a non-isocentric robotic platform, with an RT dose to the prostate of 40 Gy administered in five treatment sessions of 8 Gy each. Intermediate risk patients received a dose of 36.25 Gy to the seminal vesicles. Concurrent and adjuvant androgen ablation therapy were prohibited among study participants.

Primary outcomes included GU and GI toxicities and relapse-free survival (RFS). Researchers measured toxicity using the National Cancer Institute’s Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 3.0. Biochemical failure was assessed using the ASTRO-consensus and the nadir+2 definitions. Overall survival (OS) was measured as a secondary outcome for the study. Actuarial OS and RFS were calculated with the Kaplan-Meier statistical method. Median follow-up was 61 months.

At five years following SBRT, 97 percent of patients were free from prostate cancer progression. In low-risk patients, the cancer control rates was superior to historical controls. Specifically in the low-risk group, the five-year RFS rate was 97.3 percent, which is superior to the 93 percent historical comparison DFS control rate (p = 0.014). Actuarial five-year OS was 95.6 percent for the entire cohort. Actuarial five-year nadir+2 RFS was 97.1 percent for all patients, representing 97.3 percent of low-risk and 97.1 of intermediate-risk patients. Actuarial five-year ASTRO RFS was 92.3 percent and 91.3 percent for low- and intermediate-risk groups, respectively.

Fewer than two percent of all patients experienced serious side effects in the five years following SBRT. Five grade three GU side effects were reported in four of the 309 study participants. There were no reported grade four or five toxicities nor any grade three GI toxicities. Between half and two-thirds of patients experienced less serious side effects, with rates of 53 and 59 percent for grade one GU and GI toxicities and rates of 35 and 10 percent for grade two GU and GI toxicities, respectively. These side effects were usually temporary.

“Our results illustrate how advanced technology has radically improved our ability to target cancer,” said Dr. Meier. “After following patients for more than five years, we found that serious side effects from a brief course of SBRT were uncommon and that cancer control rates were very favorable compared to historical data. Our trial confirms that SBRT may be preferable to other treatment approaches for newly-diagnosed cases of prostate cancer, including more aggressive disease.”

The abstract, “Five-Year Outcomes from a Multi-Center Trial of Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy for Low- and Intermediate-Risk Prostate Cancer,” will be presented in detail during a scientific session at ASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting at 7:45 a.m. Eastern time on Monday, September 26, 2016. To speak with Dr. Meier or obtain a copy of the abstract, please contact ASTRO’s media relations team on-site at the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center September 25 through 28, by phone at 703-286-1600 or by email at press@astro.org.

ATTRIBUTION TO THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF RADIATION ONCOLOGY (ASTRO) ANNUAL MEETING REQUESTED IN ALL COVERAGE.

This news release contains updated data from the study author(s).

ABOUT ASTRO’S ANNUAL MEETINGASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting, the nation’s premier scientific meeting in radiation oncology, will be held September 25-28, 2016, at the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center in Boston. The 2016 Annual Meeting is expected to attract more than 11,000 attendees from across the globe, including oncologists from all disciplines and members of the entire radiation oncology team. Led by ASTRO president David C. Beyer, MD, FASTRO, the 2016 meeting will feature keynote addresses from Kathleen Sebelius, former U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services; Thomas James Lynch Jr., MD, Chair and CEO, Massachusetts General Physicians Organization; and Jason Ragogna, general manager, SMS and Safety Alliances, Corporate Safety, Security, and Compliance, Delta Air Lines, Inc. The Presidential Symposium, “Prostate Cancer: Defining Value and Delivering It,” highlights the meeting’s theme of “Enhancing Value, Improving Outcomes” and will feature recent practice-changing studies and current developments in value-based care for prostate cancer. ASTRO’s four-day scientific meeting will feature a record number of abstracts, including 368 oral presentations, 1,760 posters and 180 digital posters in more than 50 educational sessions and 20 scientific panels for 20 disease-site tracks. For more information about ASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting, visit www.astro.org/AnnualMeeting. For press registration and news briefing information for ASTRO’s 58th Annual Meeting, visit www.astro.org/AMpress.

ABOUT ASTROASTRO is the premier radiation oncology society in the world, with more than 10,000 members who are physicians, nurses, biologists, physicists, radiation therapists, dosimetrists and other health care professionals who specialize in treating patients with radiation therapies. As the leading organization in radiation oncology, the Society is dedicated to improving patient care through professional education and training, support for clinical practice and health policy standards, advancement of science and research, and advocacy. ASTRO publishes three medical journals, International Journal of Radiation Oncology
• Biology
• Physics (www.redjournal.org), Practical Radiation Oncology (www.practicalradonc.org) and Advances in Radiation Oncology (www.advancesradonc.org); developed and maintains an extensive patient website, RT Answers (www.rtanswers.org); and created the Radiation Oncology Institute (www.roinstitute.org), a nonprofit foundation to support research and education efforts around the world that enhance and confirm the critical role of radiation therapy in improving cancer treatment. To learn more about ASTRO, visit www.astro.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release states that between half and two-thirds of patients experienced low, “usually temporary” rates of toxicities. It also notes that “fewer than 2 percent of patients experienced severe toxicities in their gastrointestinal, reproductive, and urinary systems, and no patients reported life-threatening or fatal toxicity.” A few more details here would be helpful. For example, how many patients experienced a decline in urinary or sexual function, and for what period of time? And what are other potential risks of radiation therapy? The real question is how do these harms compare to other treatments? That was not assessed in this study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) It's a portable piece of technology providing seemingly bottomless access to a drug craved by more than 1 billion people worldwide -- nicotine. That craving is caused by smoking tobacco but is now being increasingly satisfied by e-cigarettes and the trend to "vape" instead of smoke.

The selling point is the clean image e-cigarettes purvey by removing the simultaneous exposure to the tar and thousands of chemicals found in the tobacco smoke of regular cigarettes -- removing the cause of lung diseases as well as other tobacco-related conditions.

Tobacco kills almost 6 million people each year, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), and a growing number of people are now "vaping" instead of smoking, resulting in industry worth $2.7 billion worldwide.

Since their introduction in 2006, e-cigarettes have become commonplace among smokers trying to kick their habit, with a third of smokers trying to quit in the United Kingdom turning to e-cigarettes to aid them, according to one study . But some critics argue these electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) are fueling a new addiction to nicotine -- particularly among young people experimenting with them.

"While ENDS may have the potential to benefit established adult smokers ... [they] should not be used by youth and adult non-tobacco users because of the harmful effects of nicotine and other risk exposures," says Tim McAfee, director the Office on Smoking and Health at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "Exposure to nicotine can harm adolescent brain development."

Studies conducted by the CDC through its Adult and Youth National Tobacco Surveys found increased experimentation by youth trying out e-cigarettes but not conventional cigarettes. The gadgetry and flavors associated with the devices is suggested as a reason behind this, with fears of them acting as a gateway into real tobacco smoking.

But others in the field of tobacco control disagree, stating that whilst people -- including youth -- may have tried e-cigarettes, the evidence is lacking for their regular use. "Kids like new technology and just experiment or use it once or twice," says Jean-Francois Etter, professor of Public Health at the University of Geneva.

Whilst Etter says that use among young people should be monitored, he believes the role of e-cigarettes in reducing global tobacco consumption is more important. "They are a gateway out of smoking," says Etter. The number of people using a combination of tobacco and e-cigarettes is on the rise, according to Etter, resulting in smokers switching and consuming less tobacco each day. "[They have] the same level of nicotine but people are less exposed to toxins ... nicotine is not a health problem," he says. However, further evidence on the long-term health effects of e-cigarettes or nicotine is needed.

"The vast number of people using e-cigarettes are using them to stop smoking; [they're] about 60% more effective than going cold turkey or buying nicotine replacement therapy over the counter."

Bauld's research hasn't identified a dependence on nicotine with e-cigarettes in the same way as the addiction resulting from regular cigarettes. "E-cigarettes are not the best nicotine delivery devices," she says referring to the fact nicotine is not seen to enter the bloodstream as readily when using e-cigarettes. That's backed up by Etter's research as well as a recent study by researchers at Penn State College of Medicine, in which e-cigarettes were found to be less addictive than tobacco cigarettes.

They do, however, provide nicotine more effectively than aids such as patches or gums, according to Bauld.

"Patches and gums are a very small market," says Etter about the quitting devices which first came onto the market 40 years ago. He fears too much restriction on e-cigarettes will limit their impact in achieving a world free of tobacco.

Both Bauld and Etter recognize the need to monitor the consumption of nicotine among teenagers but feel the value of e-cigarettes among adult smokers and their potential to save lives by reducing tobacco consumption should not be underestimated -- a sentiment recognized by the World Health Organization.

The greatest impact to date in reducing the number of smokers worldwide has been the taxation and legislation restricting tobacco advertising and increasing prices. "For every 10% increase in tax you have 4% reduction in tobacco consumption," says Peruga.

The growing fear is the increasing domination of big tobacco in the e-cigarette market, which was once seen as a competitor. Their ownerships of popular e-cigarette brands could push out smaller companies in the field, reminiscent of the original tobacco epidemic.

"The intent of big tobacco is to sell their product," concludes Peruga. "[They may] expand their market to other customers who didn't use cigarettes but might consider nicotine use."

But as it seems e-cigarettes are here to stay, most calls are for informed regulation rather than prohibition. "The majority of e-cigarettes -- especially when they are well regulated -- are likely to be less toxic than cigarettes -- and that for smokers is an advantage," says Peruga.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: On the harms possible from e-cigarettes, the story was not as thorough as it could have been. For example, there is a growing scientific literature on known harmful molecules in the vapor. Nickel, for instance, is in some ENDS vapor and is known to be harmful in other inhaled scenarios. Concerns have also been raised about the quality of different brands of cartridges and the batteries used in some devices, which have in rare cases been reported to catch fire.
But we acknowledge that the story took the time to quote different experts by name and let them make their harms arguments, so we’ll award a satisfactory rating. Jean-Francois Etter, professor of Public Health at the University of Geneva, urged people to see the benefit of e-cigarettes in cutting smoking as outweighing their harms. Another expert argues that while they may benefit adults who are trying to quit traditional smoking, “[they] should not be used by youth and adult non-tobacco users because of the harmful effects of nicotine and other risk exposures. ” He adds that “Exposure to nicotine can harm adolescent brain development.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, June 28, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Something as simple as taking a low-dose aspirin every day may protect pregnant women from the life-threatening condition known as preeclampsia, new research suggests.

"Preeclampsia is one of the most serious complications of pregnancy, with a high risk of death for the mother and baby," said senior study author Dr. Kypros Nicolaides. He is a professor of fetal medicine at Kings College Hospital in London.

But he added, "This condition is, to a great extent, preventable."

The new study looked at an aspirin dose of 150 milligrams (mg) per day because some past studies with smaller daily doses of aspirin have produced conflicting results, according to Nicolaides. A baby aspirin dose is 81 milligrams.

In those studies using smaller doses, the reduction in preeclampsia risk hovered around 10 percent, he said, but the higher dose in this latest study was linked to a 62 percent reduction in risk.

Preeclampsia is a serious high blood pressure disorder. It can affect all of the organs in a woman's body, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). The exact cause of the disorder is unknown, but certain risk factors make it more likely to occur, including:
• Being pregnant with more than one baby,
• Having chronic conditions, such as type 1 or type 2 diabetes, autoimmune disease and kidney problems.

Dr. Mitchell Kramer, chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Huntington Hospital in New York, said he'd add women who are severely obese and women who've had babies who had restricted growth to the list of women at high risk of preeclampsia.

ACOG already recommends that women who are at high risk of preeclampsia take a low-dose baby aspirin beginning between 12 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.

About 1,600 women completed the double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Just under 800 were randomly put into the daily aspirin group, while just over 800 were placed in the placebo group. The women came from 13 different maternity hospitals across Europe and Israel.

Instead of relying solely on standard risk factors, the researchers combined those risk factors with measurements of maternal blood flow, blood pressure and two hormones produced by the placenta. They used an algorithm they designed to combine all those factors to select women who they believed were at a high risk of preeclampsia.

Between 11 and 14 weeks, the women began taking a daily 150 mg aspirin or a placebo. They continued taking the pills until they were 36 weeks' pregnant, or sooner if they delivered the baby early.

Just 13 women in the aspirin group developed preeclampsia, while 35 women in the placebo group developed the complication, the findings showed.

The reduction in risk was even greater for early deliveries. Women who delivered at less than 34 weeks were 82 percent less likely to have preeclampsia if they were taking 150 mg of aspirin, Nicolaides said.

There were no serious side effects for expectant mothers, or adverse events for the babies related to aspirin use during pregnancy, the researchers noted.

However, as with all drugs, women should talk to their doctor about the use of aspirin in pregnancy before taking up this regimen, because aspirin does increase the risk for bleeding.

Nicolaides said the aspirin may help improve blood flow from the mother to the placenta.

According to Kramer, "This randomized study concludes that [aspirin's] use is not only effective for reducing the incidence of preeclampsia at term, but also preterm. This is important because it will reduce the need for preterm delivery, which is risky for the baby."

Low-dose aspirin can also help reduce the chances of eclampsia, which is seizures due to preeclampsia for high-risk women, Kramer noted.

The study is scheduled for presentation Wednesday at the Fetal Medicine Foundation meeting in Slovenia. The findings were also published simultaneously in a special online issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

To learn more about preeclampsia, visit the March of Dimes.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says, “There were no serious side effects for expectant mothers, or adverse events for the babies related to aspirin use during pregnancy, the researchers noted.” To its credit, it also adds, “However, as with all drugs, women should talk to their doctor about the use of aspirin in pregnancy before taking up this regimen, because aspirin does increase the risk for bleeding.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Novo Nordisk’s (NOVOb.CO) top-selling diabetes drug Victoza cut the risk of heart attack, stroke and cardiovascular death by 13 percent in a closely watched study, but the result disappointed investors who had hoped for more.

The stock fell around 5 percent in Copenhagen on Tuesday.

Victoza is only the second diabetes drug to show such heart benefits, after Eli Lilly (LLY.N) and Boehringer Ingelheim’s pill Jardiance. Victoza’s effect was evident across risks.

“To me, the impressive thing about this trial is the consistency across clinical endpoints and its robustness,” said John Buse, professor of medicine at the UNC School of Medicine, who worked on the study.

He believes doctors’ approach to type 2 diabetes treatment will now start to shift to a greater focus on minimising overall risks, rather than simply cutting blood sugar levels.

Because about half of deaths in people with diabetes are caused by heart disease, reducing heart risk is considered essential to their care.

But investors had been anticipating a bigger effect. Jefferies analyst Jeffrey Holford said market expectations had been for a mid-to-high teens percent reduction in complications.

There was also concern that Victoza did not appear to lower heart risks in American patients monitored in the study, despite doing so in other parts of the world and producing a solid result globally.

Novo, the world’s biggest diabetes company, had said in March that Victoza cut heart risks “significantly” in the study but the scale of the benefit was only disclosed on Monday.

Researchers told the American Diabetes Association’s (ADA) annual meeting that 13.0 percent of patients on Victoza died from cardiovascular causes or suffered non-fatal heart attacks or strokes, against 14.9 percent of those on placebo.

Deaths from heart disease were 22 percent lower in the Victoza group.

The Jardiance trial last year showed a similar 14 percent overall relative risk reduction and a 38 percent reduction in cardiovascular deaths.

The Victoza trial, known as Leader, had been designed to show Novo’s drug did not increase heart risk, so its superiority is welcome news for the company, especially as Sanofi’s (SASY.PA) rival Lyxumia failed to show heart benefits in an earlier test.

Victoza, which had sales of $2.7 billion last year, is the biggest seller in a class of drugs known as GLP-1 analogues that stimulate insulin production.

“I think physicians will look to GLP-1s with greater enthusiasm,” Buse said in an interview.

Once-daily Victoza is typically prescribed as a third or fourth option after patients have first tried various oral medicines.

“The significance of this is that now we can start to change the conversation around diabetes management from one of ‘let’s manage your blood sugar’ to one of ‘let’s manage your risk of complications’,” Buse said.

Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen, Novo’s chief science officer, said the results should encourage doctors to use Victoza earlier, since they could now see it offered “life-expanding” treatment.

The findings, which involved following 9,340 patients for a median 3.8 years, were also published online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Gastrointestinal upset was the biggest side effect with Victoza. There were fewer cases of pancreatitis, which has been viewed as a potential problem, but more cases of pancreatic cancer, although the difference was not statistically significant.

Since 2008, U.S. regulators have demanded studies for new diabetes medicines to show there is no increase in heart risk, opening a new battleground between different treatments. Lilly is conducting a similar large study to try and prove the heart benefits of its once-weekly GLP-1 drug Trulicity.

The Leader study was funded by Novo and the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of mentioning the side effects of Victoza, even pointing towards whether effects were statistically significant. One omission was that the story did not mention the higher incidence of gallstone disease, a side effect that was highlighted as significant in the paper.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Ali Andrew Li was born on Jan. 7, he was gently placed on his mother's chest, where doctors cleaned and examined him and covered him with a warm blanket.

"I just loved it," his mother, Salma Shabaik, a family physician who lives in Los Angeles, says. "It was really nice to have the baby right there beneath my eyes where I could feel him, touch him, kiss him."

That was different than the birth of her son Elias two years ago; he was whisked away to a bassinet to be examined. And unlike Elias, who cried a lot after delivery, Shabaik says Ali stopped crying "within seconds" after being placed on her chest.

Kangaroo mother care has been widely used worldwide to care for premature babies, and it's gaining popularity in caring for healthy full term babies like Ali as well. It is as it sounds: Like a kangaroo's pouch, mothers hold their naked newborns on their bare chest for the first few hours of life.

At Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center where Ali was born, the technique is routinely practiced for healthy mothers and newborns. The baby gets to know their mother immediately, says Dr. Larry Gray, behavioral and developmental pediatrician at Comer Children's Hospital, University of Chicago Medicine. "The baby gets landed in a trusting environment," he says, reassuring them that life outside the womb can also be "soft, comfortable and warm."

The benefits are many, according to Dr. Lydia Kyung-Min Lee, an ob-gyn at UCLA. Not only is the baby happier, she says, but his or her vitals are more stable. Body temperature, heart and breathing rate normalize more quickly. The close contact also allows the baby to be exposed to the same bacteria as the mother, which can protect against allergies and infection in the future. Infants who receive kangaroo care breast feed more easily, Lee says, and their mothers tend to breast feed for longer periods of time, which is "all good."

Babies also seem to suffer less pain. Almost 20 years ago, Gray studied how babies respond to a heel prick to draw blood, a procedure that screens newborns for genetic disorders. He found that when healthy newborns had kangaroo care, there was less facial grimacing and crying suggesting pain, compared to babies who had been swaddled and had the procedure in their bassinets, "sort of alone."

One of the first places to show how this technique can help preemies was Colombia in the 1990s. There, hospitals with no access to incubators and other equipment often sent home preemies with no expectation that they would live. But doctors were surprised to see that babies whose mothers carried them close, skin to skin, not only survived but thrived.

This was a "serendipitous magical finding," says Gray, suggesting that skin-to-skin contact acted something like a "natural incubator."

Gray also points to the work of Myron Hofer, a psychiatrist with Columbia University Medical Center who studies attachment between mother and infants. Hofer coined the term "hidden regulators" that pass between mother and baby. It's not just that mother and baby are together, Gray says, but also that the mother is in some way "programming the baby, the breathing, temperature and heart rate."

That "magic" can also happen between baby and father, too, says Gray, if there's skin-to-skin contact. And if mothers or babies are very sick and have to be isolated, Gray suggests mothers take any opportunity to hold their infant skin to skin. Even a little bit of kangaroo contact, he says, can be beneficial.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There aren’t any obvious harms from this intervention.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, July 20, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The cancer drug Avastin, when used in combination with standard chemotherapy, is safe and can effectively treat an advanced form of one of the most common lung cancers, researchers report.

Previously it had been thought that this combination might have serious adverse side effects, including life-threatening bleeding, for patients with non-squamous non-small-cell lung tumors. However, this phase 4 trial, which used Avastin (bevacizumab) plus chemotherapy in a large population found these problems were minimal.

Phase 4 trials are done after a drug is on the market, to look for any new problems.

"Today we have a new option to treat non-squamous lung cancer, incorporating Avastin in chemotherapy regimens and in maintenance therapy," said lead researcher Dr. Lucio Crino, director of medical oncology at S. Maria della Misericordia Hospital in Perugia, Italy.

"The practical implication is the possibility to incorporate Avastin with any chemotherapy regimen in the frontline therapy of metastatic non-squamous lung cancer," he added.

The report, which is funded by the maker of Avastin, F Hoffman-La Roche Ltd., is published in the July 20 issue of The Lancet Oncology. The funder was involved in study design, coordination of data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, and writing of the report, the journal noted.

Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer is a common cancer that kills 1.18 million people every year worldwide, according to background information in the study. Avastin is a so-called monoclonal antibody that works by blocking vascular endothelial growth factor A, which stimulates the growth of the tumor's blood supply.

When used as an adjunct to chemotherapy, Avastin had already shown cancer-fighting activity in two phase 3 trials, the researchers noted.

For the study, Crino's team studied Avastin in more than 2,200 patients with advanced or recurrent non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer. The patients were treated at centers in 40 countries around the world.

These patients were given the drug every three weeks along with standard chemotherapy, for up to six cycles. Patients were then treated with Avastin alone until the cancer began to progress ("maintenance" therapy).

The researchers reported few clinically significant adverse events, meaning that most were no greater than what one would expect in the general population. One percent of patients experienced bleeding in the lungs and 4 percent had bleeding, Crino's group found.

Overall, 3 percent of the patients died due to adverse events associated with Avastin. These included 1 percent who had blood clots and 1 percent who suffered bleeding.

Other serious adverse events associated with Avastin were blood clots in the lungs and nosebleeds, low white blood cell counts, fever along with a low white blood cell count and deep vein thrombosis (DVT), all of which occurred in 1 percent of the patients.

Dr. Robert Pirker, from the department of medicine at the Medical University of Vienna in Austria, and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that Avastin "can be safely given when certain precautions are taken."

However, several issues remain to be determined, including the optimal dose and the role of maintenance therapy with Avastin, he said.

"In addition, it is unknown whether bevacizumab [Avastin] increases survival when added to cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with advanced non-squamous non-small-cell lung cancer," Pirker said.

Overall, Avastin, like several other targeted agents have led to therapeutic advances in lung cancer, he added. "Hurdles in clinical development do occur but -- as shown for bevacizumab -- can be overcome," Pirker said.

Another expert, Dr. Norman H. Edelman, chief medical officer at the American Lung Association, and professor of preventive medicine, internal medicine, physiology & biophysics at Stony Brook University in New York, called the study "very good bread-and-butter clinical research."

The efficacy of the drug has been proven previously, he noted, but this study provides an in-depth analysis of Avastin's safety profile under "real life" conditions, he added.

"Too often this step is shortcircuited in the rush to market of a new drug and we have to await the laborious collection of after-market data to find the real dangers of many new drugs," Edelman said.

"So, the researchers and sponsors are to be congratulated for doing this study. They find that there are real deleterious side effects but that they are manageable, and conclude the drug is worth using under the proper circumstances," he said.

Avastin is in the spotlight Tuesday for another reason, as well. U.S. regulators could rescind approval of the drug for the treatment of breast cancer, based on follow-up studies reported Friday that failed to show the medication shrank tumors or extended lives, according to published reports.

The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday will ask a panel of outside experts to review the evidence on the Roche drug, the Associated Press said. It's possible the FDA will withdraw approval of Avastin as a breast cancer treatment.

The drug is also approved for lung, colon, brain and kidney cancer.

For more information on lung cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The story reported on the potential harms associated with the addition of this drug to a treatment regimen.  Without information about what a patient might gain – it is hard to know whether the risk of these harms is worth the potential benefit. And the story could have provided more details about the severity and impact of the harms.  Nonetheless, we give it a satisfactory on this criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Despite the availability of effective therapies, glaucoma remains a leading cause of blindness. Nearly 3 million people in the United States have the condition. It is often marked by elevated internal eye pressure, called intraocular pressure. Medicated eye drops taken daily or twice daily can lower internal eye pressure to help prevent damage to the optic nerve. But studies show that many patients do not take glaucoma eye drops as directed due to factors such as forgetfulness or physical limitations like arthritis. 1 Some studies show that half of patients stop taking their prescription glaucoma eye drops after a year, leaving them vulnerable to vision loss. 2

Researchers are tackling this challenge of medication adherence with new drug delivery methods. One technology involves a thin silicone ring suffused with medication that slowly releases over time. An ophthalmologist fits the patient with the ring. No surgery is required. The ring is designed to be replaced by an ophthalmologist every six months. This eliminates the need for glaucoma patients to regularly put in medicated eye drops themselves.

Ophthalmologists at 10 sites nationwide tested the ring in a phase 2 clinical trial on patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension. In the study, 64 patients received the topical ocular insert containing the glaucoma drug bimatoprost. They were also supplied artificial tears. The control group of 66 patients wore an insert treated with no drug but twice a day used 0.5 percent timolol drops, the regulatory benchmark for glaucoma drugs. Eye pressure in the bimatoprost group fell 3.2 to 6.4 mmHg over six months, in comparison to 4.2 to 6.4 mmHG for the timolol group. Overall, eye pressure decreased in the group wearing the bimatoprost ring by about 20 percent from the initial measurements over six months.

Authors said the device was well-tolerated and safe, with a high retention rate of 89 percent for both groups at six months. The ring became dislodged in 15 patients but was replaced each time, allowing therapy to continue. Some patients experienced itchiness and eye redness, which is not unusual for patients taking glaucoma medication.

"In making effective treatments easier for patients, the hope is that we can reduce vision loss from glaucoma, and possibly other diseases," said study author James D. Brandt, M.D., director of the UC Davis Medical Center Glaucoma Service. "What is exciting is that this is just one of several sustained-release drug delivery methods designed to help patients who have trouble taking daily eye drops."

A phase 3 study of a larger group of patients is expected to begin later in 2016. The authors noted the device could also be used for non-glaucoma medications, with potential applications for dry eye, allergies and inflammation. In addition, the non-invasive nature of the device and its relatively large surface area make this technology a potential candidate for delivering multiple ocular drugs at once, further reducing the burden of self-administration on patients.

"Six-month IOP Reduction with a Topical Bimatoprost Ocular Insert: Results of a Phase 2 Randomized Controlled Study," Brandt, et al. Ophthalmology, article in press, May 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2016.04.026. The results are also being presented today at the Ophthalmology Innovation Summit in New Orleans. The authors receive financial support from ForSight VISION5, manufacturer of the bimatoprost ring.

For more information on glaucoma, visit the American Academy of Ophthalmology's EyeSmart® public information website, www.aao.org/eye-health.

About the American Academy of Ophthalmology

The American Academy of Ophthalmology is the world's largest membership association of eye physicians and surgeons. A global community of 32,000 ophthalmologists, we are passionate about protecting sight and fighting preventable blindness. For more than 120 years, we have been educators, innovators and advocates for the public and our profession to ensure the highest-quality medical and surgical eye care. Our EyeSmart® program is a preeminent source of eye health information for the public and empowers people to preserve their vision. For more information, visit www.aao.org.

About Ophthalmology 

Ophthalmology, the official journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology, publishes original, peer-reviewed, clinically-applicable research. Topics include the results of clinical trials, new diagnostic and surgical techniques, treatment methods, technology assessments, translational science reviews and editorials. For more information, visit www.aaojournal.org.

1 Patterns of Glaucoma Medication Adherence over Four Years of Follow-Up, Newman-Casey, et al. Ophthalmology, 2015. 

2 Adherence and persistence with glaucoma therapy, Schwartz, et al, Survey of Ophthalmology, Nov. 2008
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release quotes the authors saying the device is “well-tolerated and safe” with a retention rate of 89 percent at six months. It also pointed out that some patients experienced itchiness and redness, which it describes as common adverse effects for patients taking glaucoma medication, and that the ring became dislodged in 15 patients, requiring it be replaced so therapy could continue.
While the release adequately covers the known risks, in a study this small it would be good to remind readers that the device has not yet been tested on a large and diverse group of patients who might have different results. We also wonder how the ring would work in practice. Would patients who have difficulty following a treatment regimen in the first place be prompt about getting to a physician’s office promptly to have a ring replaced?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women who take tamoxifen for a decade cut their risk of dying from breast cancer nearly in half, study author says.

Breast cancer patients who double the length of time that they take a common medication can sharply reduce their risk of death, according to a new study that's predicted to influence medical practice.

The study involved an estrogen-blocking pill called tamoxifen, a standard therapy for the roughly two-thirds of breast cancer patients whose tumors are sensitive to estrogen. Taking tamoxifen for five years after diagnosis reduces breast cancer mortality by about one-third.

In the new study, women with early tumors who took tamoxifen for 10 years cut their risk of dying from breast cancer by another 29%, compared to women who stopped after five years.

In absolute terms, 12% of women on tamoxifen for 10 years died of breast cancer within five to 14 years after diagnosis, compared to 15% of those who stopped at five years.

Overall, women who take tamoxifen for a decade cut their risk of dying from breast cancer nearly in half, compared with those who don't take it at all, says study co-author Richard Gray of the University of Oxford in the United Kingdom.

That's significant, given that tamoxifen is used by hundreds of thousands of women worldwide, says Gray, whose study was presented Wednesday at the annual San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium. Oxford funded the study, which included more than 6,800 women from 36 countries, While tamoxifen delays tumor growth in some women, it appears to cure others, Gray says.

"This is a dream come true for women," says V. Craig Jordan, a researcher who led tamoxifen's development, but who wasn't involved in the new study. "It's very exciting."

Tamoxifen, which has been used for decades, is far cheaper than most new chemotherapies and biological drugs, which cost thousands of dollars a month. A generic version costs about $100 a month in the USA, according to Susan G. Komen for the Cure.

In the U.K., tamoxifen costs only $5 a month. In India, it's 2 cents a pill, says Jordan, scientific director at Georgetown's Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center.

Jordan says the new findings will quickly change care for some patients.

Younger women with more aggressive tumors may want to extend their tamoxifen use, says Jennifer Litton, an assistant professor at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, who wasn't involved in the study.

Tamoxifen is the only hormonal option for women before menopause, Litton says.

Doctors may not want to change the care of older patients, however, she says. That's because postmenopausal women have the option of tamoxifen or another class of hormonal therapies, called aromatase inhibitors, or AIs. These drugs are slightly more effective than tamoxifen, although they don't work before menopause, Litton says.

Because the study didn't include AIs, doctors can't say how whether tamoxifen would benefit women who've taken them, Litton says. Other researchers are conducting trials comparing five versus 10 years of AIs, although these results won't be out for several years.

Gray noted that tamoxifen has risks. In his study, doubling the length of treament also doubled the risk of endometrial cancer, which affects the uterine lining, to about 3%. However, because this cancer is very treatable, death rates were low: 0.4% of those on tamoxifen for 10 years died of endometrial cancer, compared to 0.2% of those taking it for five years.

Doctors saw no increase in strokes, which has long been a concern with tamoxifen, Gray says.

Breast cancer survivors have mixed reactions to the results.

Some women will be glad to have another treament option, says breast cancer survivor Lillie Shockney, 59, administrative director of the Johns Hopkins Cancer Survivorhip Program in Baltimore.

"Patients get very nervous when they stop any hormonal therapy, because they feel like now they aren't doing anything," says Shockney, 59. "The opportunity to 'do something' might be appealing, despite the side effects."

Shockney says she'd like to see research on other ways to prevent recurrences, such as weight loss. "If someone lost 40 pounds, would that do as much as another five years on tamoxifen?" Shockney asks.

Some patients may be reluctant to prolong their use of a drug that causes so many side effects, says Boston breast cancer survivor Alicia Staley.

Studies show that only 80% of women take tamoxifen for five years, Litton says. Some switch to an AI, although these drugs can also cause problems, such as joint pain and osteoporosis.

Staley say she tamoxifen gave her "many, many side effects," including severe hot flashes. "Dry eyes, joint pain, weight gain — you name it, I had it," she says.

After 2½ years, Staley and her doctor stopped the drug "to regain a measure of quality of life."

For Shockney, tamoxifen took a heavy toll on her marriage, causing dryness that made sex unbearably painful.

Patients and their partners need to have honest talks with doctors about how extended treatment will affect their relationship, she says.

"If we are going to look at giving women tamoxifen for 10 years, by golly, we better get the partners involved," Shockney says.

Yet Shockney says her husband of nearly 35 years would have wanted her to do everything possible to survive.

"If someone said to my husband, 'I know this has been a rough road for you, and a big impact on your sex life, but if she stays on it another five years. it could affect her survival,' he would have said, 'Please, please, take the pill.' "
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag – but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
Good points:
Room for improvement:
The story provided only one woman’s tale of side effects.  It provided no estimate of how often these occur. And the Young Survival Coalition pointed out another age-specific concern in the statement it released:
Finally, a particular concern with this study is the impact that this study may have on young women’s family planning.  Many young women already wait until they have completed their five-year course of Tamoxifen before trying to start a family.  Will this study cause that delay to become 10 years?  And, are the modest benefits shown in this study worth that?  That is a very personal decision and again, we recommend speaking with your physician.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is such a radical change in thought that it’s been hard for many people to get their heads around it,” said Dr. Monica Morrow, chief of the breast service at Sloan-Kettering and an author of the study, which is being published Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association. The paid for the study.

Doctors and patients alike find it easy to accept more cancer treatment on the basis of a study, Dr. Morrow said, but get scared when the data favor less treatment.

The new findings are part of a trend to move away from radical surgery for breast cancer. Rates of , removal of the whole breast, began declining in the 1980s after studies found that for many patients, survival rates after and radiation were just as good as those after mastectomy.

The trend reflects an evolving understanding of breast cancer. In decades past, there was a belief that surgery could “get it all” — eradicate the cancer before it could spread to organs and bones. But research has found that breast cancer can begin to spread early, even when are small, leaving microscopic traces of the disease after surgery.

The modern approach is to cut out obvious tumors — because lumps big enough to detect may be too dense for drugs and radiation to destroy — and to use radiation and chemotherapy to wipe out microscopic disease in other places.

But doctors have continued to think that even microscopic disease in the lymph nodes should be cut out to improve the odds of survival. And until recently, they counted cancerous lymph nodes to gauge the severity of the disease and choose chemotherapy. But now the number is not so often used to determine drug treatment, doctors say. What matters more is whether the disease has reached any nodes at all. If any are positive, the disease could become deadly. Chemotherapy is recommended, and the drugs are the same, no matter how many nodes are involved.

The new results do not apply to all patients, only to women whose disease and treatment meet the criteria in the study.

The tumors were early, at clinical stage T1 or T2, meaning less than two inches across. Biopsies of one or two armpit nodes had found cancer, but the nodes were not enlarged enough to be felt during an exam, and the cancer had not spread anywhere else. The women had lumpectomies, and most also had radiation to the entire breast, and chemotherapy or hormone-blocking drugs, or both.

The study, at 115 medical centers, included 891 patients. Their median age was in the mid-50s, and they were followed for a median of 6.3 years.

After the initial node , the women were assigned at random to have 10 or more additional nodes removed, or to leave the nodes alone. In 27 percent of the women who had additional nodes removed, those nodes were cancerous. But over time, the two groups had no difference in survival: more than 90 percent survived at least five years. Recurrence rates in the armpit were also similar, less than 1 percent. If breast cancer is going to recur under the arm, it tends to do so early, so the follow-up period was long enough, the researchers said.

One potential weakness in the study is that there was not complete follow-up information on 166 women, about equal numbers from each group. The researchers said that did not affect the results. A statistician who was not part of the study said the missing information should have been discussed further, but probably did not have an important impact.

It is not known whether the findings also apply to women who do not have radiation and chemotherapy, or to those who have only part of the breast irradiated. Nor is it known whether the findings could be applied to other types of cancer.

The results mean that women like those in the study will still have to have at least one removed, to look for cancer and decide whether they will need more treatment. But taking out just one or a few nodes should be enough.

Dr. Armando E. Giuliano, the lead author of the study and the chief of surgical oncology at the Cancer Institute at St. John’s Health Center in , Calif., said: “It shouldn’t come as a big surprise, but it will. It’s hard for us as surgeons and medical oncologists and radiation oncologists to accept that you don’t have to remove the nodes in the armpit.”

Dr. Grant W. Carlson, a professor of surgery at the Winship Cancer Institute at , and the author of an editorial accompanying the study, said that by routinely taking out many nodes, “I have a feeling we’ve been doing a lot of harm.”

Indeed, women in the study who had the nodes taken out were far more likely (70 percent versus 25 percent) to have complications like infections, abnormal sensations and fluid collecting in the armpit. They were also more likely to have lymphedema.

But Dr. Carlson said that some of his colleagues, even after hearing the new study results, still thought the nodes should be removed.

“The dogma is strong,” he said. “It’s a little frustrating.”

Eventually, he said, genetic testing of breast tumors might be enough to determine the need for treatment, and eliminate the need for many node biopsies.

Two other breast surgeons not involved with the study said they would take it seriously.

Dr. Elisa R. Port, the chief of breast surgery at in Manhattan, said: “It’s a big deal in the world of breast cancer. It’s definitely practice-changing.”

Dr. Alison Estabrook, the chief of the comprehensive breast center at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt hospital in New York said surgeons had long been awaiting the results.

“In the past, surgeons thought our role was to get out all the cancer,” Dr. Estabrook said. “Now he’s saying we don’t really have to do that.”

But both Dr. Estabrook and Dr. Port said they would still have to make judgment calls during surgery and remove lymph nodes that looked or felt suspicious.

The new research grew out of efforts in the 1990s to minimize lymph node surgery in the armpit, called axillary dissection. Surgeons developed a technique called sentinel node biopsy, in which they injected a dye into the breast and then removed just one or a few nodes that the dye reached first, on the theory that if the was spreading, cancer cells would show up in those nodes. If there was no cancer, no more nodes were taken. But if there were cancer cells, the surgeon would cut out more nodes.

Although the technique spared many women, many others with positive nodes still had extensive cutting in the armpit, and suffered from side effects.

“Women really dread the axillary dissection,” Dr. Giuliano said. “They fear lymphedema. There’s numbness, , and some have limitation of motion. There are a fair number of serious complications. Women know it.”

After armpit surgery, 20 percent to 30 percent of women develop lymphedema, Dr. Port said, and radiation may increase the rate to 40 percent to 50 percent. Physical therapy can help, but there is no cure.

The complications — and the fact that there was no proof that removing the nodes prolonged survival — inspired Dr. Giuliano to compare women with and without axillary dissection. Some doctors objected. They were so sure cancerous nodes had to come out that they said the study was unethical and would endanger women.

“Some prominent institutions wouldn’t even take part in it,” Dr. Giuliano said, though he declined to name them. “They’re very supportive now. We don’t want to hurt their feelings. They’ve seen the light.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses several harms from lymph node removal, and shows that the difference in survival for women who had nodes removed and those who did not was not significant. “Indeed, women in the study who had the nodes taken out were far more likely (70 percent versus 25 percent) to have complications like infections, abnormal sensations and fluid collecting in the armpit. They were also more likely to have lymphedema.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Sharon Samuels was a teenager when she was first diagnosed with essential tremor. Over the years her condition worsened, until a new therapy came along to help improve her brain's motor circuit.

For decades, Sharon Samuels struggled with simple everyday tasks like brushing her teeth, buttoning her shirt, putting on makeup, and eating food.

“I did not want to go out socially with other people, especially people who I did not know, because I could see them looking at me. And the feeling was horrible,” she recalled. “It would take my heart away when I was trying to eat and I’d look up and they were looking at me.”

Samuels, 72, has essential tremor, a movement disorder characterized by uncontrollable shaking mostly in the hands or legs. An estimated 10 million people in the United States suffer from the condition, according to the International Essential Tremor Foundation. The disorder isn’t fatal, but it tends to get worse with age and to affect patients’ quality of life.

Doctors usually treat essential tremor with medication, but the drugs don’t work well for all patients. Now a new trial finds that a treatment to kill off neurons in a certain region of the brain can do away with tremors in some patients who don’t respond to drugs. But the procedure brings lasting side effects in some patients, and its long-term usefulness is still being studied.

In an ongoing clinical trial at 11 medical centers globally, researchers are using ultrasound waves to treat the source of essential tremor in the brain. The therapy, called focused ultrasound thalamotomy, uses the energy generated by sound waves to burn off certain cells in the thalamus, a region of the brain where the essential tremor is thought to originate.

Patients are placed in an MRI machine with their head secured in place in a special helmet. They are awake as doctors aim over 1,000 low-energy ultrasound waves to create a lesion — an injury to the tissue — inside the thalamus.

“As we make the test lesion, we see a subtle improvement in their tremor and the patients notice it,” said Dr. Rees Cosgrove who is leading the trial at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. Brigham is one of the six centers running the trial in the US.

“As we enlarge the lesion, the tremor just stops and they’ll just look at their hand. It has been shaking for years and they look at it as though, ‘Hmm, is this really my hand?’ It’s really a remarkable moment.”

For Samuels, who underwent the procedure on June 29, the recovery has been surprising. She had been taking tremor medication for almost a decade with little improvement. After the procedure, which only focused on her left hand, her tremor there has almost disappeared.

“This has changed the quality of my life,” she said. “Now, it’s a pleasure, I can sign my name, I can write. I can eat like a normal person, doing things that I couldn’t do before.”

In July, the Food and Drug Administration approved the device being used in the trial. It has been developed by InSightec, which is funding the trial along with the Focused Ultrasound Foundation and the Binational Industrial Research and Development Foundation.

A pilot study on MRI-guided focused ultrasound treatment was published in 2013.

The randomized trial provides further data on the treatment. In the study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine on Wednesday, 76 patients were treated with focused ultrasound, and their tremor was evaluated after the first, third, sixth, and 12th month. Researchers found that the severity of essential tremor reduced significantly over that time in the patients who underwent the treatment versus those who had a sham procedure. The treated group also evaluated their quality of life as much better than before the procedure, despite a few persistent side effects like gait disturbance and paresthesia — the sensation of prickling pins and needles.

Neurologist Dr. Bryan Ho, who is not involved in the trial, noted that tremor suppression remained sustained throughout the 12 months. But he expressed concern about the side effects of the treatment.

“Over a third of patients actually experienced either gait disturbance or paresthesia. It’s a pretty high incidence of side effects,” said Dr. Ho, who is the director of the Movement Disorders Program at Tufts Medical Center.

He added that since these patients were only followed for a year, there isn’t enough data available yet to determine the long-term efficacy of the treatment.

“It’s one and done,” he said. “Patients may have some benefit for a period of time, but how do they do five years from now or 10 years from now after the treatment? That needs to be shown.”

The researchers are in the process of collecting this data; the clinical trial will run until December. The doctors at Brigham will follow up with Samuels — and others who undergo the treatment — for up to five years and run more MRI scans and neurological exams to find out for how long the lesion lasts and keeps the tremor suppressed.

For now, the treatment has had an immense impact on patients’ lives. “These people are able to go back and now use that hand like you and I use our hands, without thinking about it,” said Dr. Cosgrove.

“They can write their names again, they can feed themselves, they are not embarrassed about being in public. So it really is extraordinarily helpful for people.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story addresses adverse effects, and that’s sufficient for a Satisfactory rating.
We do wish the story had quantified the harms that were measured in the study. The fourth paragraph says the procedure “brings lasting side effects in some patients” and later the story quotes a physician who is not involved in the research as saying, “It’s a pretty high incidence of side effects.” But nowhere do exact numbers appear.
Rather than citing data from the study, the story quotes the physician as saying that “over a third of patients actually experienced either gait disturbance or paresthesia,” or numbness. This information isn’t very useful because the story does not explain when these rates were measured. According to the study, three months after the procedure 36% of patients had gait disturbance and 38% had numbness. After 12 months, the numbers dropped, to 9 percent and 14 percent respectively.
Also worth mentioning is that one patient was reported to have permanent diminished sensation of the dominant thumb and index figure, which was categorized as a serious adverse event. That did not appear in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Taking one or two baby aspirins a day for at least five years was tied to a lower risk of colorectal cancer in a study from Denmark.

Earlier studies had suggested that aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen may help protect against colorectal cancer, but it wasn’t clear how much had to be taken, and for how long, to achieve those benefits.

Now, using data on more than 113,000 individuals, researchers have been trying to sort out the relationship between aspirin and NSAIDs, duration of treatment, and colorectal cancer rates.

In general, the risk of developing colorectal cancer varies with age, race, ethnicity and lifestyle. More than 90 percent of cases are diagnosed in people older than 50, according to the National Cancer Institute.

An online risk calculator from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (available here: 1.usa.gov/1DlscTL) indicates that in the U.S., for an average white or black woman in her late fifties, the 10-year risk of developing colorectal cancer is between 1 and 1.4 percent, and her lifetime risk is between 5 and 5.4 percent. For an average black or white male of the same age, the corresponding risks would be about 1.4 percent and 5.8 percent.

In the new study from Denmark, taking low-dose aspirin continuously for at least five years appeared to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer by 27%, and using nonaspirin NSAIDs for at least five years appeared to reduce it by 30%.

On the other hand, merely having taken aspirin did not alter the colorectal cancer risk, they reported in Annals of Internal Medicine.

“Unless low-dose aspirin is taken continuously, there is little protection against colorectal cancer,” Dr. Soren Friis from the Danish Cancer Society Research Center in Copenhagen told Reuters Health.

Nonaspirin NSAIDs were also protective against colorectal cancer with consistent long-term use, “and there was some indication that even non-continuous use of these agents may be (marginally) effective for the prevention of colorectal cancer,” Dr. Friis said.

Aspirin and NSAIDs carry their own risks, however. Long-term use can cause gastrointestinal bleeding, for example, so the potential reduction in colon cancer risk needs to be balanced against potential side effects, the authors warn.

The study had several limitations. For instance, the researchers only had data for users who obtained their aspirin or NSAIDs from doctors’ prescriptions. They didn’t include patients who made over-the-counter purchases of the medicines. Also, the researchers can’t rule out the possibility that other factors may have increased participants’ risk for colorectal cancer, such as obesity, dietary habits, alcohol use, and family history of colorectal cancer.

Dr. Friis emphasized that people should not start taking aspirin or NSAIDs on the basis of the new findings.

“Self-medication with aspirin or non-aspirin NSAIDs is strongly discouraged, due to the possibility of serious adverse events,” Dr. Friis said. “The public should not take any medication regularly without consulting with a physician.”

Dr. Gurpreet Singh Ranger from Upper River Valley Hospital, Waterville, New Brunswick and Dalhousie Medical School, in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, agreed with Dr. Friis.

“Low dose aspirin, already taken regularly by millions, reduces the risk of colorectal cancer,” he told Reuters Health by email. But “before starting to take aspirin long term, it is important to discuss the implications with your family doctor or specialist.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story is straightforward in saying that all NSAIDs carry risks.
“Long-term use can cause gastrointestinal bleeding, for example, so the potential reduction in colon cancer risk needs to be balanced against potential side effects, the authors warn.”
It would have been easy to also mention cerebral vascular bleeds, but that’s a minor point.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
May 18, 2010 -- Flibanserin, an antidepressant-like drug, makes sex more satisfying for some premenopausal women distressed over their low sexual desire.

The findings come from phase III clinical trials that drugmaker Boehringer Ingelheim hopes will convince the FDA to approve flibanserin for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD).

While HSDD is a controversial diagnosis -- some experts see it as the medicalization of what is for many women a relationship issue -- the 1,378 premenopausal women enrolled in the clinical trials were suffering distress over their lack of sexual desire.

Compared to women who received inactive placebo pills, those who took flibanserin at bedtime were more likely to get relief from self-reported sexual distress, to experience more sexual desire, and to have more sexually satisfying experiences.

The drug didn't work for all women. Just under a third of women taking flibanserin got over their sexual distress and/or lack of sexual desire (vs. about a fifth of women taking placebo pills). But the difference was important to the women, says study researcher Michael L. Krychman, MD, medical director of sexual medicine at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif.

"The absolute number of women who had remission of sexual distress was clinically significant, but equally important to them was how it improved their lives," Krychman tells WebMD.

Nearly half of women taking flibanserin (and nearly a third of women taking placebo) reported at least minimal improvement in "bothersome decreased sexual desire."

Flibanserin is taken nightly at bedtime. However, it's not an on-demand treatment. Data suggest that the drug begins to affect sexual satisfaction after four weeks of continuous treatment.

In the 24-week "Bouquet" studies (each of the Boehringer Ingelheim-funded studies is named after a flower), there were few drug-related side effects. Those most commonly reported were daytime sleepiness, dizziness, fatigue, anxiety, dry mouth, nausea, and insomnia. Some 15% of women on flibanserin, and 7% of those on placebo, stopped treatment due to side effects.

Updated reports on data from the North American "Daisy" and "Violet" studies were made by Krychman and other researchers at this week's annual meeting of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists in San Francisco.

Kychman is an advisor to Boehringer Ingelheim and serves on their speakers' bureau, services for which he is compensated.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provided statistics on common side effects including daytime sleepiness, dizziness, fatigue, anxiety, dry mouth, nausea and insomnia.  These side effects resulted in 15% of those taking flibanserin vs 7% taking placebo withdrawing from the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New research finds that eating an avocado per day, as part of an overall diet rich in healthy fats, may help cut the bad kind cholesterol, known as LDL.

Researchers at Pennsylvania State University recruited 45 overweight participants who agreed to try three different types of cholesterol-lowering diets. Their study was published Wednesday in the Journal of the American Heart Association.

One was a low-fat diet that included lots of fruits, low-fat dairy, poultry, whole grains and small amounts of red meat.

The other two diets were moderately high in fat, with about 34 percent of total calories consumed per day coming from fat. The types of foods and meals were similar to the low-fat diet, but included more nuts and oils.

One of the moderately high-fat diets included a daily serving of one avocado.

In one sample meal plan, lunch was chicken salad with half an avocado, and dinner included turkey tacos with another half an avocado.

The diets were similar in terms of macronutrients (like protein and fats) and calories. The only difference between the two was the avocado — the other diet had the same amount of fat from other sources.

At the end of the study, the researchers found that the avocado diet led to significant reductions in LDL cholesterol, compared with the other two diets.

To put the difference in perspective, the avocado diet decreased LDL cholesterol about 14 milligrams per deciliter of blood. Compare that with a decrease of about 7 mg/dL for the low-fat diet, and about a 8 mg/dl drop from the moderate-fat diet.

"I was surprised to see the added benefit [of the avocado]," Penny Kris-Etherton, a nutrition scientist at Penn State and the lead author of the study, tells us." It's something in the avocado" other than just the fat composition, she says.

She says she'd like to do follow-up research to look at the bioactive compounds in avocados, which may explain the added reduction in LDL cholesterol in the study participants. It's also possible that the fiber in avocados plays a role in the cholesterol-lowering effect, she says.

But one caveat for anyone who loves guacamole: When it's served up with chips, the calories can add up. A mere half-cup of guacamole has about 200 calories all on its own.

Kris-Etherton's study was funded, in part, by the National Center for Research Resources, part of the National Institutes of Health.

It was also supported by a grant from the Hass Avocado Board, an industry group that the researchers say had no role in the design of the study or the interpretation of the data.

We asked Kris-Etherton if she would have published the results had there been no positive findings for the avocado.

"Oh, absolutely!" she told us. The agreement was to publish no matter the results. And given the reduction in funds available for research, it's become increasingly common for researchers to carry out these kinds of industry-supported studies.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says that eating avocados is linked to decreases in LDL cholesterol levels, but also clearly notes that eating avocados in conjunction with tortilla chips (as guacamole lovers are wont to do) would lead to a significant increase in calorie consumption.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By MARILYNN MARCHIONE

 The Associated Press

 Monday, February 28, 2011; 9:39 PM 



-- In a bold new approach ultimately aimed at trying to cure AIDS, scientists used genetic engineering in six patients to develop blood cells that are resistant to HIV, the virus that causes the disease.

It's far too early to know if this scientific first will prove to be a cure, or even a new treatment. The research was only meant to show that, so far, it seems feasible and safe.

The concept was based on the astonishing case of an AIDS patient who seems to be cured after getting blood cells from a donor with natural immunity to HIV nearly four years ago in Berlin. Researchers are seeking a more practical way to achieve similar immunity using patients' own blood cells.

The results announced Monday at a conference in Boston left experts cautiously excited.

"For the first time, people are beginning to think about a cure" as a real possibility, said Dr. John Zaia, head of the government panel that oversees gene therapy experiments. Even if the new approach doesn't get rid of HIV completely, it may repair patients' immune systems enough that they can control the virus and not need AIDS medicines - "what is called a functional cure," he said.

Carl Dieffenbach, AIDS chief at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, agreed.

"We're hopeful that this is sufficient to give the level of immune reconstitution similar to what was seen with the patient from Germany," he said.

This is the first time researchers have permanently deleted a human gene and infused the altered cells back into patients. Other gene therapy attempts tried to add a gene or muffle the activity of one, and have not worked against HIV.

The virus can damage the immune system for years before people develop symptoms and are said to have AIDS - acquired immune deficiency syndrome. The virus targets special immune system soldiers called T-cells. It usually enters these cells through a protein receptor, or "docking station," called CCR5.

Some people (about 1 percent of whites; fewer of minorities) lack both copies of the CCR5 gene and are naturally resistant to HIV. One such person donated blood stem cells in 2007 to an American man living in Berlin who had leukemia and HIV.

The cell transplant appears to have cured both problems, but finding such donors for everyone with HIV is impossible, and transplants are medically risky.

So scientists wondered: Could a patient's own cells be used to knock out the CCR5 gene and create resistance to HIV?

A California biotechnology company, Sangamo (SANG-uh-moh) BioSciences Inc., makes a treatment that can cut DNA at precise locations and permanently "edit out" a gene.

Dr. Jacob Lalezari, director of Quest Clinical Research of San Francisco, led the first test of this with the company and colleagues at the University of California in San Francisco and Los Angeles.

He warned that it would be "way overstated" to suggest that the results so far are a possible cure.

"It's an overreach of the data. There are a lot of people out there with hopes and dreams around the C-word," so caution is needed.

In the study, six men with HIV had their blood filtered to remove a small percentage of their T-cells. The gene-snipping compound was added in the lab, and about one-fourth of the cells were successfully modified. The cells were mixed with growth factors to make them multiply and then infused back into the patients.

Three men received about 2.5 billion modified cells. Three others received about 5 billion.

Three months later, five men had three times the number of modified cells expected. As much as 6 percent of their total T-cells appear to be the new type - resistant to HIV, Lalezari said.

The sixth man also had modified cells, but fewer than expected. In all six patients, the anti-HIV cells were thriving nearly a year after infusion, even in tissues that can hide HIV when it can't be detected in blood.

"The cells are engrafting - they're staying in the bloodstream, they're expanding over time," said Lalezari, who has no personal financial ties to Sangamo, the study's sponsor.

The only side effect was two days of flulike symptoms. It will take longer to determine safety, but several AIDS experts said they were encouraged so far.

"It is a huge step" and a first for the field of genetics, said John Rossi, a researcher at City of Hope in Duarte, Calif., where he and Zaia plan another study to test Sangamo's approach. "The idea is if you take away cells the virus can infect, you can cure the disease."

On Wednesday, Dr. Carl June, a gene therapy expert at the University of Pennsylvania, will report partial results from a second, federally funded study of 10 people testing Sangamo's product. He treated his first patient with it in July 2009.

- People born without the CCR5 gene are generally healthy, but will deleting it have unforeseen consequences?

- Will HIV find another way into cells? Certain types of the virus can use a second protein receptor, though this is less common and usually when AIDS is advanced. Sangamo is testing a similar approach aimed at that protein, too.

- How long will the modified cells last? Will more be needed every few years?

- Could doctors just infuse Sangamo's product rather than removing cells and modifying them in the lab?

- What might this cost?

Sangamo spokeswoman Liz Wolffe said it's too early in testing to guess, but it would be "a premier-priced" therapy - in the neighborhood of Dendreon Corp.'s new prostate cancer immune therapy, Provenge - $93,000.

Yet AIDS drugs can cost $25,000 a year, so this could still be cost-effective, especially if it's a cure.

Jay Johnson, 50, who works for Action AIDS, an advocacy and service organization in Philadelphia, had the treatment there in September.

"My results are excellent," he said. "The overall goal is to not have to take medication, and then hopefully lead maybe to a cure."

Matt Sharp, 54, of suburban San Francisco, also had the treatment in September.

"I would trade anything to not have to take a handful of medications every day for the rest of my life and suffer all the consequences and side effects," he said.

"I may not live long enough to see the cure, but I always hoped for a chance."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good job in saying: “The only side effect was two days of flulike symptoms. It will take longer to determine safety”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Patients with atrial fibrillation (AF), a rapid irregular heartbeat caused by pooling blood in the heart which can lead to heart failure and stroke, are often treated with an ablation, a minimally invasive procedure used to remove the tissue which causes the pooled blood. Following this procedure, patients are often prescribed long-term, daily oral anticoagulation medications -- also known as blood thinners. However, a new study shows the use of novel anticoagulants for AF prescribed on an "as-needed basis" guided by diligent pulse monitoring, can be a safe and effective alternative to lowering overall risk of stroke. Researchers from the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania presented their findings today at the Heart Rhythm Society's 37th Annual Scientific Session in San Francisco.

Oral anticoagulation therapy is recommended in patients with infrequent AF and high risk of stroke, however, prolonged use of blood thinners is associated with a higher bleeding risk. To determine an alternate but effective therapy, the researchers enrolled 100 patients age 45-78 with significant stroke risk and coupled with diligent pulse monitoring -- manually or by using a smartphone - twice a day with "as needed" anticoagulants for the treatment of AF. Patients were provided with novel oral anticoagulants and were instructed to start taking the medication if they suspected or detected an AF episode lasting longer than one hour.

"This kind of approach to anticoagulation therapy requires an open line of communication between the patient and the care team, and calls for a specific type of patient. We call them "highly motivated patients," said lead author Monica Pammer, PA-C, a physician assistant in Electrophysiology at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. "These are patients who were actively seeking, preparing for and are committed to the alternate treatment method, and who are informed about how to diligently and effectively monitor their pulse throughout the day."

Researchers followed the participates for approximately 23 months, during which time 28 patients started taking the blood thinner at least once for a suspected or detected AF episode, and only 10 patients transitioned back to chronic oral anticoagulation therapy for recurrent AF. No patients experienced a stroke or transient ischemic attack - also called a mini-stroke -- and there was only one mild bleeding incident that required medical attention.

"It is extremely common for patients with AF to seek treatment that does not involve the use of chronic oral anticoagulants therapy, as there are other risks associated with their long term use," said co-author Francis E. Marchlinski, MD, FHRS, director of Electrophysiology for the University of Pennsylvania Health System and Richard T. and Angela Clark President's Distinguished Professor in the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. "The goal of this study was to find a safe and effected treatment option, and our initial results support 'as-needed' blood thinners and pulse monitoring as the alternative."

All patients enrolled had no AF recurrences during an extended period of telemetry monitoring before the study began, and were willing and able to check their pulses manually or by a smartphone-enabled device twice a day. Of these patients, 84 had been ablated, sixteen were being treated with drug therapy, and three had implanted devices that served as a quality control check.

"While this is an observational study with a relatively small patient sample, further research is certainly needed to better understand alternate treatment options," said Pammer. "And, we stress that 'as-needed' blood thinners should not be considered unless the patient qualifies as highly motivated."

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania (founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions the bleeding harms that come with taking anticoagulants, a harm that increases with chronic use. However, the release suggests that the therapy was proven safe when that wasn’t clearly established.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But two studies discussed at the oncology meeting found that patients who were considered Her2-negative even using both tests benefited from Herceptin.

Both studies reanalyzed tumor samples from earlier clinical trials showing that Herceptin, if used after a tumor is removed by surgery, cuts the risk of the cancer’s recurring by half. For a woman to have entered those trials, her tumor had to be classified as Her2-positive by a local clinical laboratory.

But scientists have now gone back and retested those preserved tumor samples and found that as many as 20 percent of them were actually Her2-negative. Yet the women with those tumors also experienced a reduction in cancer recurrence from Herceptin, in some cases as great as that in the Her2-positive women.

“This is a revolution compared to what we believed before,” said Dr. Edith A. Perez of the Mayo Clinic, who presented one of the studies. She said the findings raised questions of whether women who were Her2-negative should be tested again.

Some experts were skeptical, saying the number of patients in the two studies was too small to draw firm conclusions. Also, they said, it was not clear if those women were truly Her2-negative, since they had tested positive by the local laboratory.

Dr. Daniel F. Hayes, a breast cancer specialist at the University of Michigan who helped develop guidelines for Her2 testing, said it would be unwise to start giving Herceptin to Her2-negative women because the drug was expensive and raised the risk of heart failure.

But he said the studies called attention to the inconsistent quality of Her2 testing in many small laboratories. Laboratories can use commercially available tests or develop their own.

Dr. Soonmyung Paik, who presented the second study at the cancer conference, said the problem might lie not in sloppy testing but rather in the cutoff used to determine which women get Herceptin.

Dr. Paik, who is with the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, said that about 40 percent of women had intermediate levels of Her2. They are now classified as negative but might still derive some benefit from the drug. On the other hand, he said, many women who are Her2-positive do not benefit from Herceptin. So better ways are needed to determine who should be treated.

“To me, the take-home message is that we don’t have a perfect test, unfortunately,” Dr. Paik said.

Dr. Pamela M. Klein, an executive at Genentech, the manufacturer of Herceptin, said the company was continuing to explore how to best identify patients for the drug.

The fact that this uncertainty is occurring so long after the 1998 approval of Herceptin — the paragon of “personalized medicine” — suggests that it will not be so easy to tailor other drugs to patients based on gene or protein tests.

It left some doctors at the conference incredulous and uncertain how to treat their patients.

“Here we are, 10 years into it,” said Dr. Marc L. Citron, an oncologist in Lake Success, N.Y., “and we don’t know how to test for it.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions the potential harms of treatment (i.e. slight increased risk of heart failure in some women).  The story also mentions that even women diagnosed as positive are not guaranteed benefit from the drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 22, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Breast cancers in women aged 40 to 49 that are diagnosed by mammograms have a better prognosis than those detected by doctors or the women themselves, a new study indicates.

"They have an earlier diagnosis, earlier stage, better prognosis," said study author Judith Malmgren, an affiliated professor of epidemiology at the University of Washington School of Public Health and Community Medicine. She is also president of HealthStat Consulting Inc. in Seattle.

The new study, like previous ones, re-ignites the ongoing debate about the best age to start routine mammograms and the best screening interval. It appears in the March issue of the journal Radiology.

In 2009, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force issued mammogram recommendations. It recommends women aged 50 to 74 who are at average risk for breast cancer have a mammogram done every two years. It also suggests that women aged 40 to 49 at average risk discuss the pros and cons with their doctors and decide on an individual basis if and when to start screening.

Meanwhile, other organizations, including the American Cancer Society, recommend women begin mammograms at age 40 and continue to have them annually.

Malmgren and her colleagues evaluated nearly 2,000 women who had breast cancer. All were aged 40 to 49 when they were treated between 1990 and 2008.

The researchers looked at the method of diagnosis, whether by mammogram or if the cancer was found by the doctor or the woman. They also took these into account: the cancer's stage at diagnosis; type of treatment; annual follow-up; recurrence; and survival.

Over the 18-year period, the number of breast cancers diagnosed at very early stages increased 66 percent, while the number of more advanced cancers (stage 3) decreased by 66 percent.

Those whose cancers were detected by mammogram rose from 28 percent in 1990 to 58 percent in 2008. The number of cancers detected by doctor or patients declined from 73 percent in 1990 to 42 percent in 2008.

Women whose cancers were detected by mammograms were more likely than the doctor- or patient-detected cancers to have lumpectomy or other breast-conserving surgery: 67 percent vs. 48 percent. The women whose cancers were detected by mammograms were less likely to be given chemotherapy.

While 4 percent of women whose cancer was found on mammogram died during a follow-up period that ranged from one to 20 years, 11 percent of those whose cancers were found by the doctor or the women died.

When the researchers looked only at invasive cancers, 92 percent of the women whose cancer was found on mammogram survived without recurrence at five years; 88 percent of the other group did.

"I don't think the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force is looking at the whole picture," Malmgren said. "They are concentrating on the harms."

Among them, according to the 2009 guidelines, are false-positives, which can lead to anxiety and unnecessary biopsies.

Malmgren, a breast cancer survivor, says more focus should be placed on the benefit of early diagnosis, because it often means less treatment is needed.

There was a decrease found in cancers being diagnosed at later stages in those whose cancers were found on mammograms. "That's where the money is," Malmgren said.

Dr. Virginia Moyer, chair of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and a professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine, reviewed the study. "The findings make sense," she said.

They found that cancers can be detected earlier by mammogram. "A screening test, if it can't find something earlier than [by] clinical presentation, is a poor test," she said.

However, she said, the study does not provide support for all women aged 40 to 49 to have routine mammograms.

When considering its recommendation, the task force took all available evidence into account, including published studies, Moyer noted. "The data from randomized trials and modeling show there is a very modest improvement in mortality with mammograms from 40 to 49," she said.

"Because it is so modest and there are risks, people need to make their own decision," Moyer said.

To learn more about mammograms, go to the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did discuss why mammography in younger women is not always beneficial and described several of the harms that the US Preventive Services Task Force discussed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Then, he discovered in one of his own brain scanner experiments that he -- had brain cancer.

He has penned the best-selling book, "Anti-Cancer: A New Way of Life," about his past and on-going battle, and offers suggestions to fellow cancer patients. To read an excerpt, click here.

A conventionally trained physician, Servan-Schreiber says surgery and chemotherapy saved his life, but when he asked how he could change his lifestyle to help beat the cancer for good, he came up empty.

"As soon as you stop the chemo, you feel stripped, and you think, 'Wow, what do I do now?' And then everybody asks their doctor ... and this is when 99 percent of us get the standard answer, which is, 'Nothing in particular. Live your life like you always did.' "

Servan-Schreiber did what he knew best -- he hit the books, and was surprised to find studies on how nutrition and exercise might help the body fight cancer -- information doctors never told him.

"There's tremendous evidence that physical exercise helps prevent cancer, and also helps people who already have cancer prevent a recurrence," he says.

According to Servan-Schreiber, herbs and spices such as garlic, turmeric, rosemary, thyme, mint, and green tea help make the body less fertile for cancer. For instance, "When you put a little bit of garlic extract on cancer cells, they die."

He says vegetables and fruits such as brussel sprouts, asparagus and raspberries can target specific cancers, at least in test tubes.

"Your body knows how to fight cancer," Servan-Schreiber observed to LaPook. "Help it with the right nutrition, with physical exercise, with managing stress better, and avoiding contaminants that feed cancer. And if you do these things, which are very simple, you're greatly increasing your chance of beating the odds."

Servan-Schreiber offered more words of wisdom to LaPook -- words he says doctors rarely impart to their patients -- and LaPook discussed with co-anchor Harry Smith on The Early Show Friday why he thinks it is that cancer survivors aren't offered more guidance by the medical establishment:

Servan-Schreiber appears in the joint CBS, NBC, ABC special "Standing Up To Cancer" Friday night.

In addition, LaPook spoke with several other cancer patients who told him they're left in the dark, too, about how exercise and eating the right foods might help them in their battles against the disease:
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story rightly points out that there are few drawbacks to adopting a healthy lifestyle.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For hours on a recent morning at the , Dr. Andrew Lowy painstakingly performed the therapy on a patient.

After slicing the man’s belly wide open, he thrust his gloved hands deep inside, and examined various organs, looking for . He then lifted the small intestine out of the body to sift it through his fingers.

As he found tumors, he snipped them out. “You can see how this is coming off like wallpaper,” Dr. Lowy said as he stripped out part of the lining of the man’s abdominal cavity.

After about two hours of poking and cutting, Dr. Lowy began the so-called shake and bake. The machine pumped heated chemotherapy directly into the abdominal cavity for 90 minutes while nurses gently jiggled the man’s bloated belly to disperse the drug to every nook and cranny.

The treatment is formally called cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, or Hipec.

Recent converts include University Hospitals Case Medical Center in Cleveland, in the , and even Massachusetts General. The is looking at it, according to people in the field. Advocates predict that the number of procedures could grow to 10,000 a year from about 1,500 now.

The therapy has even been featured on an episode of the TV series “Grey’s Anatomy.”

But Dr. Ryan, a gastrointestinal oncologist, suggested in an interview that the procedure was being extended to because “you can’t make a living doing this procedure in appendix cancer patients.”

He debated the procedure publicly at the recent annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. While some patients did seem to live much longer than expected, he said that they had been carefully selected and might have fared well even without the therapy.

Proponents say that if cancer has spread into the abdominal cavity but not elsewhere, then lives can be prolonged by removing all the visible and killing what’s missed with Hipec.

By contrast, said Dr. Paul Sugarbaker, a surgeon at Washington Hospital Center and the leading proponent of Hipec, “there are no long-term survivors with systemic chemotherapy — zero.”

Dr. Sugarbaker, who opposed Dr. Ryan in the debate, said that it has long been known that cancerous cells are unable to withstand as much heat as healthy cells. And putting the chemotherapy on top of tumors should be more effective than systematically delivering it through the bloodstream.

One randomized trial done more than a decade ago involving 105 patients in the did show a striking benefit. The median survival of those getting surgery and Hipec, plus intravenous chemotherapy, was 22.3 months, almost double the 12.6 months for those getting only the intravenous chemotherapy. But 8 percent who got the surgery and Hipec died from the treatment itself. And critics say that since that trial was conducted, new drugs have come to market that allow patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to live two years with intravenous chemotherapy alone.

A new trial in the has been temporarily suspended so that researchers can find a way to recruit patients. After nearly a year only one patient had enrolled, because people were reluctant to chance winding up in the control group, according to one of the investigators.

While proponents contend that the risk of dying from the surgery has been reduced since the Dutch trial, the procedure still lasts eight hours or more and full recovery can take three to six months. “It’s maximally invasive,” said Dr. Sugarbaker, who often removes the “spare parts” — organs a patient can live without, like the spleen, the gall bladder, the ovaries and the uterus.

The cost of the surgery and Hipec, including hospitalization, ranges from $20,000 to more than $100,000, doctors said. While and insurers generally pay for the operation, the heated treatment may not be covered. But doctors added it may be if it is described merely as chemotherapy. Some patients, like Ms. Borges, who is a fitness devotee, recover well and say the procedure staved off a death sentence.

But Dr. Alan Venook, a colon cancer specialist at the , said that a couple of patients referred by him had “died miserable deaths. One lost much of her abdominal wall to infection and just died in misery.”

Another risk is that the surgery may be done unnecessarily. CT scans cannot pick up many of the small tumors, so it is often unclear how much cancer is inside until the patient is opened.

In June, Dr. Lowy sliced open a woman and saw, to his horror, that she had more tumors than he could remove. Taking out only some would not improve her chances of survival, so he closed the incision, and she is now starting intravenous chemotherapy.

Things with the male patient, Andy S., went better. A 41-year-old father of two from near , Mr. S. agreed to let a reporter observe the surgery, but asked that his full name not be published because he did not want his cancer history to surface through searches.

Mr. S. had eventually diagnosed as . But the appendix was found to be cancerous. Such cancers typically spew mucus containing tumor cells into the abdominal cavity. So he signed up for surgery and Hipec with Dr. Lowy.

“I’ve had to say my goodbyes to everybody,” Mr. S. said the day before the operation. “I had to talk to my priest. I had to do all these things I never thought I’d have to do at 41. I wouldn’t wish it on my worst enemy, but I have to go through with it.”

Dr. Lowy explored the entire cavity from the diaphragm to the pelvis. He found mucus in several spots that he sopped up with a cloth and also tiny tumors the size of a pencil eraser that had implanted in several spots. He snipped those out and sewed up the wounds. He removed the right side of the man’s colon and the omentum, a fatty structure.

Then two Y-shaped tubes hooked to the Hipec machine were inserted into the abdominal cavity, one to deliver the chemotherapy and the other to bring the drug back to the machine to be reheated. The incision was sewn up around the tubes so the chemotherapy would not leak.

The man’s belly was filled with three liters of saline fluid and the chemotherapy, a generic drug called mitomycin C, heated to 42 degrees Celsius, or nearly 108 degrees Fahrenheit. Any hotter could have caused injuries. Bloated with liquid, the man’s torso resembled a water bed.

After 90 minutes, the fluid was drained and the incision reopened for a final check before the patient was stitched up. The procedure took six hours.

“We got all of the visible disease, and he didn’t have a lot of visible disease,” Dr. Lowy said with satisfaction.

Mr. S. left the hospital eight days later, happy to have undergone the treatment. “I want to have the best chance I can have to never see this again,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that one study showed that “8 percent who got the surgery and Hipec died from the treatment itself.”  And it stated:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Of the many embarrassing health statistics in this country, the huge number of unwanted pregnancies is perhaps the easiest to rectify. Nearly half the pregnancies among American women are unintended — unwanted now or within the next two years. And among sexually active teenagers and young adults, the rate of unplanned pregnancy is even higher.

Fully 43 percent of these pregnancies follow incorrect or inconsistent uses of contraception. Of course, some couples fail to use any contraception, but others rely on contraceptive methods that have significant failure rates even when properly used.

These facts prompted a committee of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists this month to urge its members to introduce women of all ages to the most effective and underused methods of reversible contraception: IUDs and hormonal implants. Once inserted, these long-acting methods remove the risk of patient error when a sexually active woman wishes to avoid pregnancy. Their effectiveness rivals that of sterilization.

In a 2012 study of 7,486 women aged 14 to 45, long-acting reversible contraceptives, or LARCs, were shown to be 20 times as effective in preventing pregnancy than the pill, contraceptive patch or vaginal ring. The risk of an unwanted pregnancy with these other methods was especially high among women under 21, whose rate of unintended pregnancy was nearly double that among older women.

Yet fewer than 10 percent of sexually active women currently rely on long-acting reversible contraception, and a major reason is doctors’ reluctance to recommend them. Only about half of obstetrician-gynecologists offer the implant, the committee said, and many physicians use “overly restrictive criteria” when deciding whether to recommend an IUD, especially for adolescents and women who have not yet been pregnant.

Greater LARC use can reduce birthrates among adolescents and, for women of all ages, a reliance upon abortion to prevent unwanted births, the experts wrote in the October issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

Furthermore, the higher upfront costs of LARC methods are no longer an impediment for women with insurance obtained through the Affordable Care Act. Megan L. Kavanaugh, a senior research scientist at the Guttmacher Institute, which studies reproductive health, said in an interview that “all new insurance plans obtained through the act’s exchanges fully cover all contraceptive methods without any co-payments or other out-of-pocket costs.” Title X family planning clinics and Planned Parenthood clinics are more likely than other sources to offer LARC methods, she said.

In a paper published two years ago, European experts predicted that “after decades of dominance by ‘the Pill,’ it is likely that in the future, long-acting reversible contraceptives will become the first-line contraceptive option, owing to their superior contraceptive effectiveness in real-life use, cost effectiveness as well as their established safety profile.”

Here is a summary of the advantages of LARCs, listed by the committee:

■ They are independent of the sex act and do not depend on the user’s motivation and reliability.

■ Compared with other reversible methods, they are more effective and have higher rates of continued use and user satisfaction.

■ There is no need to get frequent supplies and no additional costs once they are inserted, making them highly cost effective.

■ There are few contraindications for their use, and fertility returns quickly after removal.

Furthermore, the committee stated, “almost all women are appropriate candidates” for the LARC methods currently available. They are an implant that slowly releases the hormone etonogestrel over a period of three years, and four IUDs: the copper T that can be used for up to 10 years, and three IUDs containing the hormone levonorgestrel (two approved for use up to three years, and one approved for up to five years).

In real-world use, these methods are associated with a one-year pregnancy rate of less than one per 100 women. In contrast, women using the pill, patch or vaginal ring face an annual pregnancy risk of 9 percent; the diaphragm is associated with a 12 percent pregnancy rate, and with condoms, cervical caps and sponges, the rate is 18 percent.

“While there is no one best contraceptive method for every woman or every couple, women should have access to all methods and should know how effective the LARCs are,” Dr. Kavanaugh said.

The etonogestrel implant is a small plastic rod resembling a matchstick that is inserted under the skin in the upper arm. The hormone, a form of progesterone, prevents ovulation and thickens the cervical mucus, making it harder for sperm to reach and fertilize an egg. Though the implant can remain in place and effective for three years, it can also be removed sooner if, for example, a woman decides she wants to become pregnant. Typically with the implant, menstrual bleeding diminishes, and after a year, one woman in three stops having periods. However, some women develop longer, heavier periods, and some have increased spotting between periods.

Likewise with the hormonal IUDs. Levonorgestrel, also a progesterone, changes the cervical mucus, blocking the transport of sperm and fertilization of an egg. It also suppresses growth of the uterine lining and thus reduces cramping and heavy menstrual bleeding. Women using it report a significant reduction in menstrual blood loss.

The copper IUD does not contain hormones. Rather, the copper is toxic to sperm, preventing them from fertilizing an egg. Because it also prevents a fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus, the copper IUD can serve as emergency contraception for up to five days following unprotected intercourse.

Both the implant and IUD can be used by women who are breast-feeding, as well as those who cannot take estrogen. There are few contraindications; nearly all women are eligible for an implant or IUD, according to guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Unlike early IUDs no longer in use, “modern IUDs do not carry an increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease after the first 20 days following insertion,” Dr. Brooke Winner and her colleagues wrote in The New England Journal of Medicine. With both implants and IUDs, fertility returns quickly as soon as the devices are removed.

Common side effects include irregular bleeding during the first few months following the insertion of an implant or IUD. The latter is also associated with some cramping at the time of insertion.
• The More We Learn on Nutrition, the More We Ignore
• Ask Well: Catching Up on Lost Sleep

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story lists some of the potential side effects of long-acting implants or IUDs. These include “irregular bleeding and cramping” as short-term impacts. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt, but we would have liked an additional comment by someone not connected to the committee report on whether there are any long-term studies underway about downstream potential impacts for women 5 or 10 years after using these. In addition, rare but potentially serious complications of copper IUDs, such as perforation (when the IUD pushes through the wall of the uterus), could have been mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 12, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Blood pressure drugs that block the protein angiotensin appear to reduce the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia, a new study finds.

"We think it [angiotensin] is one of the most important factors determining healthy blood vessels and also acts in the brain to help neurons to be a little more resilient," said Dr. Benjamin Wolozin, a professor of pharmacology and neurology at Boston University and senior author of a report on the findings, published online Jan. 13 in BMJ.

That report describes a study of more than 819,000 U.S. veterans, nearly all men, that found that those taking blood pressure medications that block cell receptors for angiotensin had a lower risk for dementia than those taking other cardiovascular medicines.

A similar but smaller protective effect was found for a related drug, lisinopril (Prinivil, Zestril), which blocks production of the active form of angiotensin.

Angiotensin causes blood vessels to constrict, raising blood pressure. It is produced when enzymes act to convert a precursor molecule, angiotensinogen. Lisinopril is a member of a drug family called ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors. Other examples of ACE inhibitors are benazepril (Lotensin), enalapril (Vasotec) and ramipril (Altace).

Reducing angiotensin production by giving ACE inhibitors can lower blood pressure. The same effect can be achieved with drugs that block the cell receptors through which angiotensin acts. Called angiotensin receptor blockers, these drugs have a greater protective effect against dementia than ACE inhibitors, the study found. Such drugs include candesartan (Atacand), irbesartan (Avapro), losartan (Cozaar) and valsartan (Diovan).

In the study, men taking an angiotensin receptor blocker had a 24 percent lower incidence of dementia than those taking other cardiovascular drugs. The risk was 19 percent lower for men taking ACE inhibitors. The risk was nearly halved for those taking both angiotensin-targeting drugs.

In men with Alzheimer's disease, use of an angiotensin receptor blocker reduced admission to nursing homes by half. Combined angiotensin medication therapy reduced nursing home admissions by two-thirds.

Wolozin said that it's not clear why the drugs would have a beneficial effect on the brain, but improved blood flow probably plays a role.

"If you get no blood to the brain, you're not going to think well," he said. "Also, in brain cells there is more than one kind of angiotensin receptor. By blocking bad receptors, you are left with the good ones so that helps neurons become more resilient."

But the evidence is not sufficient to support routine use of angiotensin receptor blockers to prevent Alzheimer's disease, Wolozin said. The new report describes an observational study, one that lacks the strict controls that are needed for convincing proof.

"Any study like this is hypothesis-generating," he said. "You only know for sure when you have done clinical prospective trials."

His advice for anyone considering angiotensin receptors blockers to reduce dementia risk: "They should consult with their physicians." There are potential hazards, such as too-low blood pressure that can lead to damaging falls, Wolozin said.

Caution was urged by Dr. Richard B. Lipton, vice chairman of neurology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City, who has done work on the genetics of Alzheimer's disease.

The angiotensin hypothesis makes sense, Lipton said, because improved blood flow to the brain helps nerve cells and reduces formation of Alzheimer's-related amyloid protein.

But there have been a number of observational studies implicating various molecules, including estrogens, in dementia, he said. "The sequence is that when you do the randomized trial, you don't get the same effect," Lipton said.

On the other hand, such randomized trials usually include people who are close to having Alzheimer's disease, and "it could be different if you gave the drugs earlier," Lipton said.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has more on blood pressure medications.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: One harm was mentioned – "There are potential hazards, such as too-low blood pressure that can lead to damaging falls."  That’s an incomplete listing, but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt in at least nodding in the direction of potential harms. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The effect was so marked that the trial was stopped early for ethical reasons, so that patients in the control group could be offered the new drug. Because of that, researchers do not yet know the median survival.

“You don’t need to wait for 50 percent of 675 patients to die to conclude that one drug is much better than the other,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas of the University of California, Los Angeles, who was an investigator in the trial and has been a consultant to the developer of the drug.

The other new drug, ipilimumab (pronounced ip-ee-LIM-yoo-mab), when combined with dacarbazine, extended median survival to 11.2 months compared with 9.1 months for those who received dacarbazine alone. After three years, 20.8 percent of those who got that new drug were alive, compared with 12.2 percent of those in the control group.

The results of both trials were published online by The New England Journal of Medicine in addition to being presented here.

To be sure, more than half of patients with metastatic melanoma would not be helped all that much by either drug. Experts say more needs to be done, especially since melanoma affects more young adults than many other types of cancer.

Even if the new drugs allow patients with metastatic melanoma to live two years, “Two years is nothing when you’re 30,” said Dr. Anna C. Pavlick, head of the melanoma program at New York University.

Still, doctors and patient groups welcomed the progress because until now treatment of melanoma that had spread beyond the skin to distant organs “was terrible even by routine cancer standards,” said Dr. Vernon K. Sondak, chairman of cutaneous oncology at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Fla.

Also, the number of melanoma cases has been rising, unlike for many other types of cancer. Doctors say that is because of unprotected sun exposure years ago, the proliferation of tanning salons and perhaps more attention to detecting the disease.

There were about 68,000 new cases of melanoma and about 8,700 deaths last year in the United States, up from 48,000 cases and 7,700 deaths in 2000, according to the American Cancer Society. Particularly fast increases have occurred among people older than 65 and among women 15 to 39 years old.

Vemurafenib is the latest so-called targeted therapy, which inhibits the effects of genetic mutations that spur tumor growth and spread. In particular, the drug counters the effect of a mutation in a gene called B-RAF that was discovered in 2002 to be common in melanomas. (The drug’s name comes from V600E mutation in RAF.)

The drug, which is taken orally twice a day, would be used only by the roughly half of melanoma patients whose tumors have this mutation. The drug significantly shrinks tumors in about half of these patients — or about a quarter of all melanoma patients.

It was developed by Roche and Plexxikon, a biotechnology company in Berkeley, Calif., that was recently acquired by Daiichi Sankyo of Japan. The drug is expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration within a few months.

Ipilimumab, the other new drug, releases a brake on the body’s immune system, allowing it to more effectively attack the tumor. Developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, it was approved in March and is sold under the name Yervoy.

A series of articles in The New York Times last year followed the development of vemurafenib, then known as PLX4032, and recounted how some patients close to death seemed to make miraculous recoveries.

The effect, however, typically lasts only about seven months before the cancer starts to grow again, though some patients benefit for more than two years.

S. Taylor Chance, a 67-year-old real estate agent in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., has been taking vemurafenib in a clinical trial since March 2010. “If it weren’t for the trial I wouldn’t be here,” she said.

It has not been all good. Ms. Chance said the drug caused such extreme pain at one point that “I called in the children and said, ‘I’m done, I can’t do this any more.’ ” But she had her dose reduced and took other medications for the pain.

In the trial, sponsored by Roche and led by Dr. Paul B. Chapman of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, 38 percent of participants had to stop taking the drug or lower the dose because of side effects, including rash and joint pain. Many patients get minor skin cancers that can be removed by dermatologists.

The trial of ipilimumab, paid for by Bristol-Myers, involved 502 patients with late-stage melanoma.

Last year at this conference, researchers presented results of a trial showing a survival advantage for patients who had undergone a previous treatment. The new trial of this drug, by contrast, involved patients who were getting treated for the first time.

While the extension of median survival of two months, from about 9 months to about 11 months, was less than some experts expected, researchers said the real benefit was that a small number of patients, perhaps 10 to 20 percent, could live a long time.

Because it unleashes the immune system, ipilimumab can have serious side effects. In the latest trial, a big one was liver damage.

A course of treatment of ipilimumab costs $120,000. The price of vemurafenib has not been announced, but is expected to be at least tens of thousands of dollars per year.

Doctors are eager to try the two drugs together. Roche and Bristol-Myers said Thursday that they would conduct such tests.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good job explaining signifcant potential harms of both drugs – something competitors didn’t do at all.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Complementary and alternative medicine options may help men manage premature ejaculation, according to a new review of existing research.

The improvements were small, and the studies were of varying quality, but preliminary evidence suggests that acupuncture, Chinese herbal medicine, Ayurvedic herbal medicine and a Korean topical cream may all have desirable effects, researchers conclude in the journal Sexual Medicine.

“There are a range of treatments available for premature ejaculation, including drug treatments, behavioral techniques and counseling, however, some men may not want to visit the doctor, take drugs long-term or be on a long wait list for counseling,” said lead author Katy Cooper of the University of Sheffield in the UK.

“It’s important to evaluate the evidence for other therapies,” she told Reuters Health by email. “To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to assess complementary and alternative medicine for premature ejaculation.”

According to the International Society for Sexual Medicine, premature ejaculation can be a lifelong problem, and this primary form of the problem is usually defined as ejaculation happening within one minute of initiating vaginal intercourse every time a man has ever had sex. A man’s “latency time” can also become reduced later in his sexual life, and this secondary form is usually defined as ejaculation within three minutes or less.

In the current study, researchers evaluated 10 randomized controlled trials that included comparisons either to another type of treatment or to a placebo, or dummy, treatment. Two studies were of acupuncture, five were of Chinese herbal medicine, one of Ayurvedic herbal medicine and two of Korean topical “severance secret” cream.

Together, the two acupuncture studies found that the treatment slightly increased intravaginal ejaculatory latency time (IELT) by about half a minute compared to placebo.

Chinese herbal medicine increased IELT by about two minutes, Ayurvedic herbal medicine increased IELT by nearly a minute and topical cream increased IELT by more than eight minutes.

In some instances, a combination of traditional and alternative options was the most effective. For example, Chinese medicine paired with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) increased IELT by two minutes longer than SSRIs alone and nearly three minutes longer than the Chinese medicine alone.

“There are no approved treatments for premature ejaculation,” said Donald Patrick, vice chair for research at the University of Washington in Seattle. “This is a common condition that has serious psychological effects on relationships,” said Patrick, who wasn’t involved in the study. “We need treatments to address it, and it should be treated with equal seriousness as erectile dysfunction.”

The prevalence of premature ejaculation is difficult to measure because of the differing definitions of the problem and some men’s reluctance to report it. Some studies suggest that between 20 and 30 percent of men report early ejaculation concerns, but the International Society for Sexual Medicine estimates that about 4 percent of men have a lifelong condition.

“Although it is not openly discussed in the media - at least not as much as erectile problems have been discussed in the post-Viagra era - numerous studies report men feel frustrated, depressed and anxious because of this problem,” said Ege Can Serefoglu of the Bagcilar Training and Research Hospital in Istanbul, Turkey.

The main limitation of the study is the underlying weakness of the studies evaluated. Bias was unclear in most of the studies, and only five used stopwatches to measure IELT, which is the “gold standard” for premature ejaculation studies, Patrick said.

In addition, the authors write, the studies are so different, it’s tough to draw conclusions about the different options. For example, the five Chinese medicine studies tested different substances, including Qilin pills, Yimusake and Uighur.

Some studies, but not all, discussed side effects such as gastrointestinal discomfort, dizziness, mild pain and decreased libido. When they were reported, the adverse effects were generally mild, the study team writes.

“Nowadays, I am encountering alternative medicine-obsessed patients more than I used to, and it doesn’t make sense to argue with them about the treatment they want,” Serefoglu told Reuters Health by email. “After all, the placebo is a well-known clinical phenomenon, and some of my patients report surprisingly favorable outcomes.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The report helpfully mentioned that “some studies, but not all, discussed side effects such as gastrointestinal discomfort, dizziness, mild pain and decreased libido. When they were reported, the adverse effects were generally mild.”
It would have been useful to note that the off-label use of SSRIs also involves some rate of adverse effects and that some foreign-sourced herbal treatments have been found to be adulterated with compounds from prescription drugs, and that quality control of herbal treatments is sometimes a problem.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Washington, DC -- Men can take birth control shots to prevent pregnancy in their female partners, according to a new study published in the Endocrine Society's Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism.

Researchers are still working to perfect the combination of hormonal contraceptives to reduce the risk of mild to moderate side effects, including depression and other mood disorders.

While women can choose from a number of birth control methods, men have few options to control their own fertility. Available methods for men include condoms, vasectomies and withdrawal.

Better birth control options are needed for men. In 2012, 40 percent of all pregnancies worldwide were unintended, according to the Guttmacher Institute.

"The study found it is possible to have a hormonal contraceptive for men that reduces the risk of unplanned pregnancies in the partners of men who use it," said one of the study's authors, Mario Philip Reyes Festin, MD, of the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland. "Our findings confirmed the efficacy of this contraceptive method previously seen in small studies."

The prospective Phase II single arm, multi-center study tested the safety and effectiveness of injectable contraceptives in 320 healthy men ages 18 to 45. The participants had all been in monogamous relationships with female partners between the ages of 18 and 38 for at least a year. The men underwent testing to ensure they had a normal sperm count at the start of the study.

The men received injections of 200 milligrams of a long-acting progestogen called norethisterone enanthate (NET-EN) and 1,000 milligrams of a long-acting androgen called testosterone undecanoate (TU) for up to 26 weeks to suppress their sperm counts. Healthcare professionals gave the men two injections every eight weeks. Participants initially provided semen samples after eight and 12 weeks in the suppression phase and then every 2 weeks until they met the criteria for the next phase. During this time, the couples were instructed to use other non-hormonal birth control methods.

Once a participant's sperm count was lowered to less than 1 million/ml in two consecutive tests, the couple was asked to rely on the injections for birth control. During this period known as the efficacy phase of the study, the men continued to receive injections every eight weeks for up to 56 weeks. Participants provided semen samples every eight weeks to ensure their sperm counts stayed low. Once the participants stopped receiving the injections, they were monitored to see how quickly their sperm counts recovered.

The hormones were effective in reducing the sperm count to 1 million/ml or less within 24 weeks in 274 of the participants. The contraceptive method was effective in nearly 96 percent of continuing users. Only four pregnancies occurred among the men's partners during the efficacy phase of the study.

Researchers stopped enrolling new participants in the study in 2011 due to the rate of adverse events, particularly depression and other mood disorders, reported by the participants. The men reported side effects including injection site pain, muscle pain, increased libido and acne. Twenty men dropped out of the study due to side effects.

Despite the adverse effects, more than 75 percent of participants reported being willing to use this method of contraception at the conclusion of the trial.

Of the 1,491 reported adverse events, nearly 39 percent were found to be unrelated to the contraceptive injections. These included one death by suicide which was assessed not to be related to the use of the drug. Serious adverse events that were assessed as probably or possibly related to the study included one case of depression, one intentional overdose of acetaminophen, and a man who experienced an abnormally fast and irregular heartbeat after he stopped receiving the injections.

"More research is needed to advance this concept to the point that it can be made widely available to men as a method of contraception," Festin said. "Although the injections were effective in reducing the rate of pregnancy, the combination of hormones needs to be studied more to consider a good balance between efficacy and safety."

The study, "Efficacy and Safety of an Injectable Combination Hormonal Contraceptive for Men," will be published online at http://press. , ahead of print.

Other authors of the study include: Hermann M. Behre of Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg in Halle, Germany; Michael Zitzmann of the University of Münster in Münster, Germany; Richard A. Anderson of The University of Edinburgh in Edinburgh, United Kingdom; David J. Handelsman of the University of Sydney and Concord Hospital in Sydney, Australia; Silvia W. Lestari of the University of Indonesia in Jakarta, Indonesia; Robert I. McLachlan of Monash Medical Centre in Melbourne, Australia; M. Cristina Meriggiola of the University of Bologna in Bologna, Italy; Man Mohan Misro of the National Institute of Health & Family Welfare in New Dehli, India; Gabriela Noe of the Instituto Chileno de Medicina Reproductiva in Santiago, Chile; Frederick C. W. Wu of Manchester Royal Infirmary in Manchester, U.K.; Ndema A. Habib and Kirsten M. Vogelsong of the World Health Organization of Geneva, Switzerland; and Marianne M. Callahan, Kim A. Linton and Doug S. Colvard of CONRAD, East Virginia Medical School, a reproductive health organization based in Arlington, VA.

The research was co-sponsored and funded by UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Program of Research, Development, and Research Training in Human Reproduction in Geneva, Switzerland, and CONRAD (using funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the U.S. Agency for International Development). The injectable hormones were provided by Schering AG, which has since merged with Bayer Pharma AG.

For more information on men's health, visit the Endocrine Society's centennial website.

Endocrinologists are at the core of solving the most pressing health problems of our time, from diabetes and obesity to infertility, bone health, and hormone-related cancers. The Endocrine Society is the world's oldest and largest organization of scientists devoted to hormone research and physicians who care for people with hormone-related conditions.

The Society, which is celebrating its centennial in 2016, has more than 18,000 members, including scientists, physicians, educators, nurses and students in 122 countries. To learn more about the Society and the field of endocrinology, visit our site at http://www. . Follow us on Twitter at @TheEndoSociety and @EndoMedia.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release discusses adverse effects. It says researchers stopped enrolling new participants in 2011 due to the rate of reported side events, particularly depression and other mood disorders. It also mentions that men reported having injection site pain, muscle pain, increased libido and acne, and that 20 men dropped out due to adverse effects. It also says serious adverse events that were assessed as probably or possibly related to the study included one case of depression, one intentional overdose of acetaminophen, and a man who experienced an abnormally fast and irregular heartbeat after he stopped receiving the injections.
Further, it quotes a researcher saying that “the combination of hormones needs to be studied more to consider a good balance between efficacy and safety.”
Despite the attention to side effects there were a few gaps. The release didn’t quantify the number of men who developed depression. It noted there was one suicide among the study group, but stated it was determined not related to the hormones. How was it determined that the injection did not contribute to the suicide when the hormone shots did contribute to mood disorders? The release doesn’t say.
The news release also doesn’t adequately explain the need to cancel the study due to harms. When compared to the side effects of other hormonal contraceptives used by women it appears to be safer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, April 19, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Taking aspirin regularly over several years may help prevent gastrointestinal cancers, a new study suggests.

There was a 20 percent lower risk of cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, especially in the colon and rectum, among people taking aspirin, said lead researcher Yin Cao, a postdoctoral research fellow at the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston.

But Cao doesn't think people should start taking aspirin to prevent cancer until more research is done. "The results of ongoing research to develop more tailored treatment based upon a personalized assessment of risks and benefits is critical before recommending aspirin for preventing cancer," she said.

Moreover, patients and their doctors need to consider the potential risks of taking aspirin, including stomach bleeding, Cao said.

However, "if considered alongside the known benefits of aspirin in the prevention of heart attacks and strokes, our data suggest the possibility that long-term regular aspirin use may have a significant benefit in prevention of the two leading causes of sickness and death in the U.S. and much of the world," she said.

The results of the study were to be presented Sunday at an American Association for Cancer Research meeting in Philadelphia. The data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

For the study, Cao and her colleagues collected data on 82,600 women enrolled in the Nurses' Health Study in 1980 and 47,650 men enrolled in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study in 1986. The researchers collected data on aspirin use, risk factors for cancer and diagnoses of cancer.

After up to 32 years of follow-up, about 20,400 women and 7,570 men developed cancer, the investigators found. Among men, prostate cancer was excluded.

Cao's team found that men and women who took a regular dose of aspirin (325 milligrams) two times a week or more had a lower risk of cancer overall than people who did not regularly take aspirin. The reduced risk was largely due to fewer cases of gastrointestinal cancers, including colon cancer, rectal cancer and esophageal cancer.

Regular aspirin use was not associated with a reduced risk of other cancers. Specifically, no link was found between aspirin use and a lower risk of breast cancer, advanced prostate cancer or lung cancer, the researchers said.

Moreover, the benefit of aspirin in reducing overall cancer risk appeared to depend on how much one took. So the more aspirin taken, the more the risk was reduced. Amounts ranged from less than one aspirin a week to 15 or more, the researchers said.

Getting the biggest benefit from aspirin required taking it for at least 16 years. The benefit was no longer seen within four years of stopping it, the researchers found. And the study only showed an association between aspirin use and gastrointestinal cancer risk, not a cause-and-effect relationship.

The association of aspirin with reduced cancer risk was the same for women and men regardless of race, history of diabetes, family history of cancer, weight, smoking, regular use of other painkillers or taking multivitamins, the study authors added.

Eric Jacobs, strategic director of pharmacoepidemiology at the American Cancer Society, said the new study "confirms the now well-established link between regular aspirin use and lower risk of developing certain cancers of the gastrointestinal tract -- cancers of the colon, rectum and esophagus."

Some, though not all, previous studies have indicated that aspirin might slightly lower risk of certain other cancers, including breast cancer, prostate cancer and lung cancer, he added.

"Although aspirin is recommended for most people who have had a heart attack, and has some benefits for cancer risk as well, at this point the American Cancer Society does not recommend that people use aspirin specifically to prevent cancer because it is not clear that the benefits with respect to cancer outweigh the risks," Jacobs said.

While not common, aspirin can cause serious, even occasionally fatal, stomach bleeding, even at low doses, he said.

"People who are uncertain about whether they should be using aspirin should talk to their health care provider, who knows their personal medical history and can help weigh their individual risks and benefits," Jacobs said.

Visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute for more on aspirin and cancer risk.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes prominently the possible harms: “While not common, aspirin can cause serious, even occasionally fatal, stomach bleeding, even at low doses, he said.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TITUSVILLE, N.J., May 5, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- The Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson today announced the results from two Phase 3 clinical studies of the investigational compound esketamine nasal spray in patients with treatment-resistant depression. These studies will be presented at the American Psychiatric Association Annual Meeting, taking place May 5-9 in New York, NY.

Data from a study in adults with treatment-resistant depression showed that flexibly dosed esketamine nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant demonstrated a statistically significant, clinically meaningful rapid reduction of depressive symptoms as compared to placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant. The study defined treatment-resistant as patients who had not responded to two or more currently available antidepressants of adequate dose and duration in the current episode of depression.

Data from a second study, in elderly patients aged 65 and older with treatment-resistant depression, which is the first study of its kind, showed treatment with flexibly dosed esketamine plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant demonstrated clinically meaningful effects compared to placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant. However, the study narrowly missed statistical significance for its primary efficacy endpoint.

If approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), esketamine would be one of the first new approaches to treat refractory major depressive disorder available to patients in the last 50 years.

"With about 30 percent of patients with major depression failing to respond to currently available antidepressants1, treatment-resistant depression represents a major public health need," said Husseini K. Manji, MD, Global Head, Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research & Development, LLC. "The positive Phase 3 results for esketamine nasal spray in adults with treatment-resistant depression are exciting, particularly as they mark the first time an antidepressant has achieved superiority versus an active comparator in any clinical trial for major depressive disorder. What makes this even more significant is that the response was rapid and this milestone was achieved in patients deemed to be treatment-resistant. We are also pleased with the clinically meaningful outcomes for esketamine nasal spray in elderly patients, a population that often has greater disability and lower response rates."

"There's a critical need for new, rapidly acting and effective treatment options for people with major depressive disorder who do not respond to existing therapies," said Mathai Mammen, M.D., Ph.D., Global Head, Janssen Research & Development, LLC. "Janssen is fully committed to exploring the newest science in the area of mood disorders and bringing these discoveries to patients in need."

Results of the Study in Adults with Treatment-Resistant Depression 

 In the Phase 3 study of adults with treatment-resistant depression, patients were randomized to flexibly dosed esketamine nasal spray (56 mg or 84 mg) added to a newly initiated oral antidepressant or placebo nasal spray added to a newly initiated oral antidepressant.

Primary Efficacy Endpoint

The primary efficacy endpoint, change from baseline in the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total score, demonstrated the statistically significant clinical improvement in patients' depressive symptoms for esketamine nasal spray plus an oral antidepressant at day 28 (Least Squares Mean Difference Standard Error from placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant: -4.0 [1.69], 95% Confidence Interval [CI]: -7.31, -0.64; one-sided p=0.010).

Secondary and Other Efficacy Endpoints

The first key secondary endpoint (onset of clinical response by 24 hours post-dose that is maintained through day 28) numerically favored esketamine nasal spray plus an oral antidepressant vs. placebo nasal spray plus an oral antidepressant, but did not meet statistical significance (1-sided p=0.161). The other two key secondary endpoints (Sheehan Disability Scale [SDS], a subject-reported outcome measure widely used and accepted for assessment of functional impairment and associated disability, and Patient Health Questionnaire-9 [PHQ-9], a self-report scale assessing depressive symptoms) could not be formally evaluated since onset of clinical response was not statistically significant. Among other endpoints, response rate was notable with 69.3% responding in the esketamine group vs. 52% in the placebo group at 28 days (response ≥ 50% improvement in MADRS from baseline). Remission rate (MADRS total score ≤12) at day 28 was 52.5% and 31.0% for the esketamine and placebo groups, respectively.

The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (>10%) reported in the esketamine group were metallic taste, nausea, vertigo, dizziness, headache, drowsiness, dissociation, blurred vision, paraesthesia (tingling sensation) and anxiety. The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (>10%) reported in the placebo group were metallic taste and headache.

Results of the Study in Elderly Patients with Treatment-Resistant Depression 

 Janssen conducted a separate Phase 3 study in elderly patients with treatment-resistant depression. Elderly populations with major depressive disorder are historically hard to treat and often have co-morbidities and long-standing depression. To improve tolerability, patients were given a lower starting dose (28 mg) of esketamine nasal spray (flexibly dosed at 28 mg, 56 mg or 84 mg) plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant or placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant.

Primary Efficacy Endpoint

Although statistical significance for the primary endpoint for the overall patient population studied was narrowly missed, results favored the esketamine nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant group (median unbiased estimate of the difference from placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant: -3.6, 95% CI: -7.20, 0.07; one-sided p=0.029). To put this into context, an analysis of placebo-controlled data from three prior studies conducted by Duru and Fantino determined that a minimum change in MADRS of 1.9 was clinically meaningful.2 In addition, the average difference is between 2-3 points for currently approved antidepressants vs. placebo.3

Safety results were consistent with previous studies of esketamine in younger adult populations. The most common treatment-emergent adverse events (>10%) reported in the esketamine group were dizziness, nausea, headache, fatigue, increased blood pressure, vertigo and dissociation. There were no treatment-emergent adverse events reported in >10% of patients in the placebo group.

Esketamine nasal spray has an acceptable safety and tolerability profile, based on the adverse event data from both Phase 3 studies. Adverse events and associated symptoms were seen predominately on the day of dosing and were generally transient and resolved on the day of dosing.

These findings represent two of the five Phase 3 studies that comprise Janssen's treatment-resistant depression program with esketamine nasal spray. The results from these studies will inform regulatory filings for esketamine nasal spray in treatment-resistant depression, for which Janssen has received Breakthrough Therapy Designations from the U.S. FDA. Data from other Phase 3 studies will be presented later in 2018.

In both Phase 3 studies, esketamine or placebo was provided in disposable nasal spray devices containing 200 μl of solution (i.e., two sprays), and administered under the supervision of a health care professional. A bittering agent was added to placebo to simulate the taste of esketamine, to help mask the treatment assignment.

The study in adults with treatment-resistant depression was a Phase 3, double-blind, active-control, flexibly dosed, multi-center study using blinded raters, conducted at 39 sites in Czech Republic, Germany, Poland, Spain and the United States from August 2015 to November 2017. The study enrolled adults with moderate-to-severe, non-psychotic, recurrent or persistent depression, and history of non-response to ≥2 antidepressants in the current episode of depression, with one of them assessed prospectively. Non-responders were randomized (1:1) to flexibly-dosed esketamine nasal spray (56 or 84 mg twice weekly) plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant (N=114) or placebo nasal spray plus a newly initiated oral antidepressant (N=109). The primary efficacy endpoint – change from baseline to day 28 in MADRS total score – was assessed among patients who received ≥1 dose of (nasal spray and oral) study medication by mixed-effects model using repeated measures using a one-sided significance level of 0.025. (5.69). For further information about this study, visit the ClinicalTrials.gov website.

The study in elderly patients with treatment-resistant depression was a Phase 3, double-blind, multicenter, active-controlled study. Patients ≥ 65 years of age were randomized 1:1 to either esketamine nasal spray plus a new oral antidepressant (N=72) or placebo nasal spray plus a new oral antidepressant (N=66). The primary endpoint was the change in the MADRS total score from day 1 (baseline) to day 28. Statistical analysis employed mixed-effects model repeated measures (MMRM), with a weighted combination test to account for an interim analysis for sample size re-estimation, using a one-sided significance level of 0.025. For further information about this study, visit the ClinicalTrials.gov website.

About Esketamine 

Esketamine nasal spray is an investigational compound being studied by Janssen Research & Development, LLC as part of a global development program. Esketamine is a non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, also known as a glutamate receptor modulator, thought to help restore synaptic connections in brain cells in people with major depressive disorder. It has a novel mechanism of action, meaning it works differently than currently available therapies for depression.

Esketamine received Breakthrough Therapy Designations from the U.S. FDA in November 2013 for treatment-resistant depression and in August 2016 for the indication of major depressive disorder with imminent risk for suicide.4

About Major Depressive Disorder

Major depressive disorder affects nearly 300 million people of all ages globally and is the leading cause of disability worldwide.5 Individuals with depression, including major depressive disorder, experience continuous suffering from a serious, biologically based disease which has a significant negative impact on all aspects of life, including quality of life and function.5 Although currently available antidepressants are effective for many patients, about one third of patients do not respond to treatment and are thought to have treatment-resistant depression.6

About the Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson

At the Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson, we are working to create a world without disease. Transforming lives by finding new and better ways to prevent, intercept, treat and cure disease inspires us. We bring together the best minds and pursue the most promising science.

We are Janssen. We collaborate with the world for the health of everyone in it. Learn more at www.janssen.com. Follow us at www.twitter.com/JanssenUS and www.twitter.com/JanssenGlobal.

This press release contains "forward-looking statements" as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 regarding product development and the potential benefits of esketamine. The reader is cautioned not to rely on these forward-looking statements. These statements are based on current expectations of future events. If underlying assumptions prove inaccurate or known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, actual results could vary materially from the expectations and projections of Janssen Research & Development, LLC and/or Johnson & Johnson. Risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: challenges and uncertainties inherent in product research and development, including the uncertainty of clinical success and of obtaining regulatory approvals; uncertainty of commercial success; competition, including technological advances, new products and patents attained by competitors; challenges to patents; manufacturing difficulties and delays; changes in behavior and spending patterns or financial distress of purchasers of health care products and services; changes to applicable laws and regulations, including global health care reforms; and trends toward health care cost containment. A further list and description of these risks, uncertainties and other factors can be found in Johnson & Johnson's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2017, including in Exhibit 99 thereto, and the company's subsequent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Copies of these filings are available online at www.sec.gov, www.jnj.com or on request from Johnson & Johnson. None of the Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies or Johnson & Johnson undertakes to update any forward-looking statement as a result of new information or future events or developments.
• National Institute of Mental Health. Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D) Study. Available at: http://www.nimh.nih.gov/about/director/2011/antidepressants-a-complicated-picture.shtml#_edn2. Accessed .
• The clinical relevance of changes in the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale using the minimum clinically important difference approach. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18377706. Accessed .
• Khin NA, et.al. "Exploratory analyses of efficacy data from major depressive disorder trials submitted to the US Food and Drug Administration in support of new drug applications," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. April, 2011. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21527123. Accessed .
• Johnson & Johnson Press Release. Esketamine Receives Breakthrough Therapy Designation from U.S. Food and Drug Administration for Major Depressive Disorder with Imminent Risk for Suicide. Available at: https://www.jnj.com/media-center/press-releases/esketamine-recieves-breakthrough-therapy-designation-from-us-food-and-drug-administration-for-major-depressive-disorder-with-imminent-risk-of-suicide. Accessed .
• Thase ME. Update on partial response in depression. J Clin Psychiatry. 2009;70[suppl 6]:4-9.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release discusses adverse effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Veterans Affairs database study of more than 83,000 patients found that men whose low testosterone was restored to normal through gels, patches, or injections had a lower risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from any cause, versus similar men who were not treated.

The study also found that men who were treated but did not attain normal levels did not see the same benefits as those whose levels did reach normal. The study was published online Aug. 6, 2015, in the European Heart Journal.

The findings may sway the ongoing debate over testosterone therapy's benefits and risks, especially for the heart. Studies over the past few years have yielded mixed results, although part of that might stem from differing patient populations and research methods.

For example, the new VA study excluded men with a history of heart attacks or strokes, although it did include those with existing heart disease. A much-cited VA database study that was published in JAMA in 2013 looked specifically at men with coronary artery disease; about 20 percent of the total study group of around 8,700 men had suffered a prior heart attack.

So far, the medical community lacks results from any definitive clinical trial that might provide clear guidance. Meanwhile, the Food and Drug Administration issued guidance earlier in 2015 advising clinicians about the over-use of testosterone therapy, and pointing to a possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke.

The new VA study is likely to draw attention because of its large size and relatively long follow-up period.

Dr. Rajat Barua, the paper's corresponding author, says the study is also noteworthy because of its finding that administering the right dose is critical: Treating "low T" but not restoring levels to normal doesn't appear to impart much benefit, at least in terms of cardiovascular risk. Testosterone isn't prescribed with the goal of improving heart health, but that is a consideration in many cases.

"It is the first study to demonstrate that significant benefit is observed only if the dose is adequate to normalize the total testosterone levels," Barua and his coauthors wrote. "Patients who failed to achieve the therapeutic range after testosterone replacement therapy did not see a reduction in [heart attack] or stroke and had significantly less benefit on mortality."

Barua is with the Kansas City (Mo.) VA Medical Center. He's also an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Kansas.

The study team looked at national data on more than 83,000 men with documented low testosterone, all age 50 or above, who received care in VA between 1999 and 2014.

The researchers divided the men into three clinical groups: those who were treated to the point where their total testosterone levels returned to normal (Group 1); those who were treated but without reaching normal (Group 2); and those who were untreated and remained at low levels (Group 3).

Importantly, all three groups were "propensity matched" so the comparisons would be between men with similar health profiles. The researchers took into account a wide array of factors that might affect cardiovascular and overall risk. They included, for example, age, body mass index, various chronic diseases, LDL cholesterol levels, and the use of aspirin, beta blockers, and statins.

The average follow-up across the groups ranged from 4.6 to 6.2 years.

The sharpest contrast emerged between Group 1 (those who were treated and attained normal levels) and Group 3 (those whose low testosterone went untreated). The treated men were 56 percent less likely to die during the follow-up period, 24 percent less likely to suffer a heart attack, and 36 percent less likely to have a stroke.

The differences between Group 1 and Group 2 (those who were treated but did not attain normal levels) were similar but less pronounced.

Little difference emerged between Groups 2 and 3, except for a slight benefit in survival for those who were treated.

Barua and colleagues say they don't know the exact reasons for testosterone's apparent benefits for the heart and overall survival. "The mechanisms for these effects remain speculative," they write. Possible explanations, they say, could involve body fat, insulin sensitivity, lipids, blood platelets, inflammation, or other biological pathways. More research is needed, they say, to clarify how testosterone affects the cardiovascular system.

While the new study results do seem to advocate for testosterone replacement therapy, Barua stresses the need for "appropriate screening, selection, dosing, and follow-up of patients to maximize the benefit of testosterone therapy."

The authors also caution that "off-label" use remains a concern. In other words, doctors should not write a prescription simply because an older man is complaining of symptoms such as low energy and low sex drive. According to the FDA, "Testosterone products are FDA-approved only for use in men who lack or have low testosterone levels in conjunction with an associated medical condition. Examples of these conditions include failure of the testicles to produce testosterone because of reasons such as genetic problems or chemotherapy. ... None of the FDA-approved testosterone products are approved for use in men with low testosterone levels who lack an associated medical condition."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions an FDA advisory about possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke with testosterone therapy. We’ll call this acknowledgment of possible risks good enough for a Satisfactory rating, although many other possible risks exist including exacerbating sleep apnea, skin reactions, and promoting noncancerous growths of the prostate. One of the researchers is quoted as urging individuals to get appropriate screening from a health professional before considering testosterone therapy, but the reader does not learn why this is important. Bottom line: we know the overall mortality was lower in the group that was treated to a normal testosterone level, so serious adverse events , within the time frame of the study, do not appear to outweigh benefits. However, prostate cancer, for instance, is slow growing and might not have manifested within the time frame studied.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Beyond The Nasty Needle: Trying To Make Vaccines More Comfy And Convenient

News this summer of a flu vaccine patch sparked a lot of chatter. Could getting vaccinated be as easy as putting on a bandage? Could there be fewer, or at least smaller, needles in our future?

Some companies and academic labs are working to make those things happen.

They're refining technologies that involve tiny needles, less than a millimeter long, and needle-free injectors that can send a dose of vaccine through your skin in a fraction of a second.

Some of these technologies are already available on the market, while others are still being tested.

A flu vaccine patch is not yet available to the public. But one version developed by Georgia Tech's Laboratory for Drug Delivery showed promising results in its first human clinical trial, according to a study published in The Lancet in June.

The patch, about the size of a small square bandage, has tiny, dissolvable needles filled with a dose of flu vaccine. It's placed on the arm and activated through pressure. The microneedles dissolve into the skin, releasing the vaccine.

In the study, 100 participants received either the flu vaccine patch, a standard flu shot or a placebo via a patch.

Six months later, no one involved in the study had gotten the flu. People in the microneedle patch groups reported some redness, itching and tenderness but no serious side effects.

People who received the flu patch had comparable immune responses to people who had gotten the flu shot.

About 70 percent of the patients in the study preferred the patch to the regular shot, says Yasmine Gomaa, the lab's associate director.

Now, Gomaa's lab is looking beyond the flu vaccine. She says the microneedle patch could be particularly helpful in developing countries because it uses a form of vaccines that doesn't need to be kept as cold as regular vaccines. It can be stored at temperatures as high as 104 degrees Fahrenheit for up to a year, she says.

And the patch can be administered by people who aren't trained health professionals. A number of the people in the flu patch study applied it to themselves.

In 2015, Georgia Tech and the pharmaceutical company Micron Biomedical won $2.5 million in grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to develop a patch for polio immunization.

Gomaa's hope is that vaccine patches will cost less than vaccinations do now.

A 2016 study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that the use of vaccine patches could save on cooling costs and could cut down on waste. Its analysis concluded that a dose of measles vaccine with the patch would cost just under $1, while a typical shot would cost $1.65. But that didn't take into account the costs of getting the patch to market.

The potential cost savings wouldn't happen until the patches were in "routine use," the CDC noted.

Others in the vaccine-delivery business are taking a different approach, using a new twist on a needle-free device called a jet injector that has been around for more than half a century.

Portal Instruments, a company that is developing jet injectors, uses technology based on work done by Ian Hunter at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

"Initially, we worked on microneedles," says the company's CEO Patrick Anquetil. "And then Ian realized that why don't we just remove the needle altogether? And that's how this project came to be."

Needle-free jet injectors were actually used in the 1960s in mass smallpox vaccination campaigns. As described by the CDC, these devices use a high-pressure, narrow stream of fluid to penetrate the skin. The diameter of the stream is comparable to a mosquito bite.

The devices were used to quickly vaccinate large numbers of people, including members of the armed forces.

Anquetil notes that the older devices sometimes made patients feel as if they had been punched.

"To create the jet, you have to instantaneously create 100 times more pressure than you've got in the tire of a car," he says. "Patients actually hated them because they were more painful than a needle and syringe."

"My 85-year-old neighbor still remembers how painful it was," says Ron Lowy, CEO of PharmaJet, a company that makes an FDA-approved jet injector that administers a flu vaccine.

The older devices had another problem. They used the same nozzle for multiple injections, leading to concerns about the transmission of bloodborne pathogens between patients.

Today's devices have made a lot of progress, Lowy says. Now, the syringe is changed for each patient and the injections are gentler.

"It feels like somebody snapped me with a rubber band," he says, adding that the injection happens too fast for some patients to register any sensation at all. It lasts about one-tenth of a second.

He says hundreds of thousands of people in the U.S. have already received the flu vaccine via one of PharmaJet's injectors.

"If you have your choice, you want to get poked with a needle or you want to try this? Most of the people say, 'Yeah, I'll try that,' " he says.

Cost remains an issue for some jet injectors. Portal is aiming to get its cost down to $3 or $4 per injection.

"In vaccines, what's really hard is that there's a very, very high volume, and you're competing with a needle and syringe, which is tremendously low cost," Anquetil says.

PharmaJet says the ability to give precise doses helps to save money. The company says its flu vaccine "starter kit," which can vaccinate 500 people, costs $900.

FluMist, an FDA-approved flu vaccine delivered through a nasal spray, was widely used in the U.S. and, at one point, was even the preferred method of vaccination for children.

Then last year, in a sharp turnaround, the CDC recommended that it not be used during the 2016-17 flu season after a study found it had not been very effective in the previous year, particularly among kids.

The vaccine's effectiveness was just 3 percent, so low that "no protective benefit could be measured" for children ages 2 to 17, the CDC said in a statement.

In contrast, the effectiveness of the flu shot was about 63 percent for kids in that age group.

AstraZeneca, the parent company behind FluMist, says the CDC's data contradicts data from several other studies, which show the vaccine was about 48 percent effective during the same flu season. And the same vaccine continues to be recommended and used in European Union markets, AstraZeneca says.

In the U.S., the CDC continues to recommend against the nasal spray vaccine for the upcoming flu season. AstraZeneca hopes to reverse that decision before flu season begins.

"We continue to pursue a broad-based investigation to identify potential causes of lower effectiveness" in recent years, the company said in a statement, adding that one of the four flu virus strains it used in the vaccine during the past two flu seasons may have been the problem.

The company has chosen a new strain of live virus that is similar to other strains that have proven effective in studies and clinical trials.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The focus of the article headline is convenience and comfort. It follows through on that focus by doing a fairly good job of addressing side effects of the various delivery mechanisms, though again, the information is somewhat uneven. The most thorough description of harms is provided in the flu patch section of the story, where we learn that participants in the clinical trial had some redness, itching and tenderness but no serious side effects. About the jet injection we learn it is much less painful than when it was used for smallpox vaccination back in the 1960s. The story also informs us that nozzles are changed between patients so the former problem with infection from using the same equipment has been resolved. No other harms (like the redness and itching associated with the patch, for example) are mentioned. The section of the story on nasal spray vaccines is short, and it doesn’t include any information about side effects or harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Medical Cannabis Significantly Safer for Elderly With Chronic Pain Than Opioids, According to Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Researchers

BEER-SHEVA, Israel...February 13 - Medical cannabis therapy can significantly reduce chronic pain in patients age 65 and older without adverse effects, according to researchers at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev (BGU) and the Cannabis Clinical Research Institute at Soroka University Medical Center.

The new study, published in The European Journal of Internal Medicine, found cannabis therapy is safe and efficacious for elderly patients who are seeking to address cancer symptoms, Parkinson's disease, post-traumatic stress disorder, ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, multiple sclerosis, and other medical issues.

"While older patients represent a large and growing population of medical cannabis users, few studies have addressed how it affects this particular group, which also suffers from dementia, frequent falls, mobility problems, and hearing and visual impairments," says Prof. Victor Novack, M.D., a professor of medicine in the BGU Faculty of Health Sciences (FOHS), and head of the Soroka Cannabis Clinical Research Institute. Novack is also the BGU Gussie Krupp Chair in Internal Medicine.

"After monitoring patients 65 and older for six months, we found medical cannabis treatment significantly relieves pain and improves quality of life for seniors with minimal side effects reported."

This older population represents a growing segment of medical cannabis users, ranging from approximately seven percent to more than 33 percent, depending on the country. Recent U.S. polls indicate Americans over 65 represent 14 percent of the total population and use more than 30 percent of all prescription drugs, including highly addictive painkillers.

BGU researchers surveyed 2,736 patients 65 years and older who received medical cannabis through "Tikun Olam," the largest Israeli medical cannabis supplier. More than 60 percent were prescribed medical cannabis due to the pain, particularly pain associated with cancer. After six months of treatment, more than 93 percent of 901 respondents reported their pain dropped from a median of eight to four on a 10-point scale. Close to 60 percent of patients who originally reported "bad" or "very bad" quality of life upgraded to "good" or "very good" after six months. More than 70 percent of patients surveyed reported moderate to significant improvement in their condition.

The most commonly reported adverse effects were dizziness (9.7 percent) and dry mouth (7.1 percent). After six months, more than 18 percent of patients surveyed had stopped using opioid analgesics or had reduced their dosage.

All patients received a prescription after consulting with a doctor who prescribed treatment. More than 33 percent of patients used cannabis-infused oil; approximately 24 percent inhaled therapy by smoking, and approximately six percent used vaporization.

While the researchers state their findings to date indicate cannabis may decrease dependence on prescription medicines, including opioids, more evidence-based data from this special, aging population is imperative.

The researchers in the study also include, Ran Abuhasira, a BGU Ph.D. candidate working in the Soroka Clinical Research Center, Lihi Bar-Lev Schleider of "Tikun Olam," and Prof. Raphael Mechoulam of Hebrew University. Prof. Novak is an advisor to the dean for Clinical Research in the FOHS at BGU. He is also the head of the Clinical Research Center and Research Authority at Soroka.

About American Associates, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev

American Associates, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev (AABGU) plays a vital role in sustaining David Ben-Gurion's vision: creating a world-class institution of education and research in the Israeli desert, nurturing the Negev community and sharing the University's expertise locally and around the globe. As Ben-Gurion University of the Negev (BGU) looks ahead to turning 50 in 2020, AABGU imagines a future that goes beyond the walls of academia. It is a future where BGU invents a new world and inspires a vision for a stronger Israel and its next generation of leaders. Together with supporters, AABGU will help the University foster excellence in teaching, research and outreach to the communities of the Negev for the next 50 years and beyond. Visit vision.aabgu.org to learn more.

AABGU, which is headquartered in Manhattan, has nine regional offices throughout the United States. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions the “most commonly reported side effects were dizziness (9.7%) and dry mouth (7.1%).”
It would have been useful to include this information from the study: Among the roughly 900 subjects who took the follow-up questionnaire at six months, almost one-third “reported at least one adverse event.” For about 10 percent of these subjects, they reported this adverse event as a 7 out of 10 on the severity scale.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental Ebola vaccine was highly protective against the deadly virus in a major trial in Guinea, according to results published today in The Lancet. The vaccine is the first to prevent infection from one of the most lethal known pathogens, and the findings add weight to early trial results published last year. [1]

The vaccine, called rVSV-ZEBOV [2], was studied in a trial involving 11,841 people in Guinea during 2015. Among the 5,837 people who received the vaccine, no Ebola cases were recorded 10 days or more after vaccination [3]. In comparison, there were 23 cases 10 days or more after vaccination among those who did not receive the vaccine.

The trial was led by the World Health Organization, together with Guinea's Ministry of Health and other international partners.

"While these compelling results come too late for those who lost their lives during West Africa's Ebola epidemic, they show that when the next Ebola outbreak hits, we will not be defenceless," said Dr Marie-Paule Kieny, WHO's Assistant Director-General for Health Systems and Innovation, and the study's lead author [4].

The vaccine's manufacturer, Merck, Sharpe & Dohme, this year received Breakthrough Therapy Designation from the United States Food and Drug Administration and PRIME status from the European Medicines Agency, enabling faster regulatory review of the vaccine once it is submitted.

Since Ebola virus was first identified in 1976, sporadic outbreaks have been reported in Africa. But the 2013-2016 West African Ebola outbreak, which resulted in more than 11,300 deaths, highlighted the need for a vaccine.

The trial took place in the coastal region of Basse-Guinée, the area of Guinea still experiencing new Ebola cases when the trial started in 2015. The trial used an innovative design, a so-called "ring vaccination" approach - the same method used to eradicate small pox.

When a new Ebola case was diagnosed, the research team traced all people who may have been in contact with that case within the previous 3 weeks, such as people who lived in the same household, were visited by the patient, or were in close contact with the patient, their clothes or linen, as well as certain "contacts of contacts". A total of 117 clusters (or "rings") were identified, each made up of an average of 80 people.

Initially, rings were randomised to receive the vaccine either immediately or after a 3-week delay, and only adults over 18 years were offered the vaccine. After interim results were published showing the vaccine's efficacy, all rings were offered the vaccine immediately and the trial was also opened to children older than 6 years.

In addition to showing high efficacy among those vaccinated, the trial also shows that unvaccinated people in the rings were indirectly protected from Ebola virus through the ring vaccination approach (so-called "herd immunity"). However, the authors note that the trial was not designed to measure this effect, so more research will be needed.

"Ebola left a devastating legacy in our country. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to developing a vaccine that will prevent other nations from enduring what we endured" said Dr KeÏta Sakoba, Coordinator of the Ebola Response and Director of the National Agency for Health Security in Guinea [4].

To assess safety, people who received the vaccine were observed for 30 minutes after vaccination, and at repeated home visits up to 12 weeks later. Approximately half reported mild symptoms soon after vaccination, including headache, fatigue and muscle pain but recovered within days without long-term effects. Two serious adverse events were judged to be related to vaccination (a febrile reaction and one anaphylaxis) and one was judged to be possibly related (influenza-like illness). All three recovered without any long term effects.

It was not possible to collect biological samples from people who received the vaccine in order to analyse their immune response. Other studies are looking at the immune response to the vaccine including one conducted in parallel to the ring trial among frontline Ebola workers in Guinea.

"This both historical and innovative trial was made possible thanks to exemplary international collaboration and coordination, the contribution of many experts worldwide, and strong local involvement," said Dr John-Arne Røttingen, Specialist Director at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, and the chairman of the study steering group [4].

In January, GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance provided US$5 million to Merck towards the future procurement of the vaccine once it is approved, prequalified and recommended by WHO. As part of this agreement, Merck committed to ensure that 300,000 doses of the vaccine are available for emergency use in the interim, and to submit the vaccine for licensure by the end of 2017. Merck has also submitted the vaccine to WHO's Emergency Use and Assessment Listing procedure, a mechanism through which experimental vaccines, medicines and diagnostics can be made available for use prior to formal licensure.

Additional studies are ongoing to provide more data on the safety of the vaccine in children and other vulnerable populations such as people with HIV. In case of Ebola flare-ups prior to approval, access to the vaccine is being made available through a procedure called "compassionate use" that enables use of the vaccine after informed consent. Merck and WHO's partners are working to compile data to support license applications.

The rapid development of rVSV-EBOV contributed to the development of WHO's R&D Blueprint, a global strategy to fast-track the development of effective tests, vaccines and medicines during epidemics.

Also published in The Lancet (embargo as above), is a phase 2 trial of a different Ebola vaccine candidate, the recombinant adenovirus type-5 Ebola vaccine. The trial was led by the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology and was conducted in Sierra Leone in 2015. It involved 500 healthy participants, followed for 6 months - 250 were given a high dose vaccine, 125 a low-dose and 125 a placebo. The study found that the vaccine was safe and induced an immune response that peaked at 28 days, but decreased during the six months post injection. One serious adverse event was reported, in an individual with a history of asthma. Further research on this vaccine is needed in order to assess its efficacy.

The rVSV-ZEBOV trial is funded by WHO, with support from the Wellcome Trust, the United Kingdom Department for International Development, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Norwegian Institute of Public Health through the Research Council of Norway, the Canadian Government through the Public Health Agency of Canada, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, International Development Research Centre and Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development and Médecins Sans Frontières.

The trial team includes experts from The University of Bern, the University of Florida, the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Public Health England, the European Mobile Laboratories among others. The trial was designed by a group of experts including the late Professor Donald A. Henderson of John Hopkins University, who led the WHO smallpox eradication effort by using the ring vaccination strategy.

[1] http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)61117-5/abstract 

[2] VSV-EBOV was developed by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The vaccine was licensed to NewLink Genetics, who in turn licensed it to Merck & Co. The vaccine works by replacing a gene from a harmless virus known as vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) with a gene encoding an Ebola virus surface protein. The vaccine does not contain any live Ebola virus. Earlier trials have shown the vaccine to be protective in animals, and be safe and produce an immune response in humans. 

[3] Analysis only included cases occurring 10 days after receiving the vaccine to account for the incubation period of the Ebola virus. 

[4] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in the text of the Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release also accurately quantifies the harms associated with this vaccine, noting that more than half of those vaccinated reported mild side effects, including short-term headaches, fatigue and muscle pain. The release also identified two serious negative reactions (a high fever and an allergic reaction) associated with the vaccination and a flu-like illness that might have been a result of the vaccine. This is a particularly strong point of the release in that many releases on drug/vaccine studies don’t quantify the adverse event rates very clearly or completely.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Contrary to a widely promoted theory, B vitamins do not cut the risk for heart attacks or strokes, according to two large new studies.

The findings, released yesterday, are the latest in a series of recent studies that have found vitamins and other dietary supplements fail to have the health benefits they are touted for.

The new findings undermine a theory that taking B vitamins to reduce levels of an amino acid in the blood called homocysteine could protect against heart attacks and strokes. Previous research had indicated people with high homocysteine levels were at greater risk.

Although the new studies did show that the vitamins cut homocysteine levels, that did not translate into a reduction in the risk for heart attacks or strokes.

In the first study, Eva Lonn of McMaster University in Canada and her colleagues gave 5,522 Americans and Canadians who had heart disease or diabetes either the supplements or a placebo for five years. Although homocysteine levels among those taking the supplements fell, they were no less likely to die from a heart attack or stroke, the researchers found.

In the second study, Kaare Harald Bonaa of the University of Tromso in Norway and colleagues researchers gave 3,749 patients who had had a heart attack within the previous week the vitamins or a placebo for more than three years on average. Again, while those receiving the supplements had lower homocysteine levels, they were no less likely to have another heart attack or a stroke, or to die from heart disease.

The studies, released early by the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with their presentation at an American College of Cardiology meeting in Atlanta, confirm the results of another large study that was published in 2004 in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

"The consistency among the results lead to the unequivocal conclusion that there is no clinical benefit of the use of folic acid and vitamin B12 (with or without the addition of vitamin B6) in patients" with heart disease, wrote Joseph Loscalzo of the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston in an editorial that will be published with the studies.

The Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group representing dietary supplement makers, said the findings did not rule out the possibility that the vitamins may reduce the risk for heart disease among healthy people.

"These studies did not test whether B vitamins used by healthy people can help keep them healthy. Instead, they looked at whether B vitamins can treat or reverse heart disease in people who already have it. Vitamins should not be expected to perform like drugs -- their greatest promise is in prevention," said Annette Dickinson in a written statement.

Kilmer McCully of the V.A. Boston Healthcare System in West Roxbury, who proposed the homocysteine theory, agreed, adding that more research is needed to understand the exact role of the amino acid in heart disease.

"You really can't deny that homocysteine is involved in the disease process," McCully said in a telephone interview. "There are hundreds, if not thousands, of papers showing that."

But Steven E. Nissen, president of the American College of Cardiology, said the findings should end debate about the theory, which had already lost credibility among many scientists. "The homocysteine theory really isn't getting much attention anymore," he said.

The findings follow a number of disappointing studies testing vitamins and other dietary supplements for health reasons. Recent studies have failed to find a clear benefit for glucosamine and chondroitin for arthritis, saw palmetto for prostate problems and echinacea for the common cold.

Another study presented at the cardiology meeting did surprise researchers when it did not find any benefit to combining the blood-thinner Plavix with aspirin for preventing heart attacks, strokes or deaths in heart patients. Earlier research had indicated that the combination would be effective. The new study, involving more than 15,000 high-risk patients, did not find any overall benefit and even suggested the combination may be dangerous for some patients.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There is no discussion of any harms associated with consumption of vitamin B supplements, although such harms would occur from vitamin B intake unlike that studied, so this gets a satisfactory grade. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An analysis of two influential studies of prostate cancer screening concludes that the much-debated test “significantly” reduces deaths from the disease, suggesting that current recommendations against routine PSA screening might be steering men away from a lifesaving procedure.

The analysis, published Monday in Annals of Internal Medicine, drew wildly different reactions, as is often the case with research on PSA screenings. Some experts in cancer screening and statistics said its novel approach was “on shaky ground” and used a “completely unverifiable” methodology that they had “never seen before,” but others praised its “intriguing and innovative approach.” There was one area of agreement, however: “I imagine it’s going to generate some buzz,” said biostatistician Ted Karrison of the University of Chicago.

If the new analysis is correct, one of the influential PSA studies, called PLCO, reduced deaths from prostate cancer by 27 percent to 32 percent, not the zero percent that PLCO researchers themselves found. For a man in the U.S., the risk of dying of prostate cancer is about 2.5 percent. A mortality reduction of 30 percent would lower the death rate to 1.75 percent, said epidemiologist Ruth Etzioni of Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, the study’s senior author.

“If a screening test reduces cancer mortality by 20 percent, it’s considered a successful test,” Etzioni said. “I think the [prostate-cancer] mortality reduction we calculate is a significant benefit. This is a screening test that saves lives.”

Those gains come at some cost to health, though: For every life saved, she estimated, five men will be told they have cancer when in fact their abnormal cells would never grow, spread, or harm them. In other estimates, such “overdiagnoses” outnumber lives saved by 50-to-1.

The new study lands amid another shift in how experts view PSA screening, which measures blood levels of a molecule sometimes associated with prostate cancer. In 2012 the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, whose recommendations help determine that procedures insurance should cover, recommended against routine PSA tests because of their many risks and tiny benefits. Among other drawbacks, the tests lead to overdiagnosis (meaning a biopsy finds malignant cells but they are so innocuous they would never harm, let alone kill, the man) as well as incontinence and impotence from treatment (including of harmless cancers).

In April, however, the task force proposed instead that men aged 55 to 69 discuss PSA’s pros and cons with their doctor and then decide what to do, factoring in that if 1,000 men get regular PSA screening for a decade it will save about one life. (Older and younger men are still advised not to have routine screening.)

The rationale for the re-analysis led by Etzioni is that the PLCO study was a bit of a mess. It assigned half of its nearly 77,000 participants, men ages 55 to 74, to have yearly PSA tests and the other half to not do so. But 46 percent of the men in the no-PSA group had yearly PSAs anyway. As a result, when researchers counted deaths in each group, it wasn’t a clean comparison: Rather than comparing screened to unscreened men, they were comparing assigned-to-screening men to not-assigned-to-screening men.

The finding that assigned-to-screening men were no more likely to avoid death from prostate cancer might therefore have been because their screening behavior wasn’t different enough from the “unscreened” (but in fact partly screened) men’s, not because PSA screening doesn’t save lives.

In an effort to untangle that possibility, Etzioni and 21 co-authors from 10 countries created multiple mathematical models. They all rely on estimates of “lead time,” or how much sooner a cancer is detected because of PSA instead of because symptoms are detected. The models incorporated the records of all the PLCO men and ignored which group they’d been assigned to.

Bottom line: Screened men’s cancers were detected earlier than unscreened men’s, and more frequent screening advanced detection more. That moved some prostate cancers from too-advanced-to-treat to treatable, reducing prostate cancer mortality by 27 percent to 32 percent over 11 years, Etzioni and her colleagues conclude.

Researchers not involved in the study weren’t convinced. “The concern is that men in the no-screening group but who chose to get screened anyway might differ in important ways from men who stayed with no-screening,” Karrison said. They might be more health conscious or conscientious, or have other traits associated with longevity. If so, then those traits, not screening, might be responsible for their lower risk of dying from prostate cancer. Two prominent experts in cancer prevention and statistics agreed, but said they did not want to be publicly identified as criticizing the new analysis because some of its authors are colleagues of theirs.

Dr. Kenneth Lin of Georgetown University Medical Center, a former staffer at the USPSTF, said crediting PSA tests with reducing prostate cancer mortality by around 30 percent was probably an overstatement, especially since mathematical models are only models. An earlier one for the PLCO study concluded that more men died in its screening group than in the don’t-get-screened group. “Models are models,” Lin said. “No matter how sophisticated, they shouldn’t trump data from real people who participated in the randomized trials” — which in PLCO found zero lives saved from PSA screening.

A researcher associated with the Preventive Services Task Force, but who was not permitted to speak to reporters while the group is finalizing its PSA recommendation, said the panel would incorporate the new paper in its analysis. “But honestly,” he said, “I don’t know that this adds a great deal to our understanding.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Drawing from information produced by the USPSTF, the article concluded that the gains in prostate cancer detection “come at some cost to health, though: For every life saved, five men will be told they have cancer when in fact their abnormal cells would never grow, spread, or harm them. In other estimates, such “overdiagnoses” outnumber lives saved by 50-to-1.”
The one harm that is often overlooked in widely-promoted screening programs is the psychological harm that perfectly healthy people may experience when they have had a “cancer scare,” and that even though their life is unlikely to be saved, the worry, anxiety, depression and angst do exact a substantial life-altering toll that goes unmeasured.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It's pretty well known to doctors that the most successful treatment for obesity is surgery, especially the gastric bypass operation. But here's something the medical world is just realizing: that the gastric bypass operation has other even more dramatic effects. It can force type 2 diabetes into almost instant remission and it appears to reduce the risk of cancer.

Surgeons have been performing bariatric, or weight loss operations since the 1950s, but they're much safer than they used to be. They're typically done laparoscopically now, where doctors use tiny surgical tools and video cameras instead of making big, deep incisions.

Despite the increase in obesity, only a small number of people have had the gastric bypass operation.

met some people who were once morbidly obese.

There was Tony Sideman, who underwent surgery in April 2007 and has lost 140 pounds; there was Janet Rovak, who lost 90 pounds in the eight months since her surgery; and there was Travis Goodbou, who lost 260 pounds in the seven months since he underwent the operation.

Dr. Neil Hutcher from Richmond, Va. has performed more than 3,000 bypass surgeries. Asked how many people gain the weight back, Dr. Hutcher tells Stahl, "You know I think when you're dealing with an incurable disease that kills many people, if you have an 85 to 90 percent success rate, that's pretty darn good."

"Is that what you have?" Stahl asks.

There's no diet, no exercise regimen, and no pill with a success rate like that. These patients lose a ton of weight and keep it off.

Here's how Hutcher does the surgery: first, he sections off a small pouch of the upper part of the stomach, which is then attached to a lower part of the small intestine, bypassing most of the stomach, so that there's not a lot of room for food.

It used to be that roughly one in 100 people died from this operation. Hutcher says it's now about one in 1,000, which makes it less deadly than most major surgeries.

"It's less than gall bladder surgery. It's about one-tenth of cardiac surgery," he explains.

It's safer because of new surgical techniques which have also made it more effective. For instance, they can make the stomach pouch smaller than they used to.

"Even if I wanted to eat a whole cheesecake, my stomach is very tiny. It holds four ounces max, stretched to the max. And that's not even one piece of cheesecake," a female patient explained.

A big reason the operation works is because it seems to suppress appetite. "If you listen to your patients, they come back and they say, 'Doctor, you put the fire out,'" Hutcher says.

"When you see a sign for fast food or…she's already shaking her head at me," Stahl asked a patient.

"Don't want it," the female patient replied. "I used to crave sweets all the time. I couldn't go past the gift shop at work without getting a candy bar. Now I go past it and I never give it a thought."

Paul Delios of Saugus, Mass. has lost 90 pounds. He owns a doughnut shop with his siblings, but he's able to resist the cravings. "Before I'd have cravings for everything. Now I really don't," he told Stahl.

For most patients the cravings really do disappear. One theory is that's because the operation suppresses the levels of a stomach hormone called "grelin" that activates the sensation of hunger.

Yet most people who have this operation do not get skinny. Dr. David Cummings, an expert on appetite at the University of Washington, says as a rule these patients end up just one third lighter.

"Most people with severe obesity who undergo gastric bypass do not become fully normal, in terms of body weight. They go from severely obese to mildly obese, or from obese to overweight. But nevertheless it's an enormous change," Dr. Cummings explains.

And not just in terms of weight loss. Dr. Hutcher says the operation itself can take type 2 diabetes - which has ballooned in this country - and throw it into complete remission.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The segment mentions some harms of the surgery, including death, depression and suicide. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Rydapt (midostaurin) for the treatment of adult patients with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) who have a specific genetic mutation called FLT3, in combination with chemotherapy. The drug is approved for use with a companion diagnostic, the LeukoStrat CDx FLT3 Mutation Assay, which is used to detect the FLT3 mutation in patients with AML.

 

AML is a rapidly progressing cancer that forms in the bone marrow and results in an increased number of white blood cells in the bloodstream. The National Cancer Institute estimated that approximately 19,930 people would be diagnosed with AML in 2016 and 10,430 were projected to die of the disease.

“Rydapt is the first targeted therapy to treat patients with AML, in combination with chemotherapy,” said Richard Pazdur, M.D., acting director of the Office of Hematology and Oncology Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and director of the FDA’s Oncology Center of Excellence. “The ability to detect the gene mutation with a diagnostic test means doctors can identify specific patients who may benefit from this treatment.”

Rydapt is a kinase inhibitor that works by blocking several enzymes that promote cell growth. If the FLT3 mutation is detected in blood or bone marrow samples using the LeukoStrat CDx FLT3 Mutation Assay, the patient may be eligible for treatment with Rydapt in combination with chemotherapy.

The safety and efficacy of Rydapt for patients with AML were studied in a randomized trial of 717 patients who had not been treated previously for AML. In the trial, patients who received Rydapt in combination with chemotherapy lived longer than patients who received chemotherapy alone, although a specific median survival rate could not be reliably estimated. In addition, patients who received Rydapt in combination with chemotherapy in the trial went longer (median 8.2 months) without certain complications (failure to achieve complete remission within 60 days of starting treatment, progression of leukemia or death) than patients who received chemotherapy alone (median three months).

Common side effects of Rydapt in patients with AML include low levels of white blood cells with fever (febrile neutropenia), nausea, inflammation of the mucous membranes (mucositis), vomiting, headache, spots on the skin due to bleeding (petechiae), musculoskeletal pain, nosebleeds (epistaxis), device-related infection, high blood sugar (hyperglycemia) and upper respiratory tract infection. Rydapt should not be used in patients with hypersensitivity to midostaurin or other ingredients in Rydapt. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not take Rydapt because it may cause harm to a developing fetus or a newborn baby. Patients who experience signs or symptoms of lung damage (pulmonary toxicity) should stop using Rydapt.

Rydapt was also approved today for adults with certain types of rare blood disorders (aggressive systemic mastocytosis, systemic mastocytosis with associated hematological neoplasm or mast cell leukemia). Common side effects of Rydapt in these patients include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, swelling (edema), musculoskeletal pain, abdominal pain, fatigue, upper respiratory tract infection, constipation, fever, headache and shortness of breath.

The FDA granted this application Priority Review, Fast Track (for the mastocytosis indication) and Breakthrough Therapy (for the AML indication) designations.

The FDA granted the approval of Rydapt to Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. The FDA granted the approval of the LeukoStrat CDx FLT3 Mutation Assay to Invivoscribe Technologies Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release effectively reports possible side effects experienced by AML patients receiving Rydapt, including “low levels of white blood cells with fever (febrile neutropenia), nausea, inflammation of the mucous membranes (mucositis), vomiting, headache, spots on the skin due to bleeding (petechiae), musculoskeletal pain, nosebleeds (epistaxis), device-related infection, high blood sugar (hyperglycemia) and upper respiratory tract infection.”  It also warns women who are pregnant or breastfeeding to avoid taking Rydapt.  It also points out that the FDA approved the use of Rydapt for other patients with “certain types of rare blood disorders” and provides a list of possible side effects they might experience.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Walnuts have long been touted as a healthy, whole food, but new research just upped the homely nut's reputation another notch.

In a study by researchers from the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona and Loma Linda University, more than 700 older, healthy adults were asked to add either a handful of walnuts to their daily diets or to follow their normal diet without eating nuts.

After one year, both groups experienced minimal body weight, triglyceride, and HDL cholesterol changes, but the walnut-eaters had significant reductions in LDL cholesterol ("bad" cholesterol) compared to the nut-free control group.

The research shows the well-known cholesterol-lowering effect of eating walnuts works equally well in the elderly, even in the long term, the authors reported at the Experimental Biology conference in San Diego.

"Given walnuts are a high-energy food, a prevailing concern has been that their long-term consumption might be associated with weight gain," said study author Dr. Emilio Ros, director of the Lipid Clinic, Endocrinology & Nutrition Service at the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, in a press statement. ""It's encouraging to see that eating walnuts may benefit this particular population."

Other walnut studies presented at the conference, funded in part by the California Walnut Commission, suggested the omega-3 fatty acid-rich nut may also benefit gut bacteria and help reduce inflammation.

Elisabetta Politi, nutrition director of the Duke Diet and Fitness Center at Duke University, said, "We advocate that people eat nuts, including walnuts, because they are high in healthy fat, low in carbohydrates and a good source of protein."

Politi said a serving of walnuts is about 14 halves, which adds up to 180 calories. They're rich in fiber, folic acid, and potassium. Walnuts are especially heart healthy because they have more polyunsaturated fat than almonds, cashews, peanuts, pecans, pistachios, and macadamia nuts per serving. Walnut oil can be a good alternative too, in dressings and for light basting, Politi said.

It's still important to remember portion control, especially for people on weight loss programs, warned Politi.

"Try a serving in a snack bag. Eat walnuts mindfully," she said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The only harm mentioned is that walnuts can cause weight gain because they are high in calories. Because walnuts are a common food, there are no real expected harms except for those who are allergic to them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A therapy-animal trend grips the United States. The San Francisco airport now deploys a pig to calm frazzled travelers. Universities nationwide bring dogs (and a donkey) onto campus to soothe students during finals. Llamas comfort hospital patients, pooches provide succor at disaster sites and horses are used to treat sex addiction.

And that duck on a plane? It might be an emotional-support animal prescribed by a mental health professional.

The trend, which has accelerated hugely since its initial stirrings a few decades ago, is underpinned by a widespread belief that interaction with animals can reduce distress — whether it happens over brief caresses at the airport or in long-term relationships at home. Certainly, the groups offering up pets think this, as do some mental health professionals. But the popular embrace of pets as furry therapists is causing growing discomfort among some researchers in the field, who say it has raced far ahead of scientific evidence.

Earlier this year in the Journal of Applied Developmental Science, an introduction to a series of articles on “animal-assisted intervention” said research into its efficacy “remains in its infancy.” A recent literature review by Molly Crossman, a Yale University doctoral candidate who recently wrapped up one study involving an 8-year-old dog named Pardner, cited a “murky body of evidence” that sometimes has shown positive short-term effects, often found no effect and occasionally identified higher rates of distress.

Overall, Crossman wrote, animals seem to be helpful in a “small-to-medium” way, but it’s unclear whether the critters deserve the credit or something else is at play.

“It’s a field that has been sort of carried forward by the convictions of practitioners” who have seen patients’ mental health improve after working with or adopting animals, said James Serpell, director of the Center for the Interaction of Animals and Society at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine. “That kind of thing has almost driven the field, and the research is playing catch-up. In other words, people are recognizing that anecdote isn’t enough.”

Using animals in mental health settings is nothing new. In the 17th century, a Quaker-run retreat in England encouraged mentally ill patients to interact with animals on its grounds. Sigmund Freud often included one of his dogs in psychoanalysis sessions. Yet the subject did not become a research target until the American child psychologist Boris Levinson began writing in the 1960s about the positive effect his dog Jingles had on patients.

But the evidence to date is problematic, according to Crossman’s review and others before it. Most studies had small sample sizes, she wrote, and an “alarming number” did not control for other possible reasons for a changed stress level, such as interaction with the animal’s human handler. Studies also tend to generalize across animals, she noted: If participants are measurably soothed by one golden retriever, that doesn’t mean another dog — or another species — will evoke the same response.

Even so, media headlines are often about the happiness bounce. Hal Herzog, a Western Carolina University psychologist who has long studied human-animal interactions, recalls a 2015 study on the health benefits for children of having a pet dog. “Here’s a reason to get a puppy,” NBC announced. “Kids with pets have less anxiety.”

That’s actually not what the study concluded. The authors did find that children with dogs had lower anxiety based on screening scores than children without dogs. Still, they cautioned that “this study does not answer whether pet dogs have direct effects on children’s mental health or whether other factors associated with acquisition of a pet dog benefit their mental health.”

It was a classic case of conflating correlation and causation, which Herzog says is common. Cherry-picked positive results also are a problem, as he says happens in promotional materials from the Human-Animal Bond Research Initiative (HABRI). The pet-industry backed organization funds research on the topic.

“The number of papers I see that start out, ‘It is now well-established that there are health benefits from owning pets’ — that drives me crazy,” Herzog said. “Yes, there’s literature that supports that. But there’s also literature that doesn’t find that.”

HABRI Executive Director Steven Feldman takes a more positive view of the science while acknowledging that more research needs to be done. “Just like getting vegetables and getting exercise, I would say having animals in our lives is also an essential element of human wellness,” he said.

To many animal lovers and pet owners, the back-and-forth might sound horribly wonky. There’s something intuitive about the good feelings animals give us. Why over-analyze it?

Alan Beck does not disagree. Beck, who directs the Center of the Human-Animal Bond at Purdue University, cites one common theory for why animals might be therapeutic. It’s called the biophilia hypothesis, and it argues that humans evolved a built-in need to affiliate with other living beings.

“Throughout history, animals gave us some comfort. So if it works for you and me in a relatively normal environment, maybe it has a special role for someone who has a depression and stress disorder — that just makes sense,” he said. “The literature does show it’s not bad. And that’s just as important.”

Focusing too much on scientific support sometimes feels like a form of “physics envy,” Beck added, “where you try to quantify everything without appreciating it.”

But there are good reasons for rigorous research on animals and mental health. In 2012, the Department of Veterans Affairs said it would not cover costs of service dogs for veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder, citing “a lack of evidence to support a finding of mental health service dog efficacy.” The department is now in the midst of a multiyear study on the topic, which could lead to government funding for these pooches.

Another reason, the scientists say, is for the animals’ sake. Crossman pointed to a 2014 incident at Washington University in St. Louis as an example of animal therapy gone wrong. A bear cub brought to campus during finals week nipped some students, causing a rabies scare that almost ended with the animal being euthanized. More generally, Serpell said, the popular idea that pets make you happier “is not a harmless distortion. … If the public believes that getting an animal is going to be good for them, many times an unsuitable person will get an unsuitable animal, and it doesn’t work out well for either.”

The research is getting stronger, in part because funding is growing — from HABRI as well as from a public-private partnership between the National Institutes of Health and the Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition. Crossman’s recent study at the Yale Innovative Interactions Lab was among the work being supported.

It relied not just on the Labrador retriever Pardner but seven other certified therapy dogs. Several times a month over much of the past year, they hung out at the university for 15-minute sessions with children who had just finished two stressful tasks: spontaneously crafting stories and telling them to strangers, followed by doing math problems.

The strangers were the researchers, and their mission was to assess whether the kids, ages 10 to 13, would find their time with the dogs to be therapeutic. The study was designed to avoid some of the pitfalls that Crossman has seen elsewhere, which is why some of the 78 young participants got to play only with a fuzzy blanket — because tactile stimulation is known to reduce stress — and why others simply waited for the 15 minutes.

“Without the controls, the changes could be due to all kinds of things, like the fact that lots of time has passed,” Crossman said. “Kids are actually pretty good at coping.”

The children completed questionnaires to assess their mood and anxiety before and after; spit samples, to measure the “stress hormone” cortisol, were taken at three points. At the end, all the kids got a “junior scientist” certificate, lots of praise and an open play session with the dogs.

Crossman, who emphasizes that she is an animal lover, declined to reveal the findings before they’re published. But “hopefully” they will show that dogs can affect children’s stress, she said — before quickly offering a researcher’s clarification.

“I say ‘hopefully’ not just because I think it works or hope it does, but because these programs are used so widely,” she explained. “Kids are already participating in this on a huge scale. Ideally, the order goes the other way around: We test the idea, and then we implement.”

These states have the fattest pets — and they might surprise you

Long before they conquered the Internet, cats took over the world

A kitten nursery saves tiny lives in a city aiming to become ‘no kill’

Bear breaks into house, plays the piano but not very well
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This was a tough call for us: Harms are discussed, but briefly and anecdotally. The brief portion comes in the same quote mentioned above, noting that the body of evidence regarding therapy animals “sometimes has shown positive short-term effects, often found no effect and occasionally identified higher rates of distress” (emphasis added). A little more information there would be welcome. There’s also the issue of immunosuppressed patients coming into contact with therapy animals, and possible harm to the animals, who could be over-worked or subjected to aggressive or harmful treatment from even well-meaning people.
Still, some harms are at least acknowledged.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A music legend fights Alzheimer's disease on his unforgettable farewell tour. CNN Films Presents:" Glen Campbell ... I'll Be Me ," Saturday, November 7, at 8 p.m. ET.

(CNN) Over the years, resveratrol, an antioxidant found in grapes, chocolate and red wine, has been touted as a possible antidote to Alzheimer's disease, cancer, diabetes and many other conditions. Now, the first study in people with Alzheimer's suggests that the compound, when taken in concentrated doses, may actually have benefit in slowing progression of this disease.

Researchers at 21 medical centers across the United States looked at the safety and effectiveness of taking high doses of resveratrol in an experimental pill -- equal to the amount found in 1,000 bottles of red wine -- in people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's.

The researchers looked at several biomarkers of Alzheimer's, and found that people who took up to four pills a day for a year had higher levels of amyloid-beta proteins in their spinal fluid than those who took a placebo (control) pill.

Although accumulation of amyloid-beta in the brain is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease, patients actually have lower levels of this protein outside of the brain. The study finding suggests that resveratrol could help change the balance from amyloid-beta buildup in the brain to circulating protein in the body.

Even if concentrated forms of resveratrol pills like the kind used in this study were available, it's too soon to recommend going out and getting some just yet.

"The study is encouraging enough that we should certainly go ahead and do a [larger] clinical trial because we showed that it is safe and does have significant effects on Alzheimer's biomarkers," said Dr. R. Scott Turner, professor of neurology at Georgetown University Medical Center and lead investigator of the study, which was published on Friday in the journal Neurology.

The main goal of the current study, which included 119 patients, was to find out whether high doses of resveratrol could be safe. The only small concern they found was that patients taking resveratrol lost about two pounds during the one-year study, and weight loss is already a problem with Alzheimer's, Turner said. In comparison, the control group gained about 1 pound.

Much more research is needed

The study was not big enough to answer some important questions, such as whether patients taking resveratrol actually had lower levels of amyloid-beta plaques in their brain, and most importantly, whether they experienced less decline in their mental faculties.

A large, phase 3 clinical trial getting at these issues could start in as soon as a year, Turner said. (The current study was a phase 2 trial, typically meant to evaluate safety and get an early look at efficacy of a new drug.)

Even for the relatively small number of participants in the study, the researchers did see indication that resveratrol could improve cognition. Patients in this group had slight improvements in their ability to carry out daily tasks, such as remembering to brush their teeth. And anecdotally, patients who took resveratrol told the researchers that they felt like they were maintaining their mental ability. (Neither the participants nor the researchers knew who was taking resveratrol and who was taking placebo.)

"To really get a better feel of how effective this could be you really need to do larger studies for longer periods of time (such as several years)," said James A. Hendrix, director of global science initiatives at the Alzheimer's Association, a research and advocacy organization. "Other potential therapies we've had had some early exciting results and then they didn't pan out in later trials," he added.

If resveratrol does pan out in further research, it may add to the medications that are currently available, such as Aricept and Exelon, which slow, but do not halt, progression of the disease, Hendrix said.

Ultimately, it will probably be a combination of several drugs, as well as diet, exercise and social and mental stimulation that help stave off the rapid mental decline that is often associated with Alzheimer's, he added.

Antioxidant may be most effective in combination

This is one of the first studies to look not only at these biomarkers, but also the metabolites of resveratrol in spinal fluid, to show that resveratrol is probably getting into the brain, said Dr. Giulio M. Pasinetti, who is the Saunders Family Chair and professor in neurology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. However, he added that changes in biomarkers may not necessarily lead to mental and behavioral improvements, which larger studies will address.

In addition, resveratrol on its own might not end up working as well as a combination of resveratrol and other polyphenol compounds found in red wine, grape juice and grape seed extract, which could help people at risk of Alzheimer's and those who already have mild symptoms, Pasinetti said.

The current study used high doses of resveratrol to increase the chances that enough of the compound got into the brain to have an effect. But for now, the best way to get resveratrol is probably through diet. One glass of red wine a day could help those with mild Alzheimer's, "but no more than that," Turner said.

There is probably little benefit in taking currently available resveratrol supplements, even if they claim to contain levels similar to the ones used in this study. "The things that are on the market are not regulated, and you don't know how much is in them," Turner said. "There could be 500 milligrams, which is what they advertise [researchers gave participants in the study four 500 milligram pills a day] or there could be zero," he said.

Previous research has suggested that people who consume diets rich in resveratrol do not have lower rates of cancer, heart disease and other conditions.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story specifically discusses the safety of resveratrol, noting that the one concern researchers found was that there appeared to be a slight weight loss (two pounds) in patients taking resveratrol over the course of the one-year study, compared to a one pound weight gain in patients taking placebo. This is significant because weight loss can be a problem for Alzheimer’s patients. The story could also have addressed the concerns raised in some quarters that resveratrol may affect blood clotting, which would be important information for patients taking blood thinners.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 29, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A device that grabs and drags a blood clot out through the blood vessels should be used to treat certain stroke victims, according to new guidelines issued by the American Heart Association.

Nearly nine out of 10 strokes are caused by a blood clot that blocks one of the arteries supplying blood to the brain, the American Heart Association (AHA) said. Standard stroke treatment relies on powerful blood-thinning medications that break up the clot and restore blood flow to the brain.

But when those drugs don't work, doctors now can turn to a new catheter-based device that will physically remove the blood clot, said Dr. William Powers, lead author of the updated AHA guidelines and chair of neurology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

The tool, called an endovascular stent retrieval device, is made up of wire mesh that resembles a tiny ring of chicken wire, Powers said.

Skilled surgeons run the device up through a person's arteries via a catheter, and then open it smack in the middle of a stroke-causing blood clot.

"If you actually deploy or open one in the middle of a clot, it smooshes out and the clot gets caught in the chicken wire, and then you pull the whole thing out back through the artery," Powers said.

The new guidelines were published June 29 in the journal Stroke.

The AHA issued its updated guidelines based primarily on the results of six new clinical trials released within the past eight months, Powers said. All of these studies showed that the device can safely and effectively stop a stroke by removing blood clots, he added.

A number of other medical societies have endorsed the AHA's new guidelines, including the American Association of Neurological Surgeons and the Society of Vascular and Interventional Neurology.

As with other stroke treatments, time is of the essence. The procedure must start within six hours of the onset of a stroke, which means that emergency teams and hospitals will have to move fast, Powers said.

The guidelines provide added incentive to quickly transfer stroke victims from a local hospital to a major stroke center capable of advanced treatment, said Powers and Dr. David Kandzari, director of interventional cardiology and chief scientific officer for the Piedmont Heart Institute in Atlanta.

Local hospitals currently are urged to "drip and ship" people experiencing a major stroke -- essentially, start an IV drip of the powerful clot-busting drug called tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and then ship them by ambulance or helicopter to the nearest comprehensive stroke center for further treatment, Kandzari said.

Stent retrieval devices make that quick hospital transfer even more important, since the gadgets provide a crucial backup for tPA but are more tricky to use.

"These are procedures performed by very specialized individuals," Kandzari said. "They are not regularly performed by cardiologists or radiologists or neurologists. Hospitals must make plans to get people to other centers that are capable of this catheter-based therapy," he explained.

Powers said, "I think what's going to happen is that we will develop systems of rapid triage and rapid transport. A lot of this at this point depends on logistics and manpower. The people who do this are specially trained. You need a lot of special training to get those catheters up into the brain and pull things out."

The guidelines specifically recommend using a stent retrieval device for people who:
• Didn't have any significant disability prior to their current stroke.
• Received tPA within 4.5 hours of their stroke onset, and can start the procedure within six hours after stroke symptoms started.
• Are at least 18 years old, as clinical trials have not been conducted with children.
• Have imaging scans that show more than half of the brain on the side of the stroke is not permanently damaged.
• Have a clot blocking a large artery supplying blood to the brain.

That last point is especially important, because the stent retrieval device will not fit into the smaller blood vessels that branch out further into the brain, Powers said.

The major risk of using the device is that it could tear an artery and cause bleeding in the brain, particularly since it will be used on people who have already received very potent blood thinners, Kandzari said.

But clinical trials have shown that the risk of brain bleeding for people who received tPA and then went through mechanical clot removal is no greater than for people who just receive the blood thinner, Powers said.

"The outcomes were uniformly positive in all of the trials," he said. "It's really, really good evidence."

For more about stroke, visit the National Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article meets the standard by including this sentence: “The major risk of using the device is that it could tear an artery and cause bleeding in the brain, particularly since it will be used on people who have already received very potent blood thinners, Kandzari said.”
It also notes, “clinical trials have shown that the risk of brain bleeding for people who received tPA and then went through mechanical clot removal is no greater than for people who just receive the blood thinner.” Some caution about the fact that we don’t know if that risk will be as low when the procedure is rolled out more widely (as opposed to being used in a highly controlled study environment) would have been welcome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A year-long, head-to-head study of four widely used diets found that overweight women who followed the very low-carbohydrate Atkins diet had no adverse health effects and lost slightly more weight than women on the other three.

The study by Stanford University researchers compared the Atkins approach with three others: the standard low-fat, reduced-calorie regimen long recommended by many physicians and weight-loss experts; the Zone, a reduced-carbohydrate approach developed by author Barry Sears; and the very low-fat, high-carbohydrate regimen created by Dean Ornish.

The latest findings add to a growing body of evidence that the high-protein Atkins diet does not cause the harmful heart and artery effects long feared by many researchers.

Women who followed the Atkins plan had a significant drop in triglycerides, one of the unhealthful blood fats linked to a higher risk of heart disease. Their blood pressure also dropped the most of the four groups, a finding that the researchers think may relate to their slightly greater weight loss. Those in the Atkins group also experienced the largest increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL), a protective type of cholesterol.

Most important, the Atkins group did not develop the soaring levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) that some experts have thought might result from eating a diet rich in saturated fat and cholesterol found in fatty cuts of meat, butter and cream. High levels of LDL are a major risk factor for heart disease. The study found that while LDL rose slightly for those in the Atkins group, their blood levels did not differ statistically from the other groups.

"This is the best study so far to compare popular diets," said Walter Willett, chair of the department of nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health, because of its size, duration and the small number who dropped out. The findings confirm, he said, that reducing carbohydrates, "especially those with refined starch and sugar like that found in the U.S. diet, has metabolic benefits." It also shows that replacing these carbohydrates with either fat or protein "can improve blood cholesterol fractions and blood pressure," he said.

The findings "are pretty much in line with what all the other studies have shown comparing Atkins and low-fat diets," said Bonnie Brehm, assistant professor of nutrition at the University of Cincinnati College of Nursing and co-author of two, independent studies of the Atkins diet. "We have found the same thing with all of our trials."

As for weight loss, the goal that concerns dieters the most, none of the groups managed to shed the large numbers of pounds touted by weight-loss programs and television shows such as "The Biggest Loser."

All the participants reported eating about 2,000 calories a day when the study began. All also reported having cut their intake -- some by as much as 500 calories per day at two to six months -- but then gradually adding back many of those calories. But as researchers noted, if participants ate as little as they said, all the groups would have lost much more weight.

At first, the Atkins group lost weight faster. But as in previous studies, the pounds shed began to even out across the four groups. After a year, women in the Atkins group averaged a modest 10-pound loss compared with about six pounds for those in the other groups.

Both the authors and other weight-loss experts were quick to note that the new findings did not answer the question of what is the best way for most people to shed weight.

"This isn't a study testing how well you would do if you followed these diets to the letter," notes Christopher Gardner, assistant professor of medicine at the Stanford Prevention Research Center and lead author of the study, which appears in tomorrow's Journal of the American Medical Association. "This is a study that shows what happens if you bought the book and tried to follow" the diets, as most dieters do.

The 311 overweight and obese women in the study were randomly assigned to one of the four groups. Each received a book detailing her prescribed diet. For the first eight weeks, the women also attended one-hour weekly group sessions with a registered dietitian trained to explain the diet in detail. Participants received follow-up phone calls and e-mails to remind them of appointments, and they were paid $25 to $75 for each appointment they made.

Reactions to the findings were mixed.

"It's bad science, good publicity," said the Zone's Sears.

"For all practical purposes, the programs all worked about the same," said Kelly D. Brownell, director of Yale University's Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity and creator of the Lifestyle, Exercise, Attitudes, Relationships and Nutrition (LEARN) program for weight management, one of the diets studied. The extra four pounds lost by the Atkins group are not very meaningful, Brownell said.

Others were more critical.

"This study is seriously flawed, and its conclusions misleading," said Ornish, clinical professor of medicine at the University of California at San Francisco. A careful read of the study shows "no significant difference in weight loss between the Atkins and Ornish or LEARN diets after one year!" he noted in an e-mail. "There was significantly more weight loss on the Atkins diet after one year only when compared with the Zone diet. This directly contradicts their primary conclusion."

All low-carbohydrate diets are not necessarily created equal, however. A study last year by Willett and his colleagues in the New England Journal of Medicine found that women on low-carb diets who ate mostly animal fat and animal protein did not reduce their risk of heart disease. But those who ate vegetable forms of protein, such as soy, and fat, such as olive oil, did reduce their risk of heart disease. As Willett said yesterday, "lower-carbohydrate diets look like a good option, but if you consider them, eat olive oil and fish rather than butter and sausage."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned a concern with the Atkins diet that it would result in increased LDL cholesterol but that the study did not find this to be the case.
The article on which the story was based reported on the reasons people did not complete the study; there were no serious medical harms found.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There may be a seed of truth amidst the many health claims for pomegranate juice, researchers from Israel said Thursday, at least for kidney patients on dialysis.

They found that such patients who gulped a few cups of the tart liquid every week lowered their chances of infections, the second-leading killer of the more than 350,000 Americans on dialysis.

The findings were presented at the American Society of Nephrology’s meeting in Denver — aka Renal Week — and have not yet been vetted by independent experts.

“It’s a very intriguing study,” said Dr. Frank Brosius, who heads the nephrology division at the University of Michigan Health System and was not involved in the research.

“I certainly don’t know of anything else that would have such a profound effect,” he told Reuters Health, cautioning at the same time that the study needed to be replicated by other centers.

The results come in the wake of a U.S. crackdown on allegedly false advertising by POM Wonderful, which claims its pomegranate products can help everything from heart disease to prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction.

The Israeli researchers, led by Dr. Batya Kristal of Western Galilee Hospital in Nahariya, did not use POM juice, but a brand sold by Naturafood.

In lab tests, Kristal told Reuters Health, that brand ranked highest in polyphenol antioxidants, which can reduce cell damage caused by so-called free radicals.

Antioxidants are found in different levels in fruits and vegetables, such as blueberries or broccoli.

“Pomegranate juice was shown in the last three years to contain the highest levels of polyphenols among a variety of products,” Kristal said. “Much higher than red wine, for instance.”

The researchers figured an antioxidant-rich diet might help patients with kidney failure, because the level of free radicals in their blood increases as the blood circulates through the dialysis device. That, in turn, may rev up inflammation in their tissues.

In the study, funded by the Israeli Ministry of Health, 101 patients were randomly assigned to either a concoction without pomegranate juice, or the real thing.

After downing about half a cup three times a week over a year, those who drank the real thing had a reduction of inflammatory molecules in their blood.

They also made fewer trips to the hospital.

“We found significant reductions in hospitalization due to infections, with more than 40 percent reduction in the first hospitalization and 80 percent in the second,” said Kristal.

However, the researchers were only able to rule out chance as the cause of the reduction in the second visit to the hospital.

According to the findings, among 50 patients drinking pomegranate juice for a year, about two would have to go to the hospital at least twice. By comparison, that number would be nearly 11 in patients not drinking the juice.

The researchers say they don’t know if their results extend to other brands as well, and suggest squeezing your own juice. A 16-oz bottle of POM Wonderful sells for about $4.

She said her team had found no side effects, but added that kidney patients should be aware of the high potassium content in the juice, given the delicate balance of nutrients in their blood, and talk to their doctor if they consider drinking it.

Brosius was skeptical of the benefits, although he said the juice was unlikely to cause harm.

“I would prefer to see this validated at other centers before we come out and say this is the thing to do,” he said. Even if the findings hold up, he said, it is still unclear what accounts for them. “Who the heck knows what the active ingredients are?”

Marion Nestle, a nutrition expert at New York University, said the effects might not be unique to pomegranate juice.

“This study does not demonstrate anything special about pomegranate juice,” she told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “The effects of juice were compared to a placebo, not to any other kind of juice that might have exactly the same effect.”

“The pomegranate people are spending millions to prove what I could have told them in the first place,” she added. “Pomegranate juices — like most if not all fruit and vegetable juices — have antioxidant activity. Does this make pomegranates better than any other fruit? Investigators have yet to show this.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good job.  The story states that the “team had found no side effects, but added that kidney patients should be aware of the high potassium content in the juice, given the delicate balance of nutrients in their blood, and talk to their doctor if they consider drinking it.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 9, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Drinking plenty of water each day may have an unexpected benefit -- staving off urinary tract infections, a new study reports.

Young women plagued by UTIs who drank an additional 6 cups of water each day were nearly half -- 48 percent -- as likely as a control group to have another infection, the study showed.

The water group also reduced their use of antibiotics by roughly half -- or 47 percent.

What's more, the amount of time that passed before a woman's next UTI and between recurrent infections was longer in the water group than in the control group.

Women are more prone to UTIs than men, partly due to their anatomy. A shorter urethra makes it easier for bacteria from rectum to enter the vagina and travel to the bladder.

Study author Dr. Thomas Hooton said it's thought that increasing fluid intake decreases UTI risk in two ways: by preventing bacteria from adhering to the bladder and by reducing the overall concentration of bacteria that could cause an infection.

"Flushing bacteria out of the bladder, it's been known, at least it's been thought, that it is protective. This study suggests that it is," said Hooton, clinical director of the division of infectious diseases at the University of Miami School of Medicine.

Dr. Hunter Wessells, who wasn't involved in the study, called the additional fluid intake "substantial," leading to a corresponding increase in urine output.

"It is the urine output which is of course the key factor leading to the effect seen in the study," said Wessells, chair of the department of urology at the University of Washington School of Medicine in Seattle.

Dr. Susan Bleasdale, medical director of infection control at the University of Illinois at Chicago, said the study "may be a game changer" for antibiotic "stewardship" programs aimed at reducing inappropriate antibiotic use.

She cited a 2010 review estimating that 11 million to 12 million women a year will suffer from a UTI, accounting for 1.6 billion antibiotic prescriptions a year.

"We might not even need to use antibiotics," she said.

The study, conducted in Bulgaria, involved 140 healthy premenopausal women who had at least three UTIs in the past year. All reported low daily fluid intake. They drank roughly four cups of fluid per day, including just 2 cups of water a day.

Half of the women in the study were asked to consume 1.5 liters of water, or about 6 cups, each day in addition to their usual daily fluid intake. Specifically, they were asked to begin drinking a 1/2-liter water bottle at each meal and finish each bottle before the next meal.

The remaining women served as a control group. They continued their usual fluid intake.

The women were followed for a year, with clinic visits at the beginning of the study as well as 6 and 12 months later. Researchers measured their water and fluid intake; urine volume, frequency and concentration; and symptoms. They also called the women each month to assess compliance and counsel them to return to the clinic for evaluation and possible treatment if they were experiencing UTI symptoms.

Overall, the water group increased daily water intake by close to 5 cups a day. Their total daily fluid intake, including water and other beverages, averaged nearly 12 cups.

By contrast, the control group's total daily fluid intake was less than half of that.

Hooton noted that it's not clear exactly how much fluid intake must increase to deliver a benefit.

"There's no magic in a liter-and-a-half," he said.

Likewise, he believes any increase in fluid -- not just water -- may be beneficial since fluids are mostly water. And while the study involved younger women, he said older women who experience recurrent UTIs may benefit from increasing their daily fluid intake as well.

Whether the advice would benefit women with normal urine output, however, is unclear, Wessells noted.

"In addition, the bother associated with the higher urine output, and feasibility of implementing this water intake strategy across a range of occupations and ages, requires further study as well," he said.

Researchers presented the findings Saturday at IDWeek 2017, the annual meeting of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, the HIV Medicine Association and the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society.

Research presented at meetings is generally considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed publication.

Visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for more on UTIs.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Increasing intake of water carries a low risk of causing problems–except for more bathroom trips. For women suffering from incontinence, this could be especially troublesome and a disincentive. The story indirectly addressed that, so we’ll give credit:
“In addition, the bother associated with the higher urine output, and feasibility of implementing this water intake strategy across a range of occupations and ages, requires further study as well,” he said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alzheimer's Redefined, But Changes Mean Little For Patients

The definition of Alzheimer's disease just got wider and deeper, but the expansion won't change how the vast majority of people are diagnosed. It also doesn't change the very limited treatment choices.

But the new criteria, which were developed by the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association, are almost guaranteed to prompt confusion, even in people who are thinking quite clearly.

The guidelines say, for instance, that newly developed "biomarker" tests, such as assays for proteins in spinal fluid, and some specialized brain scans can be used for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's. But, the guidelines say, the tests are to be used only for research, and not for diagnosing Alzheimer's in the general public.

The distinction is nothing to worry about for patients and their families. "You don't need a biomarker test" for everyday clinical practice, says David Knopman, a professor of neurology at the Mayo Clinic, who was co-chairman of the group that revised the dementia diagnosis. The existing tests for Alzheimer's are adequate, he says. And those biomarkers? "It's in the fine print, but it definitely says in multiple places that the biomarkers are for research purposes."

Why? Well, the biomarker tests and PET scans aren't yet accurate enough to reliably diagnose Alzheimer's, and haven't been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. And it's also because there are no treatments that can prevent, slow or stop early signs of Alzheimer's.

"For research, there's a lot of value," Knopman says. "For everyday clinical use, very very little."

About 5 million Americans have Alzheimer's. The hallmark signs are problems with thinking, learning, and memory. The current definition, created in 1984, describes Alzheimer's that way. But over the past few years there's been solid evidence that Alzheimer's starts damaging the brain years before a person starts having noticeable problems thinking. Scientists have been putting a lot of effort into trying to identify what starts the disease process, but have so far come up empty.

The new definitions, which were just published online by the journal Alzheimer's & Dementia, acknowledge this dimly understood early phase of Alzheimer's. Now there are two new pre-dementia phases: mild cognitive impairment and "preclinical Alzheimer's."

In mild cognitive impairment, a person's changes in thinking are noticeable to himself, friends, or family. They would show up on tests of memory and recall, but don't interfere with everyday activities. Alzheimer's is just one possible cause. Because there are no treatments to prevent or stop Alzheimer's, many people may not consider this diagnosis a blessing.

The second new phase, preclinical Alzheimer's, is much squishier. There's no list of symptoms that a doctor can whip out to say you've got it. Rather, the goal in creating this category is to see if scientists can define when the disease starts, and track it through biomarker tests, brain imaging, or other yet-to-be-invented tests. If that happens, it might someday lead to ways to prevent Alzheimer's. But for now this category is useful only to researchers.

The goal in all this, according to the Alzheimer's Association, is to increase opportunities for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The problem is that there aren't yet any reliable tools for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The new criteria are really a call for more research — and the money to fund it. That would be good for the Alzheimer's Association and the National Institute on Aging, which sponsored the work on the new criteria.

And it does leave one wondering if a lot more worry will be generated by the notion of "preclinical Alzheimer's," when science and medicine can't offer anything to ease those fears.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


As the story makes clear, lab tests and brain scans looking for signs of Alzheimer’s are not ready for clinical use, so it is reasonable to defer discussion of the potential harms of such tests. The story does mention that the revised guidelines do “leave one wondering if a lot more worry will be generated by the notion of “preclinical Alzheimer’s,” when science and medicine can’t offer anything to ease those fears.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - U.S. health regulators said on Tuesday they approved a stent by Abbott Laboratories that is the first designed to be absorbed into the bloodstream after it is implanted.

The stent, called Absorb, is made of a plastic similar to dissolving sutures and offers patients an alternative to metal stents currently used to prop open arteries cleared of blockages.

Unlike traditional stents that remain in place after implantation, Absorb is designed to disappear fully within three years of the procedure.

Absorb’s appeal is that it allows the blood vessel to return to a natural state, free from a permanent metal implant. The approach holds particular promise for patients whose coronary artery disease could require multiple implants over the course of several decades, said Mitchell Krucoff, a professor at Duke University Medical Center who has advised Abbott on Absorb.

“This is a game changer,” he said in an interview. “There are no longer going to be permanent metal implants in the artery.”

Absorb releases the drug everolimus to combat the growth of scar tissue that can form within a stent and cause the artery to narrow again, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which approved the stent, said.

“No metal means the treated artery can pulse and flex naturally as demands on the heart change with everyday activities,” said Gregg Stone of Columbia University Medical Center, who led clinical trials for Absorb. “No metal may also reduce the potential of future blockages that occur with permanent metallic stents.”

Data released in October concluded Absorb was comparable to Abbott’s own Xience drug-coated metal stent in safety and effectiveness but showed a higher risk of heart attacks and blood clots. Abbott said it expects the risks to lessen as surgeons gain experience with it.

Absorb also will compete with Medtronic Plc’s traditional drug-coated Resolute stent and Boston Scientific Corp’s Synergy and Promus stents. Synergy’s polymer coating disappears over time after delivering a drug that helps prevent the artery from re-clogging, leaving a metal stent in place.

Abbott plans to roll out the device to about 100 hospitals in the next several months as it trains surgeons on the implant procedure before ramping up sales, said spokesman Jonathon Hamilton. Absorb will be priced at a “modest” premium to Xience, he said. Analysts have predicted Absorb will gain a market niche but not surpass drug-dispensing metal stents such as Xience in share until longer-term data show more favorable clinical results.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that one clinical study found a higher risk of heart attacks and blood clots in participants, complications that Abbott Labs apparently blames not on the stent but on surgeons’ lack of experience in using it.
A weakness here, though, as noted in the “benefits” segment above, is that there apparently have been no clinical trials that have lasted long enough for the stents to dissolve (about three years) in order to assess harms. The story should make that clear to readers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Individuals who have heart disease are often advised to take a low-dose aspirin every day to prevent blood clots that cause heart attacks and most strokes.

Some healthy men and women should take aspirin every day to ward off heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer. That’s the final recommendation from the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) after more than a year of study and lively public comment. The recommendations were published Monday in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Aspirin has been used for more than 100 years to ease fever and relieve pain. Many people with heart disease are advised to take a low-dose aspirin every day to prevent blood clots, the cause of heart attacks and most strokes. That’s called secondary prevention. Whether healthy individuals should do the same thing, a strategy called primary prevention, is controversial.

The FDA is against taking aspirin for primary prevention, arguing that the risks, including bleeding in the brain and stomach, outweigh the benefits. The USPSTF recommends it for men and women aged 50 to 59 who are at risk of heart attack or stroke. The dueling recommendations kicked off a lively debate in the medical community.

Despite the clashing opinions, experts agree on two things: Aspirin should be just one part of an overall strategy to prevent heart attack and stroke that includes weight control, healthy eating, exercising, and not smoking. And don’t take aspirin without talking with your doctor.

Beyond that, here’s a sample of expert opinions.

Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo: Task force says some will benefit

Charles H. Hennekens: Balance between benefits and harms still hazy

Deepak L. Bhatt: No easy way to identify who will benefit or be harmed

Cynthia Boyd and Milo Puhan: Add personal preferences to the equation

Freek W.A. Verheugt: Even doctors are confused

By Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo: Taking aspirin is easy, but deciding whether or not to take aspirin for prevention is complex. Aspirin can help prevent heart attacks, strokes, and colorectal cancer, but it also increases the risk of bleeding.

The US Preventive Services Task Force found that the benefits of taking low-dose aspirin daily clearly outweigh the harms for people who are 50 to 59 years old, who have increased risk of cardiovascular disease, and who are not at increased risk for bleeding. People who are 60 to 69 can also benefit from taking aspirin, but the risks for bleeding are higher in this age group. Some older individuals may be less likely to benefit from aspirin’s ability to prevent colorectal cancer because it takes about 10 years of daily aspirin for it to affect this risk.

It is important to note that this draft recommendation applies to people who are not at increased risk for bleeding, have at least a 10-year life expectancy, and are willing to take low-dose aspirin daily. Also, it is meant for people who do not already have cardiovascular disease.

Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, MD, is vice-chair of the US Preventive Services Task Force. She is also professor of medicine and of epidemiology and biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco.

By Charles H. Hennekens: After more than 25 years of research on aspirin for primary prevention, we are not much further along than we were after the landmark findings from the Physicians Health Study in 1988. We know that taking aspirin will prevent a first heart attack and a first stroke, but we also know that aspirin can cause serious bleeding, mainly in the gastrointestinal system and, more rarely, in the brain.

In a meta-analysis of the six major randomized trials of aspirin for primary prevention, among more than 95,000 participants, serious cardiovascular events occurred in 0.51 percent of participants taking aspirin and 0.57 percent of those not taking aspirin. That corresponds to a 20 percent relative reduction in risk. At the same time, serious bleeding events increased from 0.07 percent among non-aspirin takers to 0.10 percent among those taking aspirin, or a 40 percent relative increase in risk.

Although the totality of evidence is incomplete, it appears that aspirin has net benefits when the absolute 10-year risk of having a cardiovascular event is greater than 10 percent. Unfortunately, fewer than 5,000 of the trial participants have been in that risk category. (Individuals can calculate their 10-year risk using a relatively simple calculator from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute or a more complex one from the American Heart Association.)

These calculators don’t tell the whole story. Clinicians should evaluate additional risks and benefits. For example, some individuals are at higher risk of bleeding, such as those with a history of ulcers. Others are at higher risk of having a cardiovascular event because they are obese, physically inactive, or have a family history of such events.

Several ongoing trials will provide information on aspirin’s benefit-to-risk ratio. This information is essential for making rational guidelines for aspirin in primary prevention.

Charles H. Hennekens, MD, is professor of medicine at Florida Atlantic University. He was the principal investigator of the Physician’s Health Study, which was the first to demonstrate that aspirin prevents a first heart attack in men, and the Women’s Health Study, which was the first to demonstrate that aspirin prevents a first stroke in women.

By Deepak L. Bhatt: The use of aspirin for primary prevention is one of the most complex issues in medicine today. That’s ironic because aspirin is ubiquitous and most patients perceive it to be safe and harmless. After all, it is sold over the counter.

Here’s the problem: The lower an individual’s risk of a future heart attack or ischemic stroke, the less he or she will benefit from taking daily low-dose aspirin. Yet the odds that aspirin will cause a problem, such as bleeding, remain relatively steady. That means for some low-risk individuals, taking daily aspirin could do more harm than good.

If there was a foolproof way to identify individuals at high risk for a future heart attack or stroke, as well as those at high risk for developing complications, we would know who should be taking aspirin for primary prevention and who should not. Unfortunately, no such tool exists.

Many patients — and many health care providers — believe that the aspirin-for-primary-prevention issue is settled. Not so. In fact, several clinical trials now underway are looking at this very question. These include the ASCEND, TIPS-3, and ASPREE trials.

The data on aspirin for preventing colorectal cancer are provocative, but are even less robust than for primary prevention of cardiovascular events.

Deepak L. Bhatt, MD, is executive director of interventional cardiovascular programs at Brigham and Women’s Hospital Heart and Vascular Center and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.

By Cynthia Boyd and Milo Puhan: Combining guidelines for the use of aspirin to prevent three different conditions — heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer — into a single recommendation makes good sense for patients. But making such recommendations is difficult because they must take into account so many factors.

Personal preferences are one very important factor. Say your mother had a disabling stroke, and you are willing to do everything you can to prevent having a stroke, even if it puts you at risk of bleeding. This might tip the balance in favor of taking aspirin. In contrast, someone who isn’t worried about having a cardiovascular event or developing colorectal cancer might want to stay away from aspirin to avoid bleeding.

With an international team of colleagues, we created an online tool that calculates whether the benefits of aspirin for primary prevention (preventing heart attack, ischemic stroke, and cancer) are greater than the harms (severe hemorrhagic stroke and severe gastrointestinal bleeds). The tool is based on research we recently published in BMC Medicine.

To use the tool, an individual enters his or her age group and sex and uses sliders to show how worried he or she is about six outcomes:

Green, orange, and red boxes represent the benefit-harm balance corresponding to the user’s information.

For now, this tool is for research purposes only. It must be verified before it is ready for prime time. But it suggests a direction for decision aids that can help individuals choose whether to adopt preventive strategies like aspirin that come with potentially harmful side effects.

Cynthia M. Boyd, MD, is associate professor of medicine at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Milo A. Puhan, MD, is director of the Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Prevention Institute and professor of epidemiology and public health at the University of Zurich.

By Freek W.A. Verheugt: Who should take aspirin to prevent a first heart attack or ischemic stroke is a complex issue — even for cardiologists. A recent report with data on 120 medical practices serving 69,000 patients found huge variation in doctors’ approaches. In some practices, 70 percent of patients were inappropriately taking aspirin. Part of my job, and that of other cardiologists and clinicians, is to help our patients make good choices about aspirin, guiding those at high risk toward aspirin use and those at low risk away from it.

It is important to keep in mind that other therapies, such as statins, have also been proven to decrease the risk of cardiovascular events. These are often used in combination with aspirin. As I showed in a commentary in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, when combined with a statin, aspirin’s net benefit in primary prevention is almost completely lost.

Freek W.A. Verheugt, MD, is professor of cardiology at the Heart-Lung Centre of the University Medical Centre of Nijmegen and is in the department of cardiology at Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis in Amsterdam, both in the Netherlands.

An earlier version of this article was published on Dec. 11, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: As above, Hennekens gave a description of the absolute harms involved in aspirin, particularly related to gastrointestinal bleeding, and several of the other sources also discussed this important harm.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FDA said it is reviewing a handful of reports involving mood changes, suicidal behavior and suicide in patients who have taken the popular allergy and asthma drug.

Merck has updated the drug's labeling four times in the past year to include information on a range of reported side effects: tremors, anxiousness, depression and suicidal behavior.

FDA said it asked the company to dig deeper into its data on Singulair for evidence of possible links to suicide. The agency said it has not established a "causal relationship" between Merck's drug and suicidal behavior. An agency spokeswoman said the review was prompted by three to four suicide reports it received since last October.

CBS News correspondent Kelly Wallace reports Kate Miller's 15-year-old son Cody killed himself just 17 days after starting the drug.

"It was the end of our world and we didn't know why, because this child was a perfectly normal healthy child, Never had a problem," Miller says.

His mom now believes that Singulair cost him his life.

It could take up to nine months before agency scientists can draw any conclusions, FDA said in a posting to its Web site.

The agency recently began notifying the public earlier about possible safety issues. The policy change came after the FDA was criticized for acting too slowly on information about the risks of Merck's painkiller Vioxx and, GlaxoSmithKline PLC's diabetes pill Avandia.

Merck officials stressed that the FDA's inquiry is based on reports, not clinical studies - which are the standard tool for evaluating drug safety. The company said none of the 11,000 patients enrolled in 40 Singulair trials has committed suicide.

"We have no indication that anything about the mechanism of Singulair is consistent with these events," said George Philip, director of research and product development. "But because suicide is a life-threatening event we thought it was important to provide this information in the product label."

Merck said it recently added reports of suicide to Singulair's label, which already listed suicidal thinking and behavior as reported side effects.

Merck says the information is on the company's Web site, though one must go to the fourth page of a product labeling file to find it.

Dr. Mary Ann Michelis told CBS News she received calls from concerned patients Thursday. She's now writing letters to every patient who takes Singulair, urging them not to over-react.

Michelis said, "They should not stop taking their medication unless they are experiencing a major change in their moods."

In clinical trials of asthma patients, the most common side effects were headache, flu, abdominal pain and cough.

With sales of $4.3 billion last year, Singulair is used by millions of patients in the U.S, according to Merck. First approved in 1998, it is part of a class of asthma and allergy drugs that includes AstraZeneca's Accolate and Critical Therapeutics's Zyflo.

FDA said it is also reviewing reports of side effects with those drugs. Their labeling does not contain language about suicide.

Shares of Merck & Co. Inc. fell 16 cents to $44.54 in late trading.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story is fundamentally about alleged harmful side effects of the drug, so this criterion is clearly established. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dear Julia: How well do flu shots actually work?

Just about every influential public health figure urges people to get their flu shots each fall as a necessary precaution during influenza season.

So over dinner, I asked a couple of respected evidence-based medicine researchers what they thought of the vaccine. I was taken aback by their response. They basically laughed at the idea that the flu shot was particularly effective.

This posed a conundrum. It seemed like there were two groups saying very different things. But after reviewing the research, I think I understand what's going on here. It's true that flu vaccines don't work spectacularly well, at least according to the best evidence we have (and most of the evidence on flu vaccines is of poor methodological quality). But the downsides to getting a vaccine are extremely minimal, and flu shots may still be helpful in reducing some illness and saving lives, which is why public health experts say you should get vaccinated anyway.

Why the flu vaccine isn't always effective

The flu vaccine has been our main strategy for warding off seasonal flu for more than 60 years. Seasonal influenza, which surfaces as a respiratory illness, is caused by influenza A and B viruses. The flu shot is designed to protect people against three or four strains of the A and B viruses that researchers believe will be most common that year, leading to the nasty fevers, headaches, coughs, and runny noses that make many people miserable in the fall and winter.

The challenge, however, is that the flu virus is highly unstable, mutating all the time. So this means drug companies can't just make one kind of vaccine that'll last a lifetime. Every year, public health agencies essentially make educated guesses on what strains and mutations will make the rounds. And that's not easy. In February, the World Health Organization offers a prediction — based on surveillance and laboratory and clinical studies — and then each country uses that prediction to approve vaccines in its jurisdiction. (In the US, the Food and Drug Administration makes that final call.) The potential for error here can dramatically alter the effectiveness of the flu shot in a given season. If vaccine makers prepare for one combination of viruses and different ones end up circulating widely, the vaccine won't work that well.

This may help explain why the evidence on the effectiveness of flu shots is relatively mixed. The Cochrane Collaboration, an independent nonprofit that reviews the evidence on medical questions, has conducted two major meta-analyses (looking at the results of lots of individual studies) on whether the shot prevents flu in healthy children and adults.

In kids, the highest-quality evidence — a randomized controlled trial — suggests the vaccine works well enough: On average, if you give six kids under the age of 6 a flu shot, you can expect to prevent one case of the flu. For children under age 2, the benefits are less clear; the evidence, the researchers found, was scant, and of the research that was available, it seemed the efficacy of the shot was similar to placebo.

In adults, however, the vaccine's effects are more modest. "Depending on the season," explained Tom Jefferson, an author on these Cochrane reviews, "you need to vaccinate anywhere between 33 and 100 people to avoid one set of symptoms." In a good year, when the WHO guesses correctly and the flu shot matches the strains in circulation, you need to give 33 adults flu shots, on average, to prevent one case of illness. In a year when the WHO guesses badly, you need to vaccinate 100 people to prevent one flu case.

Jefferson pointed out that his Cochrane review on adults also found that flu vaccination rates have barely any effect on the number of sick days taken and no major impact on rates of hospitalization. So, yes, the flu vaccine can prevent illness, but it's hard to detect major effects on public health in the data.

On the other hand, the evidence suggests that there's no harm in getting a flu shot, either. The meta-analyses found no evidence of serious side effects beyond the odd case of soreness at the injection site.

That seems to be the same conclusion that other studies have drawn — the flu vaccine is modestly helpful, and doesn't hurt. In 2012 researchers analyzed 15 meta-analyses on the flu shot and concluded, "Most influenza vaccines have been shown to confer some protection against naturally acquired infection and no evidence for major harms has emerged."

One key caveat here is that the evidence, overall, is pretty poor quality. Most of these analyses rely overwhelmingly on observational studies, where researchers observe and gather data on people who take the flu shot compared with those who don't. Because these aren't experiments — ideally we'd have randomized controlled trials — they're more prone to bias and therefore less reliable.

In the case of the elderly, the situation is particularly troublesome. As this Lancet study points out, because annual flu shots were recommended for the elderly since the 1960s, it has been unethical to conduct high-quality randomized controlled trials where you give only one group the shot in order to compare it with another group that didn't get the vaccine. So, as this Cochrane review notes, it's impossible to draw firm conclusions on the effectiveness of the flu vaccine for those over 65 because the data is so biased and poor.

Again, though, this doesn't mean we should throw away the vaccine. Stanford researcher John Ioannidis told me how he makes sense of this issue after reviewing the evidence: "Overall the flu vaccine is effective, and it does save lives. I cannot put an exact figure to how many, but it may well be millions of lives. Generally it is safe and rather cheap, so even if the effectiveness is less than optimal sometimes, overall it is a good deal."

Why people still bother to get the shot

Despite the limited evidence of effectiveness, there are still good reasons why public health experts recommend the shot.

For one, in those years when the WHO guesses correctly which strains will circulate, the shot tends to be a lot more helpful than some of these averages suggest. And the vaccine is overwhelmingly safe. There's also little by way of alternatives. Beyond public health measures (making sure you have good hand hygiene and avoiding the office when you're sick), the flu shot is the best medical intervention we have for preventing infection. So there's little downside with at least some potential benefit. I personally continue to get the flu shot for this reason.

As Roger Baxter, the co-director of the Kaiser Permanente Vaccine Study Center, told me, "Flu vaccines are not a panacea, and do not prevent all cases of flu, even in the best years, when there are no manufacturing problems and the match is perfect." He continued: "However, the vaccines provide moderate protection, and can prevent huge numbers of cases of this serious illness. Many studies have shown that the vaccines are very safe, so the benefit-to-risk ratio is high and the cost is relatively low."

Welcome to Dear Julia, a column where readers can submit everyday health questions. Which over-the-counter painkillers work best? Is it better to run or walk for exercise? How much harm does frequent flying do to your body? Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form, or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does mention that the risks of negative reactions to getting a flu shot usually center on inflammation at the site of the injection, a comparatively minor side effect.  It emphasizes that given such a minimal risk, there are very few harms for getting this protection, minimal though it may be in some years.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A couple of extra minutes attached to the umbilical cord at birth may translate into a small boost in neurodevelopment several years later, a study suggests.

Children whose cords were cut more than three minutes after birth had slightly higher social skills and fine motor skills than those whose cords were cut within 10 seconds. The results showed no differences in IQ.

"There is growing evidence from a number of studies that all infants, those born at term and those born early, benefit from receiving extra blood from the placenta at birth," said Dr. Heike Rabe, a neonatologist at Brighton & Sussex Medical School in the United Kingdom. Rabe's editorial accompanied the study published Tuesday in the journal JAMA Pediatrics.

Delaying the clamping of the cord allows more blood to transfer from the placenta to the infant, sometimes increasing the infant's blood volume by up to a third. The iron in the blood increases infants' iron storage, and iron is essential for healthy brain development.

"The extra blood at birth helps the baby to cope better with the transition from life in the womb, where everything is provided for them by the placenta and the mother, to the outside world," Rabe said. "Their lungs get more blood so that the exchange of oxygen into the blood can take place smoothly."

Past studies have shown higher levels of iron and other positive effects later in infancy among babies whose cords were clamped after several minutes, but few studies have looked at results past infancy.

In this study, researchers randomly assigned half of 263 healthy Swedish full-term newborns to have their cords clamped more than three minutes after birth. The other half were clamped less than 10 seconds after birth.

Four years later, the children underwent a series of assessments for IQ, motor skills, social skills, problem-solving, communication skills and behavior. Those with delayed cord clamping showed modestly higher scores in social skills and fine motor skills. When separated by sex, only the boys showed statistically significant improvement.

"We don't know exactly why, but speculate that girls receive extra protection through higher estrogen levels whilst being in the womb," Rabe said. "The results in term infants are consistent with those of follow-up in preterm infants."

Delayed cord clamping has garnered more attention in the past few years for its potential benefits to the newborn. Until recently, clinicians believed early clamping reduced the risk of hemorrhaging in the mother, but research hasn't borne that out.

Much of the research has focused on preterm infants, who appear to benefit most from delayed cord clamping, Rabe said. Preemies who have delayed cord clamping tend to have better blood pressure in the days immediately after birth, need fewer drugs to support blood pressure, need fewer blood transfusions, have less bleeding into the brain and have a lower risk of necrotizing enterocolitis, a life-threatening bowel injury, she said.

This study is among the few looking at healthy, full-term infants in a country high in resources, as opposed to developing countries where iron deficiency may be more likely.

The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has not yet endorsed the practice, citing insufficient evidence for full-term infants. The World Health Organization recommends delayed cord clamping of not less than one minute.

It is unclear whether the practice could harm infants' health. Some studies have found a higher risk of jaundice, a buildup of bilirubin in the blood from the breakdown of red blood cells. Jaundice is treated with blue light therapy and rarely has serious complications.

Another potential risk is a condition called polycythemia, a very high red blood cell count, said Dr. Scott Lorch, an associate professor of pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine and director of the Center for Perinatal and Pediatric Health Disparities Research at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

"Polycythemia can have medical consequences for the infant, including blood clots, respiratory distress and even strokes in the worst-case scenario," Lorch said. Some studies have found higher levels of red blood cells in babies with delayed cord clamping, but there were no complications.

Lorch also pointed out that this study involved a mostly homogenous population in a country outside the U.S.

"We should see whether similar effects are seen in higher-risk populations, such as the low socioeconomic population, racial and ethnic minorities and those at higher risk for neurodevelopmental delay," Lorch said.

So far, studies on delayed cord clamping have excluded infants born in distress, such as those with breathing difficulties or other problems. But Rabe said these infants may actually benefit most from the practice.

These babies often need more blood volume to help with blood pressure, breathing and circulation problems, Rabe said. "Also, the placental blood is rich with stem cells, which could help to repair any brain damage the baby might have suffered during a difficult birth," she added. "Milking of the cord would be the easiest way to get the extra blood into the baby quickly in an emergency situation."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Hooray for this story including two potential harms and reporting with experts outside of the study authors. The story calls the potential for harms “unclear” and that is one of way of giving the reader some balance even if there isn’t much information available. Both jaundice and polycythemia are listed as potential harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PITTSBURGH, Dec. 1, 2016 - In the first analysis of how to treat patients on anticoagulants who suffer a major bleeding event, a clinical practice that routinely gives doctors pause, while also evaluating a new drug, University of Pittsburgh researchers aim to provide much-needed guidance to clinicians trying to balance the risks of stroke versus bleeding when determining the best treatment.

The analysis, published today in the journal Stroke, determined that resuming anticoagulation therapy after a person suffers a major bleeding event was associated with a higher likelihood of stroke-free survival than discontinuing anticoagulation. Furthermore, restarting therapy with the new oral anticoagulant dabigatran was associated with a lower risk of recurrent hemorrhage in these cases than the old standby drug warfarin.

People take anticoagulants to avoid blood clots when they have a risk for stroke or heart attack, but the downside is that these medications increase a person's risk of severe bleeding--such as in the brain or gut--because the blood isn't clotting as well as it otherwise might.

"If a patient who is on an anticoagulant to avoid a stroke has a major bleeding event, doctors are faced with a catch-22: Discontinue the anticoagulant to avoid future bleeding, but again place their patient at increased risk of stroke; or resume the anticoagulant to continue avoiding a stroke, but then have to worry about another bleeding event," said lead author Inmaculada Hernandez, Pharm.D., Ph.D., an assistant professor in Pitt's School of Pharmacy, who completed this work as a doctoral student at Pitt's Graduate School of Public Health.

"It causes a lot of uncertainty for physicians, especially because patients at highest risk of recurrent bleeding also are at highest risk of stroke," said co-author Yuting Zhang, Ph.D., associate professor of health policy and management at Pitt Public Health, and Hernandez's doctoral dissertation committee chair.

The Pitt research team obtained data from 2010 to 2012 for a random sample of Medicare beneficiaries. They then followed nearly 90,000 people who had filled prescriptions for the anticoagulants warfarin, which has been used as a medication since 1954, and dabigatran, which was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2010. More than 1,500 of those people suffered a major bleeding event while using one of the drugs. About half of those people resumed one of the two anticoagulants a few months after the bleeding, while the others did not.

The risk of dying from any cause or having a stroke was 23 to 34 percent higher in patients who discontinued anticoagulation therapy compared to those who resumed it. People who took dabigatran after their initial bleeding event had nearly half the risk of another major bleeding event within one year compared with those who took warfarin.

"Our results should encourage clinicians to seriously consider resuming anticoagulation among patients who survived a major bleeding event, particularly if the source of bleeding was identified and addressed," said senior author Samir Saba, M.D., associate professor of medicine and associate chief of cardiology at UPMC Heart and Vascular Institute. "They should also take into account that the benefit-to-risk ratio of post-hemorrhage use of anticoagulation is not the same for all medications."

Additional authors on this research are Maria M. Brooks, Ph.D., of Pitt Public Health; and Paul K.L. Chin, Ph.D., of the University of Otago in New Zealand.

This research was funded by the Commonwealth Foundation, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality grant R01 HS018657, and National Institute of Mental Health grant R21 MH100721. Dr. Hernandez was supported by a fellowship from "La Caixa" foundation.

The University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, founded in 1948 and now one of the top-ranked schools of public health in the United States, conducts research on public health and medical care that improves the lives of millions of people around the world. Pitt Public Health is a leader in devising new methods to prevent and treat cardiovascular diseases, HIV/AIDS, cancer and other important public health problems. For more information about Pitt Public Health, visit the school's Web site at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release deals with bleeding, which is the most concerning adverse effect of blood thinners. But there are other harms including joint pain, bruising and dizziness. Warfarin requires dietary restrictions and regular monitoring with blood tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON, May 17 (Reuters) - Psilocybin, the psychedelic compound in magic mushrooms, may one day be an effective treatment for patients with severe depression who fail to recover using other therapies, scientists said on Tuesday.

A small-scale pilot study of psilocybin’s use in cases of treatment-resistant depression showed it was safe and effective, the British researchers said.

Of 12 patients given the drug, all showed some decrease in symptoms of depression for at least three weeks. Seven continued to show a positive response at three months. Five remained in remission beyond the three months.

Robin Carhart-Harris, who led the study at Imperial College London’s department of medicine, said the results, published in the Lancet Psychiatry journal, were striking.

Many patients described a profound experience, he said, and appeared to undergo a shift in the way they perceived the world.

“But we shouldn’t get carried away with these results,” he told reporters at a briefing in London. “This isn’t a magic bullet. We’re just learning how to do this treatment.”

Magic mushrooms grow worldwide and have been used since ancient times, both for recreation and for religious rites.

British researchers led by David Nutt, a professor of neuropsychopharmacology at Imperial, have been exploring the potential of psilocybin to ease severe forms of depression in people who don’t respond to other treatments.

The World Health Organization estimates that some 350 million people worldwide are affected by depression, a common mental disorder characterized by sadness, loss of interest or pleasure, tiredness, feelings of guilt or low self-worth, disturbed sleep and appetite, and poor concentration.

Many patients respond to treatment with anti depressants and cognitive behavioral therapy, but around 20 percent don’t get better and are classed as having treatment-resistant depression.

Psilocybin acts on the serotonin system, suggesting it could be developed for treating depression. But hallucinogenic drugs can also cause unpleasant reactions, including anxiety and paranoia, so Nutt’s team wanted to find out if psilocybin can be given safely.

The trial involved six men and six women, aged between 30 and 64, all diagnosed with treatment-resistant depression. They all went through a full screening process before being allowed to participate and they were fully supported before, during and after they received psilocybin.

The patients were given psilocybin capsules during two dosing sessions, seven days apart.

Blood pressure, heart rate and the self-reported intensity of the effects of psilocybin were monitored during each session, and the patients were seen by a psychiatrist the next day and one, two, three and five weeks after the second dose.

Carhart-Harris said no serious side effects were reported during the study, although all volunteers said they were slightly anxious before and during initial drug administration.

“Psychedelic drugs have potent psychological effects and are only given in our research when appropriate safeguards are in place,” he said. “I wouldn’t want members of the public thinking they can treat their own depressions by picking their own magic mushrooms. That kind of approach could be risky.”

Nutt said the results showed that psilocybin “is safe and fast acting, so may - if administered carefully - have value for these patients.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Potential risks of using hallucinogenic drugs, including anxiety and paranoia, are mentioned.
The story also could have mentioned that inducing hallucinosis can result in other self-harm and is potentially much more dangerous.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Oct. 20, 2015 -- Botox -- known for reducing facial wrinkles -- may also prevent irregular heart rhythms when injected into fat surrounding the heart after bypass surgery, according to research in the American Heart Association journal Circulation: Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology.

Botulinum toxin, commonly known as Botox, is produced by Clostridium botulinum bacteria. When a small amount of Botox is injected into a muscle, it blocks nerve signals that tell muscles to contract.

Atrial fibrillation (also called AFib or AF) is a quivering or irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) that can lead to blood clots, stroke, heart failure and other heart-related complications.

"About a third of all patients undergoing bypass surgery will develop atrial fibrillation, putting them at higher risk for cardiovascular complications," said Jonathan S. Steinberg, M.D., senior study author and Adjunct Professor of Medicine at the University of Rochester and Director of the Arrhythmia Institute in the Valley Health System in Ridgewood, New Jersey. "Atrial fibrillation is also always associated with lengthened hospitalization and that means increased healthcare costs."

In two Russian hospitals, researchers randomly assigned 60 patients to receive Botox or saline injections. The injections were made in the four major fat pads surrounding the heart. To avoid bias, neither patients nor doctors knew whether the injections contained Botox or saline.
• In the 30 days following surgery, those who received Botox injections during heart bypass surgery had a 7 percent chance of developing AF, compared to 30 percent chance in patients who received saline.
• One year after surgery, none of the patients who received Botox had AF, compared to 27 percent of the patients who received saline.
• No complications from the Botox injections were reported. But complications from the bypass surgery were similar in both groups, including time in intensive care and on a breathing machine, and infection rate.

The results must be replicated in larger studies before Botox injections are routinely used to prevent AF after bypass surgery, researchers said. If confirmed in heart bypass patients, Botox injections could also help prevent AF in people undergoing valve repair or replacement. About half of those patients will develop AF after surgery.

"This first-in-man study has opened a whole new line of thinking and research," Steinberg said. "In the near future, botox injections may become the standard of care for heart bypass and valve patients, but we're not quite there yet."

Co-authors are Evgeny Pokushalov, M.D.; Boris Kozlov, M.D.; Alexander Romanov, M.D.; Artem Streinikov, M.D.; Sevda Bayramova, M.D.; David Sergeevichev, Ph.D.; Alexander Bogachev-Prokophiev, M.D.; Sergey Zheleznev, M.D.; Vladimir Shipulin, M.D.; Vladimir Lomivorotov, M.D.; Alexander Karaskov, M.D. and Sunny S. Po, M.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.

The Russian State Research Institute of Circulation Pathology and the Siberian Division of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences funded the study.

Researcher photo, heart graphic, and beating heart animation are located in the right column of this release link: http://newsroom. 

About Your Bypass Surgery Brochure 

What is Atrial Fibrillation 

Follow AHA/ASA news on Twitter @HeartNews.

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The association receives funding primarily from individuals; foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations are available at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story appropriately points out that there were no additional harms seen in the group injected with the botulinum toxin compared to those who received saline other than those associated with the surgery.
“No complications from the Botox injections were reported,” according to the release. “But complications from the bypass surgery were similar in both groups, including time in intensive care and on a breathing machine, and infection rate.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A simple blood test may help gauge prognosis and tailor treatments for women who have been diagnosed with early stage breast cancer.

The test, described in the June 6 online edition of The Lancet Oncology, measures how many tumor cells are circulating in the blood. In the new study, if even one cell was detected in the bloodstream, a woman had a greater chance of her cancer recurring and of dying.

"This may help with prognosis and staging of the cancer and, in the future, with targets for breast cancer treatments," said study lead author Dr. Anthony Lucci, a professor of surgery at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston.

Commenting on the findings, Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said, "We are moving into a state where we're looking at a person's individual tumor and this is another way to do that, potentially leading to treatment."

Whether or not cancer has spread to the lymph nodes is currently the best way to predict survival in women with breast cancer. Even so, a substantial number of patients whose cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes will have a recurrence while some of those who do have lymph-node involvement won't relapse.

Blood tests similar to the one investigated in this study have been found to be useful to gauge how well patients who already have metastatic cancer will do.

For this study, researchers counted circulating tumor cells in 302 breast cancer patients who were about to undergo surgery but who hadn't yet received chemotherapy.

Circulating tumor cells were detectable in about one-quarter of the participants, the investigators found. Fifteen percent of these individuals had a relapse and 10 percent died during a five-year follow-up, compared with 3 percent and 2 percent, respectively, of patients who did not have circulating tumor cells.

The more tumor cells a woman had in her bloodstream, the higher the likelihood of relapsing or dying, according to the report.

Although the test may not be far off in terms of clinical practice, "we need additional studies," Lucci said.

One area for study is how well these circulating cells predict recurrence and death in patients who have already had chemotherapy.

Currently, the American Society of Clinical Oncology does not recommend that clinicians measure circulating tumor cells in patients.

And in an accompanying comment article, Justin Stebbing, a professor in the department of surgery and cancer at Imperial College in London, said that "despite increasing evidence supporting the use of [circulating tumor cells] as biomarkers, how this information can be integrated into present practice is uncertain."

According to Bernik, though, "it makes sense that women who have circulating tumor cells would potentially be at higher risk of distant disease at some later date."

The problem is that just having circulating tumor cells may not be enough information to foretell the future, she noted.

"The cells also need to have a propensity to grow elsewhere," she said. "Not every cancer cell becomes a metastatic cancer cell. Hopefully, gaining the ability to tell which cells are more likely to spread potentially could guide therapy," Bernik added.

According to Lucci, circulating tumor cells are also showing promise in predicting melanoma prognosis, so the method may be "effective in several different tumor systems."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Quotes from experts not connected with the study give readers valuable perspective on the current usefulness of the test.  Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, notes that the presence of circulating tumor cells may not be sufficient predictive information.
Justin Sebbing, a professor in the department of surgery and cancer at Imperial College in London, cautioned that it’s currently uncertain “…how this information can be integrated into present practice.”
The writer also notes that the American Society of Clinical Oncology does not recommend that clinicians measure circulating tumor cells in patients.
These three cautions should help readers understand that if accuracy is not established, use of a test to guide therapy decisions could lead people down the wrong path.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study authored by scientists from the American Cancer Society, the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, the U.S. National Cancer Institute, and more than 20 other medical centers and organizations finds that higher circulating vitamin D concentrations are significantly associated with lower colorectal cancer risk. This study strengthens the evidence, previously considered inconclusive, for a protective relationship. Optimal vitamin D concentrations for colorectal cancer prevention may be higher than the current National Academy of Medicine recommendations, which are based only on bone health. The study appears online in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

Vitamin D, known for its role in maintaining bone health, is hypothesized to lower colorectal cancer risk via several pathways related to cell growth and regulation. Previous prospective studies have reported inconsistent results for whether higher concentrations of circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D, the accepted measure of vitamin D status, are linked to lower risk of colorectal cancer. The few randomized clinical trials of vitamin D supplementation and colorectal cancer completed thus far have not shown an effect; but study size, supplementation duration, and compliance may have contributed to their null findings.

"To address inconsistencies in prior studies on vitamin D and to investigate associations in population subgroups, we analyzed participant-level data, collected before colorectal cancer diagnosis, from 17 prospective cohorts and used standardized criteria across the studies," said Stephanie Smith-Warner, PhD, an epidemiologist at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and co-senior author on the article. The analysis included over 5,700 colorectal cancer cases and 7,100 controls from the United States, Europe, and Asia. A single, widely accepted assay and laboratory was used for new vitamin D measurements and calibration of existing vitamin D measurements. "In the past, substantial differences between assays made it difficult to integrate vitamin D data from different studies," explained Regina G. Ziegler, PhD, a National Cancer Institute epidemiologist and co-senior author on the article. "This calibration approach enabled us to systematically explore risk over the broad range of vitamin D levels seen internationally."

Compared to participants with circulating vitamin D concentrations considered sufficient for bone health, those with deficient concentrations of vitamin D had a 31% higher risk of colorectal cancer during follow-up, which averaged 5.5 years (range: 1 - 25 years). Similarly, concentrations above bone health sufficiency were associated with a 22% lower risk. However, risk did not continue to decline at the highest concentrations. These associations persisted even after adjusting for known colorectal cancer risk factors. Protective associations were seen in all subgroups examined. However, the association was noticeably stronger in women than men at concentrations above bone health sufficiency. The lifetime risk of colorectal cancer is 4.2% (1 in 24) in women and 4.5% (1 in 22) in men. Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer and third leading cause of cancer-related deaths in both men and women in the United States, with about 140,250 new cases and 50,630 deaths expected during 2018.

"Currently, health agencies do not recommend vitamin D for the prevention of colorectal cancer," said Marji L. McCullough, ScD, American Cancer Society epidemiologist and co-first author of the study. "This study adds new information that agencies can use when reviewing evidence for vitamin D guidance and suggests that the concentrations recommended for bone health may be lower than would be optimal for colorectal cancer prevention."

Vitamin D can be obtained in the diet, particularly from fortified foods, from supplements, and from sun exposure. Experts recommend vitamin D be obtained through diet whenever possible because excessive ultraviolet radiation is a major risk factor for skin cancer.

Article: Circulating Vitamin D and Colorectal Cancer Risk: An International Pooling Project of 17 Cohorts. JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst doi: 10.1093/jnci/djy087
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release indicates that vitamin D should ideally be obtained from the diet, and that there are no known harms to eating foods with vitamin D (an exception being when a mishap caused over-fortification of a local milk supply a few decades ago). Skin cancer risk associated with sun exposure was covered appropriately.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Not everyone was convinced. Some, like Dr. Dean Ornish, a longtime promoter of low-fat diets and president of the Preventive Medicine Research Institute in Sausalito, Calif., said that the women did not reduce their fat to low enough levels or eat enough fruits and vegetables, and that the study, even at eight years, did not give the diets enough time.

Others said that diet could still make a difference, at least with heart disease, if people were to eat the so-called Mediterranean diet, low in saturated fats like butter and high in oils like olive oil. The women in the study reduced all kinds of fat.

The diets studied "had an antique patina," said Dr. Peter Libby, a cardiologist and professor at Harvard Medical School. These days, Dr. Libby said, most people have moved on from the idea of controlling total fat to the idea that people should eat different kinds of fat.

But the Mediterranean diet has not been subjected to a study of this scope, researchers said.

And Barbara V. Howard, an epidemiologist at MedStar Research Institute, a nonprofit hospital group, and a principle investigator in the study, said people should realize that diet alone was not enough to stay healthy.

"We are not going to reverse any of the chronic diseases in this country by changing the composition of the diet," Dr. Howard said. "People are always thinking it's what they ate. They are not looking at how much they ate or that they smoke or that they are sedentary."

Except for not smoking, the advice for a healthy lifestyle is based largely on indirect evidence, Dr. Howard said, but most medical researchers agree that it makes sense to eat well, control weight and get regular exercise.

That is also what the cancer society recommends. Dr. Thun, who described the study's results as "completely null over the eight-year follow-up for both cancers and heart disease," said his group had no plans to suggest that low-fat diets were going to protect against cancer.

Others cautioned against being too certain that a particular diet would markedly improve health, and said that whether someone developed a chronic disease might not be entirely under their control -- genetics also plays a role.

David A. Freedman, a statistician at the University of California, Berkeley, who is not connected with the study but has written books on the design and analysis of clinical trials, said the results should be taken seriously.

"The studies were well designed," Dr. Freedman said, "and the investigators tried to confirm popular hypotheses about the protective effect of diet against three major diseases in women."

"But," he added, "the diet studied here turned out not to be protective after all."

The study was part of the Women's Health Initiative of the National Institutes of Health, the same program that showed that hormone therapy after menopause might have more risks than benefits.

In this case, the study addressed a tricky problem. For decades, many scientists have said, and many members of the public have believed, that what people eat -- the composition of the diet -- determines how likely they are to get a chronic disease. But that has been hard to prove. Studies of dietary fiber and colon cancer failed to find that fiber was protective, and studies of vitamins thought to protect against cancer failed to show an effect.

Many cancer researchers have questioned large parts of the diet-cancer hypothesis, but it has kept a hold on the public imagination. "Nothing fascinates the American public so much as the notion that what you eat rather than how much you eat affects your health," said Dr. Libby, the Harvard professor.

The study found that women who were randomly assigned to follow a low-fat diet ate significantly less fat over the next eight years. But they had just as much breast and colon cancer and just as much heart disease. The women were not trying to lose weight, and their weights remained fairly steady. But their experiences with the diets allowed researchers to question some popular notions about diet and obesity.

There is a common belief that Americans get fat because they eat too many carbohydrates. The idea is that a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet leads to weight gain, higher insulin and blood glucose levels, and more diabetes, even if the calories are the same as in a higher-fat diet. That did not happen here.

Others have said the opposite: that low-fat diets enable people to lose weight naturally. But that belief was not supported by this study.

As for heart disease risk factors, the only one affected was LDL cholesterol, which increases heart disease risk. The levels were slightly higher in women eating the higher-fat diet, but not high enough to make a noticeable difference in their risk of heart disease.

Although all the study participants were women, the colon cancer and heart disease results should also apply to men, said Dr. Jacques Rossouw, the project officer for the Women's Health Initiative.

Dr. Rossouw said the observational studies that led to the hypothesis about colon cancer and dietary fat included men and women. With heart disease, he said, researchers have found that women and men respond in the same way to dietary fat.

The most recent study follows a smaller one, reported last year, on low-fat diets for women who had breast cancer. That study hinted that eating less fat might help prevent a recurrence. But the current study, asking if a low-fat diet could protect women from breast cancer in the first place, had findings that fell short of statistical significance, meaning they could have occurred by chance.

Dr. Rossouw said he was still intrigued by the breast cancer data, even though it was not statistically significant. The women on low-fat diets had a 9 percent lower rate of breast cancer; the incidence was 42 per thousand per year in women in the low-fat diet group, compared with 45 per thousand per year in women consuming their regular diet.

That could mean that fat in the diet may have a small effect, Dr. Rossouw said, perhaps in some subgroups of women or over a longer period of time. He added that the study investigators would continue to follow the women to see if the effect became more pronounced.

While cancer researchers said they were disappointed by the results, heart disease researchers said they were not surprised that simply reducing total fat had no effect, because they had moved on from that hypothesis.

Of course, Dr. Libby acknowledged, the latest advice, to follow a Mediterranean diet and get regular exercise, has never been tested in a large randomized clinical trial. "If they did a study like that and it was negative," he said, "then I'd have to give up my cherished hypotheses for data."

The low-fat diet was not easy to follow, said Dr. Rowan T. Chlebowski, a medical oncologist at Harbor-U.C.L.A. Medical Center and one of the study's principal investigators. Women were told to aim for a diet that had just 20 percent of its calories as fat, and most fell short.

The diet they were told to follow "is different than the way most people eat," Dr. Chlebowski said. It meant, for example, no butter on bread, no cream cheese on bagels, no oil in salad dressings.

"If a physician told a patient to eat less fat, that will do nothing," he said. "If you send someone to a dietitian one time, that will do next to nothing." The women in the study had 18 sessions in small groups with a trained nutritionist in the first year and four sessions a year after that.

In the first year, the women on the low-fat diets reduced the percentage of fat in their diet to 24 percent of daily calories, and by the end of the study their diets had 29 percent of their calories as fat. In the first year, the women in the control group were eating 35 percent of their calories as fat, and by the end of the study their dietary fat content was 37 percent. The two groups consumed about the same number of calories.

Some medical specialists emphasized that the study did not mean people should abandon low-fat diets.

"What we are saying is that a modest reduction of fat and a substitution with fruits and vegetables did not do anything for heart disease and stroke or breast cancer or colorectal cancer," said Dr. Nanette K. Wenger, a cardiologist and professor of medicine at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta. "It doesn't say that this diet is not beneficial."

But Dr. Freedman, the Berkeley statistician, said the overall lesson was clear.

"We, in the scientific community, often give strong advice based on flimsy evidence," he said. "That's why we have to do experiments."

Correction: February 16, 2006, Thursday A front-page article on Feb. 8 about a new study finding that low-fat diets have no effect on the risk of cancer or heart disease misstated the incidence of breast cancer among women in the study. It was 42 per 10,000 per year in women in the low-fat-diet group, compared with 45 per 10,000 in women consuming their regular diet -- not per 1,000. (The difference was deemed statistically insignificant.)
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story includes many questions about whether a low-fat diet is worth the trouble.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Most doctors opt for screening women for cervical cancer more often than guidelines suggest, according to a new study.

Researchers based at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that many primary care doctors would bring women back for cancer screening annually — while recommendations generally call for a three-year wait after normal tests.

That means more costs to women and the healthcare system, as well as a risk of unnecessary treatment for false-positive test results — with very little additional cancer-catching benefit.

“There’s really no advantage to annual screening compared to screening every two or three years,” lead author Katherine Roland told Reuters Health.

Guidelines from the American Cancer Society and other organizations recommend that women age 30 and older are screened using Pap smears and tests for the human papillomavirus, or HPV.

If both tests are normal, those guidelines call for a three-year wait before the next screening. That’s because HPV — which causes changes in the cervix that can lead to cancer — may take a decade to progress to that point.

“No test is perfect,” said Philip Castle, an HPV expert at the American Society for Clinical Pathology in Chicago. But, he added, “a single negative HPV test is very good at ruling out disease.”

Even when doctors use just a Pap test, Roland said, a woman who has had a few normal tests in a row can go two or three years before her next screening.

For the current study, she and her colleagues sent out questionnaires to a representative sample of about 600 office-based doctors and hospital departments around the country. They asked doctors and staff what tests they used for cervical cancer screening and presented them with three patient scenarios.

In those scenarios, a woman age 30 to 60 has had two consecutive normal Pap tests but no HPV tests; two normal Paps and a negative HPV test; or a negative HPV test but no recent Pap tests.

In all of those cases, guidelines recommend waiting three years before screening the patient again, the authors explain in the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. But for each scenario, between 67 percent and 85 percent of doctors said they would bring the woman back in a year.

Roland pointed to the extra costs women may incur to get childcare and make it to the doctor’s office — plus the costs to a strained healthcare system of ordering more tests.

And any extra screening increases the chance of getting a “false positive” result on a test — meaning the test finds something that doesn’t turn out to be cancer. In that case, women would need more invasive tests to rule out disease, Roland said, and risk “undue harm” from those procedures.

“Some of it is, don’t go looking before you need to go looking because you’ll find stuff that you’d rather not find,” said Castle, who was not involved in the new study.

Results from a survey of the same doctors have shown that many also give the HPV test alongside Pap smears to women under 30 — which is not recommended, because HPV is common in young women and often goes away on its own (see Reuters Health story of July 4, 2011.)

Castle said there could be a few reasons that doctors opt to screen women more often than is recommended. First, they might not know about the guidelines. But women may also be used to annual testing and ask for it themselves.

In addition, Roland added, some doctors might be afraid of missing very early cervical cancer and getting sued if they screen less frequently.

But if doctors and hospitals want to rein in spending and limit unnecessary risks, that attitude has to change, researchers agreed.

“We need to shift toward the wellness visit as opposed to, ‘You have to come in here every year for a Pap,’” Castle said.

Women should talk to their doctors about screening, especially if they think they are being screened too often, researchers added.

“A woman should know what test is being used,” said Dr. Mona Saraiya, a co-author on the new study. “Often a provider just does the HPV test” without telling the patient. “A woman should say, ‘What screening tests are you doing on me?’”

And if doctors want women to come back again next year, women should ask them why, Saraiya said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job explaining that there can be harm from screening too often – something that often isn’t explained in screening stories:
“…any extra screening increases the chance of getting a “false positive” result on a test — meaning the test finds something that doesn’t turn out to be cancer. In that case, women would need more invasive tests to rule out disease, Roland said, and risk “undue harm” from those procedures.
“Some of it is, don’t go looking before you need to go looking because you’ll find stuff that you’d rather not find,” said (one observer), who was not involved in the new study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 11, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Colonoscopy can save lives, but experts agree that testing rates remain too low. Now, researchers say a special scoring system might point to those people at highest risk for colon cancer, who may need the test the most.

The system might also make colon cancer screening more efficient and boost the number of people who get checked for the disease, said a team led by Dr. Thomas Imperiale of Indiana University Medical Center, in Indianapolis.

One expert said more efforts are needed to get people to undergo colonoscopy, which is currently recommended once every 10 years beginning at age 50.

"Five percent of the U.S. population will be diagnosed with colon cancer within their lifetimes," said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. He was not involved in the new research.

Swaminath noted that one study published in 2012 found that "colonoscopy reduced the risk of death from colon cancer by 53 percent, by removing polyps. No other procedure is available to remove polyps from anywhere in the colon."

And while some areas of the United States have rates of compliance with colonoscopy guidelines of 75 percent or more, "many areas have poor colon cancer screening rates," he added.

Imperiale's team noted that not all people deemed to be at "average risk" for colon cancer face the same risk of the disease, and so some might benefit more from invasive colonoscopy than others.

In the new study, the Indiana researchers looked at more than 4,400 Americans who were scheduled to undergo their first screening colonoscopy. They calculated a clinical "score" for each of these patients, based on their health information, and the five most common risk factors for colon cancer: age, sex, waist size, smoking and family history.

Then they looked at the results of each patient's colonoscopy. The study found that patients classified under the scoring system as low-risk did, in fact, have far fewer advanced abnormal growths that might develop into cancer, compared to patients classified as high-risk.

So, patients scoring at the lower end of risk for colon cancer might be able to have less invasive screening tests (such as the fecal occult blood test), while those at higher risk would require a colonoscopy, Imperiale's team concluded.

However, Swaminath wasn't fully sold on the notion.

He believes that the scoring system "was only modestly able to separate people within the risk groups." Swaminath pointed out that even the new study found that "low- to intermediate-risk patients still have a risk between of between 1.9 percent to 9.9 percent of harboring a polyp that can develop into cancer."

For now, he said, the data from this study is not strong enough to spur any changes in current screening recommendations.

Dr. Jules Garbus is co-chief of colon and rectal surgery at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y. He seemed more supportive of the new scoring system.

"A risk stratification tool is critical in helping physicians make appropriate screening recommendations for patients," Garbus said. "While high-risk patients may ultimately require a screening colonoscopy, many average- and low-risk patients could undergo less invasive screening procedures. This can improve patient compliance with screening, as well as address escalating health care cost issues.

The study is published Aug. 10 in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about colorectal cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The harm of a screening test such as this really is “getting it wrong” in terms of predicting someone to be at low risk and finding them to have a higher risk polyp or malignancy. As noted above, the story cautions that “low- to intermediate-risk patients still have a risk between of between 1.9 percent to 9.9 percent of harboring a polyp that can develop into cancer.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AMHERST, Mass. - Results of a new study from epidemiologists at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health suggest that long-term, high intake of vegetable protein from such foods as whole grains, soy and tofu, may protect women from early menopause and could prolong reproductive function.

Consuming enriched pasta, dark bread and cold cereal were especially associated with lower risk, while they observed no similar relation to eating animal sources of protein.

"A better understanding of how dietary vegetable protein intake is associated with ovarian aging may identify ways for women to modify their risk of early onset menopause and associated health conditions," write first author and then-graduate student Maegan Boutot, with her advisor, professor Elizabeth Bertone-Johnson. Details appear in the current early online edition of the American Journal of Epidemiology.

Early menopause, the cessation of ovarian function before age 45, affects about 10 percent of women and is associated with higher risk of cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis and early cognitive decline, the authors note. Few studies have evaluated how protein intake is associated with menopause timing, they add, and to their knowledge this is the first to look specifically at early menopause.

Boutot, Bertone-Johnson and colleagues in the School of Public Health and Health Sciences at UMass Amherst, with others, evaluated the relationship between diet and risk of early menopause among members of the Nurses' Health Study II (NHS2), an ongoing prospective study of 116,000 women aged 25-42 when they entered it in 1989.

Participants were asked to report how often they ate a single serving of 131 foods, beverages and supplements over the previous year, from "never or less than once a month" to "6+ per day." They observed that women consuming approximately 6.5 percent of their daily calories as vegetable protein had a significant 16 percent lower risk of early menopause compared to women whose intake was approximately 4 percent of calories.

For a woman with a 2,000 calorie per day diet, the authors explain, this is equal to three to four servings of such foods as enriched pasta, breakfast cereal, tofu and nuts, or about 32.5 grams a day. They adjusted for age, smoking, body mass index and other possible confounding factors.

Boutot and Bertone-Johnson add, "Though relatively few women in our study consumed very high levels of vegetable protein and our power for analyses of more extreme intake levels was limited, women consuming 9 or more percent of their calories from vegetable protein had a hazard ratio of 0.41 (95 percent confidence interval = 0.19-0.88)" compared to those eating less than 4 percent.

Others on the study team were from Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. The study was supported by a grant from NIH's Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

For the NHS2, follow-up questionnaires have assessed nurses' lifestyle behaviors and medical conditions every two years. Nearly 90 percent have continued to participate in followup. Diet was assessed five times over the 20-year study, allowing the researchers to capture within-person variation in changes in food and nutrient intake over times, Boutot explains. Participants in the study contributed more than 1 million person-years of follow-up, during which 2,041 women experienced early menopause.

Boutot and Bertone-Johnson suggest that more prospective studies of their findings are warranted, including studies that compare soy-based and non-soy vegetable proteins.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release doesn’t discuss harms such as allergic reactions or other adverse effects from eating certain plant foods such as soy, wheat, and nuts. However, a discussion of harms doesn’t seem to be warranted since the news release does not advocate consumption of a specific foods, but rather suggests that a moderate increase in a range of plant foods might offer a benefit.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Warfarin is a blood thinner that is commonly prescribed to patients to prevent life-threatening blood clots. Despite its longtime use, warfarin remains tricky to dose because a person's genetic makeup influences how the drug is processed in the body. Too much warfarin can cause internal bleeding; too little warfarin fails to prevent blood clots.

Now, a new study led by Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis shows that dosing warfarin (Coumadin and others) is safer -- producing fewer adverse events such as hemorrhage -- when key elements of a patient's genetic makeup are considered.

The research, published Sept. 26 in the Journal of the American Medical Association, reports results from the clinical trial known as GIFT (Genetics Informatics Trial of Warfarin to Prevent Deep Venous Thrombosis).

"Physicians have been prescribing warfarin since the Eisenhower administration," said first author Brian F. Gage, MD, a professor of medicine at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. "It's a widely used anticoagulant, but it causes more major adverse events than any other oral drug. Thousands of patients end up in the emergency department or hospital because of warfarin-induced bleeding. But we continue to prescribe it because it is highly effective, reversible and inexpensive. So our goal is to make warfarin safer. GIFT showed that precision-medicine based on clinical factors and three genes improves the safety of initiating warfarin therapy."

Patients in the trial were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group received warfarin dosing based on standard factors such as age, height and weight; the second group was dosed based on these clinical factors plus genetic variants. Participating sites in the trial included Washington University School of Medicine, Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, Intermountain Healthcare, University of Utah, and Rush University Medical Center.

Of the 789 patients who were dosed in the traditional manner, 116 experienced at least one adverse event (14.7 percent). Of the 808 patients whose warfarin dosing was guided by genetic testing, 87 experienced an adverse event (10.8 percent). Compared with patients receiving traditional warfarin dosing, patients dosed with the genetic approach had a 27 percent reduction in adverse events, which was statistically different. The adverse events were bleeding, formation of blood clots in the veins and warfarin overdoses. No patient died during the trial.

Earlier studies looking at whether genetic testing could improve warfarin dosing had produced conflicting results. However, these studies were smaller and considered fewer genes than GIFT. GIFT enrolled 1,600 patients age 65 and older at high risk of blood clots because they underwent hip- or knee-replacement surgeries.

Unlike prior studies, GIFT took into account genetic variants in three genes for 11 days of warfarin therapy. Genetic variants were assessed on a commercial platform called GenMarkDx. Variants in one gene affect vitamin K recycling. Variants in another gene affect warfarin sensitivity. Variants in the third gene alter warfarin metabolism in the liver and can cause an overdose if the dose is not adjusted soon enough.

"There are additional genetic variants that may help to guide warfarin dosing, especially among patients with African ancestry," Gage said. In the future, we hope to quantify how these variants affect warfarin."

Gage also noted how health-care costs relate to dosing warfarin in a genetically guided manner. "Although genetic testing is more expensive than clinical dosing, the cost is falling," he said. "In our study, we estimated that genetic testing costs less than $200 per person, which is less than one month of a newer anticoagulant."

This work was supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers R01HL097036 and UL1TR000448; the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, grant number CAG-00400N; and GenMarkDx, which supplied instrumentation.

Gage BF, Bass AR, Lin H, Woller SC, Stevens SM, Al-Hammadi N, Li J, Rodriguez Jr. T, Miller JP, McMillin GA, Pendleton RC, Jaffer AK, King CR, DeVore B, Porche-Sorbet R, Napoli L, Merritt K, Thompson AM, Hyun G, Anderson JL, Hollomon W, Barrack RL, Nunley RM, Moskowitz G, Davila-Roman V and Eby CS for the GIFT investigators. Effect of genotype-guided warfarin dosing on clinical events and anticoagulation control among patients undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty: the GIFT randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. Sept. 26, 2017.

Washington University School of Medicine's 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked seventh in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although it does so in general terms, the release covers the essentials: the risk of using blood thinners like warfarin and the risks of not using them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - In a small study, people who had chronic pain as a result of damage to the nervous system reported feeling less pain, as well as less depression and anxiety, when they smoked marijuana compared to when they smoked a drug-free placebo.

The pain reduction was “modest” - less than 1 point on an 11-point scale for the strongest marijuana - and patients reported no overall difference in their quality of life based on what they smoked.

The results support a limited number of trials that have suggested marijuana may be helpful for people suffering from chronic pain, but that it also has its limitations.

“This offers another potential tool in the tool box for treating chronic neuropathic pain,” Dr. Mark Ware, a neuroscientist at the McGill University Health Center in Montreal and the study’s lead author, told Reuters Health. But there are still questions about marijuana’s long-term safety as a pain reliever, he said.

Ware and his colleagues recruited 21 adults who were suffering from chronic neuropathic pain after an injury or surgery. Three times a day, for five days, participants took a 25 milligram hit of one of four treatments: marijuana that was 2.5 percent, 6 percent, or 9.4 percent tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or a 0 percent placebo. All patients rotated in random order through the four different treatments, with a nine-day break between each one.

During each treatment, participants were asked about their pain, sleep patterns, mood, and overall quality of life.

Patients smoking 9.4 percent THC marijuana reported lower pain scores than when smoking the placebo - on average, 5.4 versus 6.1 on a scale from 0 (“no pain”) to 10 (“worst possible pain”). They also reported that they slept better, and were less anxious and depressed than when they were on the placebo.

When smoking marijuana with moderate doses of THC, participants generally reported improved symptoms, but there was no significant difference in their relief from these doses compared to relief from the placebo treatment. There was also no difference in the quality of life or mood scores that participants reported when they were on any of the four treatments.

The highest dose of THC produced the most side effects, which included headaches, dry eyes, and a burning sensation in the regions where patients had pain.

In the second, third and fourth rounds of treatment, most - but not all - patients were able to tell when they had been on either the highest THC dose or the placebo. Most patients did not report feeling “high” at any point during the study.

About 1 to 2 percent of adults in the U.S. suffer from chronic neuropathic pain - pain that occurs when nerve fibers are damaged by injury or disease, and lingers even after the original wound has healed. The condition is treated with a range of different medications, including drugs usually intended for people with depression and epilepsy. But these don’t work for all patients, and some also have uncomfortable side effects.

“A lot of the treatments that are used for neuropathic pain ...might also be associated with disruptions in sleep,” Dr. Andrea Hohmann, who studies marijuana and pain at the University of Georgia and was not involved with the current study, told Reuters Health. For that reason, the finding that marijuana may actually help improve patients’ sleep, she said, is “particularly noteworthy.”

The cannabinoid family, which includes marijuana, is “emerging as an interesting new class of drugs for pain management,” Ware said. But, “we also know that treating chronic pain of any kind requires more than just (drugs),” he said. No matter what kind of medication they’re on, these patients should also be getting behavioral and physical therapy, he said.

The study’s five-day treatment sessions also leave questions about patients with chronic conditions who might need treatment for months or years. “The trial did not last long ... so the authors cannot really say whether any response would be sustained,” Dr. Henry McQuay, who studies pain and pain relief at the University of Oxford, wrote in an editorial accompanying the study.

Ware agreed that more research is needed. “What about long-term safety issues?” he asked. “These need to be considered before the drug becomes prescribable.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Neither story actually quantified the harms, but they both noted there were side effects. This story did a better job, though, by noting that the only dose that seemed to work also seemed to produce the most side effects and by raising the issue of long-term safety concerns. It also was the only story to answer the question that readers surely would have when reading about an illegal narcotic being used as medicine. Did these patients feel high as a result? This story says that most did not. Because of the additional information and context, the rating here is satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Older women being treated for the most common form of breast cancer who took drugs called aromatase inhibitors for 10 years rather than the usual five had a lower risk of their cancer returning, particularly in the opposite breast, physicians reported Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

In a randomized controlled trial, 959 women were given the drug and 959 a placebo. Thirteen of the women taking the drug for an additional five years developed breast cancer in the opposite breast during the study, compared with 31 taking the placebo; 55 and 68, respectively, developed a recurrence of cancer in the original breast.

For any individual woman, the odds of developing “contralateral” breast cancer — that is, in the opposite breast — are still lower than 200-to-1 per year.

Still, said Dr. Richard Schilsky, who serves as the chief medical officer of ASCO and who was not involved in the study, “there’s a substantial benefit” to continuing aromatase inhibitors out to 10 years to lower the chance of cancer developing in the other breast.

The study did not continue long enough to discover whether the lower risk of developing cancer in the opposite breast translated into a lower risk of death.

The study, which was also published Sunday in the New England Journal of Medicine, was partially funded by Novartis, which sells letrozole — the aromatase inhibitor used in the trial — as the branded drug Femara. Several of the authors have received speaking fees or consulting payments from Novartis, AstraZeneca (which makes letrozole), and Pfizer (maker of the aromatase inhibitor exemestane).

Letrozole is available as a generic for less than $100 a month.

The trial included 1,918 postmenopausal women who had what’s called hormone-receptor positive breast cancer, in which the hormones estrogen or progesterone fuel the proliferation of cells. About two-thirds of breast cancers are hormone-receptor positive, and they have a good prognosis. Aromatase inhibitors block an enzyme that the body needs to produce estrogen.

The women had taken another breast cancer drug, tamoxifen, for several years and then were started on an aromatase inhibitor, which doctors usually prescribe for five years.

After following the women for a median of just over six years, found Dr. Paul Goss of Massachusetts General Hospital and his colleagues, 95 percent of those taking letrozole for the additional five years remained free of breast cancer (meaning the disease had not returned in the original breast or developed in the opposite one). Of those taking an inert pill, or placebo, 91 percent did.

Put another way, the risk of cancer returning in the original or the opposite breast was 34 percent lower in women on 10 years of letrozole compared with those who stopped after five. There was no difference in survival, however: 100 women in each group died during the study.

“The reason this is a milestone trial is that it’s the first to show that 10 years [on letrozole] is better than five,” said Dr. Nicholas Robert, an oncologist with Virginia Cancer Specialists and a co-author of the study. But because the absolute benefits were not huge, and because the drug did cause side effects, it makes sense to consider this for women at the highest risk of a recurrence of breast cancer, he said.

Aromatase inhibitors cause side effects in some women, especially night sweats, hot flashes, and sexual dysfunction. Women receiving five more years of letrozole also had greater loss of bone in their hip, worse osteoporosis, and more fractures.

Experts said the study was significant because some women and their doctors choose to continue aromatase inhibitors past the standard five years. There had been no research on whether that was beneficial.

Dr. Debra Patt, a breast cancer specialist at Texas Oncology who was not involved in the study, called the difference of a few percentage points in the risk of recurrence (95 percent vs. 91 percent) “substantial. If you can tolerate the side effects, I think many women will opt to take the extra years of letrozole, so this study is practice-changing.”

Dr. J. Leonard Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society cautioned, however, that “one has to be cautious in interpreting these results,” partly because “based on what they show, there is no overall change in survival.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: First, we applaud the story for recognizing the difference between absolute and relative benefits.
But because the absolute benefits were not huge, and because the drug did cause side effects, it makes sense to consider this for women at the highest risk of a recurrence of breast cancer, he said.
The story also clearly understands that the absolute benefit of the treatment must be weighed against the side effects:
Aromatase inhibitors cause side effects in some women, especially night sweats, hot flashes, and sexual dysfunction. Women receiving five more years of letrozole also had greater loss of bone in their hip, worse osteoporosis, and more fractures.
One thing that would have made this even stronger: Including the rates of the different side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Would a life without onions, garlic, apples and most bread be worth living?

For growing numbers of people suffering from digestive ills, the answer is "yes," at least for a while.

They are trying something called the low-FODMAP diet, an experimental eating plan developed in Australia and now getting some scientific backing and commercial buzz in the United States. The diet is aimed primarily at people with irritable bowel syndrome, a common condition in which abdominal pain and irregular bowel habits — with diarrhea, constipation or both — can wax and wane for years.

Followers are asked to eliminate, and then try to reintroduce, a long list of foods containing certain carbohydrates that might trigger gas, bloating, pain and diarrhea. FODMAP is an acronym for those carbohydrates: fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols.

The theory is that FODMAPs, found in many fruits, vegetables, grains, dairy foods and sweeteners, are poorly digested by susceptible people. The undigested carbohydrates can draw extra fluid into the digestive tract and end up in the colon, where they are “feasted upon” and fermented by gut microbes, leading to all sorts of misery, says Lauren Van Dam, a registered dietitian at the University of Michigan.

If giving up some foods might lessen that misery, many people are game, she says. “We have some patients that are literally housebound because they are worried they are going to have an accident or because they have terrible pain,” Van Dam says.

Barbara DeLancey, a 63-year-old registered nurse from Ann Arbor, says she was crippled by 10-times-a-day diarrhea when she agreed to try the diet a year ago. “I was resistant at first because it seemed so restrictive,” she says. She got teary-eyed at the grocery store, seeing all the food she could not have.

But eventually she learned she could tolerate and add back some favorites, including garlic and apples. She credits the diet, along with medication, with a big reduction in her symptoms, but says “it has not been a miracle cure.”

The diet has generated enough interest to prompt some food companies to introduce low-FODMAP products — hoping for a market surpassing that for gluten-free foods, according to some industry reports.

In 2014, IBS treatment guidelines from the American College of Gastroenterology said the diet showed promise, but that the quality of evidence was “very low."

Since then, several studies have strengthened the case for the diet, says guideline co-author Brian Lacy, a professor of medicine and chief of gastroenterology at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, N.H. Still, one study from Sweden showed no advantage over a less-restrictive dietary approach that eliminates fewer foods and stresses changes such as smaller, more frequent meals.

"The data are not overwhelming,” Lacy says. “But I think it’s a reasonable thing to try.”

The largest study so far, with 92 patients, was conducted at University of Michigan. It found that 52% of low-FODMAP patients and 41% of patients on a less-restrictive diet reported “adequate relief.” The difference was not statistically significant, says study co-author William Chey, a professor of gastroenterology. But low-FODMAP patients did get significantly better relief from pain and bloating and greater gains in mood, body image and overall quality of life, he says.

Medications, probiotics, fiber supplements and other approaches still have roles in treating IBS, and no one approach works for all patients, Chey and Lacy say.

It’s not known if the diet leads to any nutritional deficiencies or keeps working in the long run — especially for patients who get little support from doctors or dietitians.

“Physicians are largely administering the diet by giving patients sheets of paper with foods to exclude,” Chey says. Ideally, all would be referred to dietitians, Chey and Lacy agree. But few dietitians are trained in the diet, and insurers typically do not cover the visits, Lacy notes.

When patients do make their way to Kate Scarlata, a Boston area registered dietitian who specializes in the diet, the first thing she tells them is that it “is a dietary experiment. It’s a short-term learning diet.”

Van Dam does the same — explaining that after a few weeks she will help clients reintroduce foods one carbohydrate category at a time.

“Most are able to identify some high-FODMAP foods they can tolerate very well and some they can tolerate a little, but not in high portions every day,” she says. “Our goal is for them to be on the most varied, nutritious diet possible.”

The trickiest part is avoiding onions and garlic, the dietitians say. They teach clients strategies such as using (safe) garlic-infused oils, avoiding restaurant sauces and soups and topping salads with oil and vinegar.

High- and low-FODMAP food lists are updated frequently at websites and apps run by the University of Michigan and Monash University in Australia.

Here is a sampling from the Michigan site. (Note: the site receives funding from Nestle Health Science, which is marketing low-FODMAP products).

Foods to avoid

 Dairy: Milk, ice cream, yogurt, cottage and ricotta cheeses (except for lactose-free versions)

 Fruits: Apples, peaches, pears, watermelon, cherries, figs

 Vegetables: Garlic, onions, leeks, asparagus, cauliflower or large servings (more than ½ cup) of broccoli and Brussels sprouts

 Grains: Wheat (except in sourdough bread), rye, barley

 Legumes and nuts: Cashews, kidney beans, soy beans and soy milk

 Sweeteners: Honey, fructose, xylitol, agave syrup

Foods to include 

 Dairy and dairy substitutes: Kefir, almond milk, coconut milk

 Fruits: Bananas, blueberries, grapes, oranges, strawberries

 Vegetables: Carrots, green beans, bell peppers, potatoes, tomatoes

 Grains: Rice, oats, gluten-free bread (but check labels for high-FODMAP ingredients)

 Legumes and nuts: Peanuts, pecans, walnuts

 Sweeteners: Cane sugar, aspartame, stevia
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that the diet is restrictive, in the sense that it asks patients to eliminate a wide array of foods eaten in a normal diet (before cautiously adding them back later in the process). It also hints that because of all the unknowns with this relatively new, not-fully-researched diet, “it’s not known if the diet leads to any nutritional deficiencies or keeps working in the long run — especially for patients who get little support from doctors or dietitians.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration has approved a new treatment that could help millions of older adults who are nearly blinded by macular degeneration. It’s a miniature telescope implanted directly into the eye that magnifies images to more than twice their size.

Findings from the clinical trials show that the telescope does improve vision for the majority of patients. Still, there are some concerns about corneal damage, since the telescope is relatively large inside the eye. And the population who might benefit from the new device is somewhat limited. The treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery. And for those who catch the disease early on, there may be better options.

But for 80-year-old Marian Orr, the implanted telescope was just what she needed. Orr has a big family: five children, eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. That means lots of graduations, weddings and school events. In other words, lots to see. So when Orr's vision began to decline in her mid 70s, she got worried. Both her father and uncle went blind in their 60s, and she knew macular degeneration was often inherited.

Orr says her sight gradually diminished. It got to the point "where I couldn't see. If I looked at you straight on, I couldn't see your face, could only see your head," she says. "I couldn't see the eyes and the nose. I could just see the round head that was all, sort of like a halo was all over it."

This blurred vision is pretty typical of macular degeneration.

Orr couldn't see things in a store. Her daughter took her grocery shopping. Orr couldn't identify pots, pans and dishes in her kitchen. And the outdoors became an unfamiliar, startling place.

So when Orr's cousin read about an experimental treatment for macular degeneration, Orr quickly got in touch with one of the researchers, had some basic tests, and before she knew it, she was one of more than 200 patients to have an experimental miniature telescope implanted in her eye.

Dr. Kathryn A. Colby, ophthalmic surgeon at Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston and assistant professor of ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, calls the pea-sized technology a true "breakthrough" that could help millions of patients who, until now, have had no treatment options. Colby was one of the principal investigators in the clinical trials of the miniature telescopes. They were conducted at 28 leading ophthalmic centers and included 219 patients with end-stage, age-related macular degeneration. She was not Orr's doctor.

What happens with age-related macular degeneration is that the center of the retina deteriorates, and people gradually lose sight. Colby says if you think of the eye as an old-style camera with film, then the retina is the film. Over years of wear and tear, it degenerates and weakens and no longer transmits full images to the brain. That's why Orr saw blank spots where people's noses and eyes should be in their faces, sort of like "holes in the film," says Colby.

Colby says that by magnifying the image, the telescope allows the part of the vision that's missing to become smaller. And so the "blanks" in the image appear to fill up, presenting the individual with a nearly complete image.

But, like all telescopes, when vision is narrowly focused, the peripheral view gets lost. This is why the telescope is implanted in only one eye. The other eye is used for peripheral vision.

Colby says that's also why patients need to learn to use the implanted telescope eye for near activities. For example, if they're looking to see what time it is on a clock, they use the eye with the implanted telescope. But if they're scanning the room to see exactly where the clock is, they use the other eye, which also has end-stage macular degeneration.

After surgery, patients do a variety of eye exercises to train their eyes to work together. It wasn't hard for Orr, who was used to wearing contacts, one for distance and one for close-up. For her, the tiny new eye telescope has put the "bustle" back into her life.

"I'm very active in my church. And I am a lunch buddy at one of the schools nearby," she says. Orr has lunch every week with the children in the first and second grades. She reads a lot, even books with regular-sized print, which her daughter gives her. She can read the newspaper and watch TV. "I'm busy," she says. "That's for sure!"

Practically all the patients in the telescope study with Orr had their vision improve. And 75 percent of them, like Orr, had major improvement. But because the telescope is relatively large, patients risk damage to the cornea. In the study, 10 out of 219 patients had corneal problems. Five required a corneal transplant. As a result, the Food and Drug Administration plans to monitor safety for at least five years for the next set of patients who receive the telescope.

Despite its terrific potential, the new eye telescope isn't for everyone. Dr. George Williams is an ophthalmologist and retinal surgeon associated with the American Academy of Ophthalmology. He sees lots of patients who might qualify for the eye telescope.

But he also sees a lot of patients who cannot be candidates. For one, the treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery.

"In order to implant this device, we need to remove the natural lens, or the cataract, and then use a portion of the natural lens to position and support the telescope," says Williams.

Cataract surgery removes the natural lens and, in most cases, replaces it with an artificial lens, which means there is no foundation for the telescope.

And for patients who are in the early stages of macular degeneration, Williams says that medications approved just six years ago are effective and a lot less invasive than the telescope. The drugs are injected directly into the eye on a monthly basis. And with this treatment, doctors are able to prevent severe visual loss in over 90 percent of patients. In nearly half of all patients, visual improvement is significant.

So the take-home message: If you're over 60 and you begin to experience visual loss, get yourself to an eye specialist as soon as possible to see if you can be treated with medication to stabilize and even reverse the vision loss you've experienced. If that happens, Williams says, then patients may never get to the point where they need a telescope in their eye.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The fourth sentence talks about the potential harms, a rarity for any health story. In fact, the whole second paragraph should be part of a template for most health writing. "Findings from the clinical trials show that the telescope does improve vision for the majority of patients. Still, there are some concerns about corneal damage, since the telescope is relatively large inside the eye. And the population who might benefit from the new device is somewhat limited. The treatment doesn’t work for those who have had cataract surgery. And for those who catch the disease early on, there may be better options." One of our reviewers just printed that out and taped it to his computer screen.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About 800,000 people in the United States suffer from a stroke each year. Of those who survive, about 70 percent will be left disabled, making the cardiac event a major cause of adult disability. While there are therapies to help improve patients' mobility, they’re only effective within the first few hours of an event.

Recently, researchers from the Stanford University School of Medicine have made it their mission to improve these outcomes. They hypothesized that injecting stem cells into the brains of chronic stroke patients would increase their survival rates. And in a clinical trial testing the technique, researchers found injections can safely improve patients' motor function.

“What surprised us most was the remarkable recovery some patients had,” Dr. Gary Steinberg, professor and chair of neurosurgery at Stanford, told Medical Daily, “While we had hoped for that, we didn’t really expect it. Patients recover from strokes over the first six months, and then there’s very little recovery [after that]. You know, they go to rehab and there’s not much more [more] they can recover usually.”

For the study, Steinberg and his team recruited 18 patients who had suffered their first and only stroke six months to three years prior to the trial. Each patient had a small hole drilled through their skulls in order for researchers to be able to inject stem cells taken from the bone marrow of two donors directly into parts of their brains that were damaged from stroke. After patients were sent home, researchers continued to monitor their health through blood tests, clinical evaluations, and brain imaging.

Results showed that the implanted stem cells didn’t survive very long in the brain, disappearing about one to two months after injections; however, patients still showed significant motor recovery at six and 12 months post-surgery. Some of the patients bound to wheelchairs were even able to walk again.

“The recovery some patients showed was not just minimal, it was significant,” said Steinberg, who has researched stem cell therapies for more than 15 years. “It wasn’t just someone who couldn’t move their thumb now being able to move their thumb, [it was more profound than that]."

The types of stem cells used, called mesenchymal stem cells, can differentiate into a variety of cell types. In other words, they are the precursors to muscle, fat, bone, and tendon tissue. Past research has shown that these cells can be used to treat the effects of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, brain damage caused by loss of oxygen.

In Steinberg's study, it did not “cause problems by differentiating into unwanted tissues or forming tumors.” And even when the stem cells came from an unrelated donor, the participants did not experience a strong immune reaction. Although more than 75 percent of patients reported suffering headaches afterward, the researchers said it was probably due to the surgical procedure rather than the stem cells themselves. Furthermore, there were no life-threatening effects linked to the procedure used to administer them.

Motor improvement was also independent of the severity of the stroke patients’ conditions— an important detail considering older adults tend to respond less to treatment, the researchers said.

In addition to setting the stage for an expanded trial of the procedure, the promising results also change “our notion of what happens after a stroke,” Steinberg explained. The findings suggest that stroke-damaged areas of the brain, once thought to be dead or irreversible, can actually be “resurrected.”

Source: Steinberg G, Kondziolka D, Wechsler L, et al. Clinical Outcomes of Transplanted Modified Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Stroke: A Phase 1/2a Study. Stroke. 2016.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article duly noted side effects.  It’s worth pointing out that the study only followed patients for about a year, and long-term effects are unknown and could be more severe.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A government panel of experts released updated guidelines today spelling out who should be taking a daily low-dose aspirin for heart health, which also offers the added benefit of protection against colorectal cancer.

Those who would benefit from the regimen, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, must meet a strict list of criteria -- including a high risk of heart disease and a low risk of bleeding side effects.

Specifically, the group recommends that adults 50 to 59 years old who have a 10 percent or greater 10-year cardiovascular disease risk, are not at an increased risk for bleeding, and have a life expectancy of at least 10 years take a daily low-dose aspirin to prevent heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer.

"As with any drug, patients and their doctors must balance the benefits and risks of taking aspirin," Dr. Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, chair of the task force and professor of medicine, epidemiology and biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco, told CBS News. "The benefits of aspirin outweigh the harms for most people in their 50's who are at risk of cardiovascular disease but not at increased risk of bleeding. For people in this group, taking low-dose aspirin daily can help reduce the risk of heart attack, stroke, and colorectal cancer."

Adults in their 60s can also benefit from regular use of low-dose aspirin, but the bleeding risk is higher in this age group, so doctors should help these patients decide whether or not aspirin therapy is right for them on a case-by-case basis.

"The task force recommends that all patients talk to their doctor to evaluate their risk for cardiovascular disease and bleeding before making a decision about aspirin use, but this is particularly important for people in their 60s," Bibbins-Domingo said.

Heart disease and colorectal cancer are among the most common causes of death in the U.S. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 610,000 Americans die of heart disease each year, accounting for 1 in 4 deaths. Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer diagnosed in both men and women (excluding skin cancers) and a leading cause of cancer death, the American Cancer Society reports.

While taking low-dose aspirin daily can help prevent heart troubles, doctors note that it also increases the risk of bleeding in the stomach and intestines, and strokes caused by bleeding in the brain. The task force looked at the most up-to-date research on both the benefits and harms of taking aspirin for the primary prevention of both heart disease and colorectal cancer to arrive at their recommendations.

When it comes to dosing, experts say sticking to a low-dose baby aspirin is best.

"The evidence shows that there's really no incremental benefit of going over 81 milligrams, and in fact, you may increase bleeding risk by going over," CBS News medical contributor Dr. Tara Narula, a cardiologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, told "CBS This Morning" when the draft guidelines were released last September.

At this time, the task force reports that more research is needed to assess whether taking aspirin is beneficial for people who are younger than 50 or those who are 70 and older.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Harms are explained, and that’s sufficient to rate as Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
heart assocIation Mouth-to-mouth not necessary and seen as deterrent

In a break from decades-old first aid guidelines, the American Heart Association on Monday endorsed "hands only" cardio-pulmonary resuscitation - rapid chest compression without mouth-to-mouth resuscitation - to improve the odds for victims of cardiac arrest.

The new guidelines, published in the journal Circulation, recognize that recent research has shown no real advantage to conventional mouth-to-mouth CPR in outside-the-hospital cardiac arrest cases. In addition, studies show that bystanders are often reluctant to perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on strangers, but are more likely to try rapid chest compression.

"We think that if we can double the number of bystanders who attempt CPR, we can save tens of thousands of lives every year," said Mary Fran Hazinski, a nurse at Vanderbilt University Medical Center and spokeswoman for the American Heart Association.

Sudden cardiac arrest is a leading cause of death in the United States. Every day, it claims 900 American lives. Only about 6 percent of victims whose hearts stop outside of a hospital survive.

Studies show that either mouth-to-mouth or hands-only CPR may double the survival rate from cardiac arrest, but bystanders typically step in to provide the potentially life-saving intervention in only about one-third of cases. That hesitation is rooted not only in reluctance to lock lips with a stranger, but by anxiety over how to perform conventional CPR, in which the rescuer breathes into the victim twice after every 30 chest compressions.

"Many times people nearby don't help because they're afraid that they will hurt the victim and aren't real confident in what they're doing," said Michael Sayre, chairman of the Heart Association committee that rewrote the guidelines.

In fact, effective chest compression can break the victim's ribs about one-third of the time. That's a risk well worth taking when the odds of survival without CPR are so slim.

The Heart Association also stressed that three-quarters of sudden cardiac arrest cases outside the hospital occur in the home. The bystander who needs to provide those chest compressions is often a loved one of the victim.

Conventional CPR that combines both chest compression and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation has been taught in first aid classes since the 1960s. That method has been under review since 1997. Two years ago, after considering multiple studies, the Heart Association recommended hands-only CPR only in cases where people were unwilling or unable to provide the rescue breaths as well.

The latest revision stems from three major studies published last year that showed no advantage in using mouth-to-mouth resuscitation in cardiac cases.

Dr. Chris Barton, acting chief of the Emergency Department at San Francisco General Hospital, supports the new guidelines. He said the latest research on CPR supports the notion that in the critical minutes before an ambulance or defibrillation device arrives, it is very important to provide uninterrupted, deep chest compressions.

"You want the chest to go down about 2 inches. I weigh 160 pounds, and when I do this I put about half my weight into it," he said. The pressure should be applied to the center of the chest, between the two nipples of the victim.

The compressions also have to come in rapid succession - about 100 per minute. According to Hazinski, one easy way to remember the rhythm is that it is roughly equivalent to the beat of the 1977 Bee Gees' disco hit "Stayin' Alive."

"If you are untrained, just remember to push hard and push fast," Hazinski said. "Doing something is better than doing nothing."

These new guidelines are aimed at untrained bystanders, or to those who have been trained in CPR but are unsure they can perform it adequately. The message is, if there is any doubt, provide "hands only" CPR.

Although survival rates for cardiac arrest hover around 10 percent with CPR, Hazinski noted that rates have been pushed as high as 30 percent in cities, such as Seattle, that combine high bystander participation with a strong system of professional emergency medical response.

At best, CPR is a desperate measure. Survival rates are highly dependent on prompt arrival of a defibrillator - the kind carried by ambulance crews and increasingly available in public venues such as airports and sports stadiums.

"If you have access to an AED (Automated External Defibrillator), you want to apply that as early as possible," advised San Francisco General's Barton. "Early defibrillation is the most successful intervention you can do."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news article explains that when CPR is performed with chest compressions only (without mouth-to-mouth resuscitation) the main harm is rib fractures induced by energetic chest thumping. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a finding that challenges the conventional wisdom about the risks of some hormones used in menopause, a major government study has found that years after using estrogen-only therapy, certain women had a markedly reduced risk of breast cancer and heart attack.

The research, part of the landmark Women’s Health Initiative study, is likely to surprise women and their doctors, who for years have heard frightening news about the risks of hormone therapy. But most of those fears are related to the use of a combination of two hormones, estrogen and progestin, which are prescribed to relieve hot flashes and other symptoms of menopause, and have been shown to increase a woman’s risk of breast cancer.

The new findings, reported Tuesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association, come from 10,739 women in the Women’s Health Initiative study who had previously had a hysterectomy, the surgical removal of the uterus. Nationwide, about one-third of women in their 50s have had a hysterectomy.

The Women’s Health Initiative was begun in 1991 by the National Institutes of Health as a sweeping investigation of hormone use and other health issues of postmenopausal women.



While most women in the hormone study were taking combination hormone therapy, women without a uterus took estrogen alone or a placebo for about six years and were followed for nearly 11 years. The estrogen-only group was not given progestin, which is prescribed only to protect the uterus from the harmful effects of estrogen. Although all the women in the estrogen study stopped using the treatment in 2004, the investigators have continued to monitor their health, as is typical in large clinical trials.

The most surprising new finding relates to breast cancer. The women with hysterectomies who used estrogen alone had a 23 percent lower risk for breast cancer compared with those who had taken a placebo. This is in stark contrast to the higher risk of breast cancer shown in the estrogen-progestin part of the trial.

“The decreased risk of breast cancer in this group is something we totally didn’t expect when we started the W.H.I. hormone therapy trials,” said Andrea Z. LaCroix, the study’s lead author and a professor of epidemiology at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. “This study differentiates estrogen alone from estrogen and progestin in a very big way. I hope it gets across to women, because we are not reversing ourselves.”

Indeed, the investigators emphasized that the results do not change recommendations concerning combination hormone therapy for the two-thirds of menopausal women who still have a uterus. The Women’s Health Initiative data have consistently shown that the combination of estrogen and progestin raises breast cancer risk, and that the treatment should be used only to relieve severe menopause symptoms, using the lowest dose for the shortest possible time.

But the data are reassuring for millions of middle-aged women without a uterus who take estrogen to relieve hot flashes and other menopause symptoms.

An accompanying editorial in the journal was skeptical about the results, arguing that the design of the initiative, which is skewed toward older women and stopped all forms of hormone treatment after several years of use, does not match the way doctors typically prescribe treatment to women in their 50s at the onset of menopause.

Dr. Graham Colditz, an author of the editorial and professor of surgery at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, said he thought data collected from observational studies that show a higher risk of breast cancer associated with estrogen use were more reliable than the data gathered from the Women’s Health Initiative clinical trial.

“The finding doesn’t reflect how hormones are used in the U.S. at the moment,” Dr. Colditz said.

The trial has, however, been held up for years as the gold standard for medical research, and its findings linking combination hormones to breast cancer and heart problems led to significant changes in the way doctors around the world treated menopause.

A major caveat in interpreting the new estrogen data is that the study used conjugated equine estrogens, which are estrogen compounds derived from the urine of pregnant mares and marketed by Wyeth Pharmaceuticals under the brand Premarin. The brand has fallen out of favor with many women who are choosing treatments that contain estradiol, which is chemically similar to a woman’s natural estrogen. It is not known whether the benefits of estrogen shown in the Women’s Health Initiative would be replicated using a different type of estrogen.

Nobody knows why estrogen treatment alone appeared to lower breast cancer risk in the study, but one explanation may be that in menopausal women with low levels of natural estrogen, the effects of estrogen drugs induce cell death in existing tumors. Nobody is suggesting that women start using estrogen to prevent breast cancer, but the finding opens a potentially new avenue of research in the prevention of the disease.

“We need to look closely at these findings to see if we can learn more about ways to prevent breast cancer in women,” said Dr. JoAnn Manson, a Women’s Health Initiative investigator and an author of the study who is chief of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

In the final analysis of the estrogen-only trial, use of the hormone was not associated with any significant risks or benefits pertaining to blood clots, stroke, hip fracture, colon cancer or overall death rates.

But there were surprising differences in the risks and benefits of estrogen use on heart risk when comparing the youngest and oldest women in the study. Women who were in their 50s when they first started using estrogen also had significantly fewer heart risks, including almost 50 percent fewer heart attacks, compared with those assigned to the placebo group.

The data indicate that for every 10,000 women in their 50s, those using estrogen would experience 12 fewer heart attacks, 13 fewer deaths and 18 fewer adverse events like blood clots or stroke in a given year, compared with those taking a placebo.

But the risks of estrogen use were pronounced in older women. For every 10,000 women in their 70s, using estrogen would cause 16 extra heart attacks, 19 extra deaths and 48 serious adverse events.

“The big message there is that the data look much more favorable for younger women and much riskier for older women,” said Dr. LaCroix.

Dr. Rowan Chlebowski, another author of the study and a medical oncologist at Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, said the findings underscored the fact that the risks and benefits of menopause hormones change depending on a woman’s health status, her age and the type of hormone used.

Dr. Chlebowski previously led research that showed cancer risks associated with combination hormone therapy, but he says the new data on estrogen alone show that in certain women, estrogen use to relieve menopausal symptoms is a “good choice.”

“When you look at the debate, people are saying hormones are good or not good — it’s been all or nothing. This calls attention to the fact that there are differences,” Dr. Chlebowski said. “I hope that separation will become clearer now.”

 



This article appeared in print on Wednesday, April 6, 2011 on page A1.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 



Kudos to the The Times for parsing risk carefully. Among these: estrogen alone carries different risks than estrogen-with-progestin,
estrogen-alone for older women is much riskier than for younger women and risks for women who still have a uterus (unlike those who have had a hysterectomy) are also different. Last, but still important, the form of estrogen used in the study is not typically used now, so conclusions about benefits cannot be assumed to follow to the current form (estradiol.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Trulance (plecanatide) for the treatment of Chronic Idiopathic Constipation (CIC) in adult patients.

“No one medication works for all patients suffering from chronic gastrointestinal disorders,” said Julie Beitz, M.D., director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “With the availability of new therapies, patients and their doctors can select the most appropriate treatment for their condition.”

According to the National Institutes of Health, an estimated 42 million people are affected by constipation. Chronic idiopathic constipation is a diagnosis given to those who experience persistent constipation and for whom there is no structural or biochemical explanation.

Trulance, taken orally once daily, works locally in the upper GI tract to stimulate secretion of intestinal fluid and support regular bowel function.

The safety and efficacy of Trulance were established in two 12-week, placebo-controlled trials including 1,775 adult participants. Participants were randomly assigned to receive a placebo or Trulance, once daily. Participants in the trials were required to have been diagnosed with constipation at least six months prior to the study onset and to have less than three defecations per week in the previous three months, as well as other symptoms associated with constipation. Participants receiving Trulance were more likely to experience improvement in the frequency of complete spontaneous bowel movements than those receiving placebo, and also had improvements in stool frequency and consistency and straining.

Trulance should not be used in children less than six years of age due to the risk of serious dehydration. Trulance should be avoided in patients six years of age to 18 years of age. The safety and effectiveness of Trulance have not been established in patients less than 18 years of age. Trulance should not be used in patients with known or suspected mechanical gastrointestinal obstruction.

The most common and serious side effects of Trulance was diarrhea. Patients may experience severe diarrhea. If severe diarrhea occurs, patients should stop taking Trulance and contact their health care provider.

Trulance is manufactured by New York, New York-based Synergy Pharmaceuticals Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We rate this Satisfactory because the release includes the restrictions on pediatric use and the risk of severe diarrhea. The release would have been even better if it had mentioned how often the volunteers experienced side effects and the full scope of side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: The investigational anticancer therapeutic abemaciclib, which targets CDK4 and CDK6, showed durable clinical activity when given as continuous single-agent therapy to patients with a variety of cancer types, including breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), glioblastoma, and melanoma, according to results from a phase I clinical trial.

Journal in Which the Study was Published: Cancer Discovery, a journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.

Senior authors: Amita Patnaik, MD, associate director of clinical research at South Texas Accelerated Research Therapeutics in San Antonio, Texas, and Geoffrey I. Shapiro, MD, PhD, director of the Early Drug Development Center at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.

Background: In February 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib (Ibrance) for use in combination with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole for treating postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer.

The oral CDK4/6 inhibitor abemaciclib is a very different molecule from palbociclib, with distinct attributes that contribute to its discrete therapeutic effects, in particular, its single-agent activity, according to Shapiro. For example, abemaciclib has greater selectivity for CDK4 compared with palbociclib, which may explain why it does not affect white blood cell counts as severely, allowing it to be taken on a continuous schedule without treatment holidays, he said. Abemaciclib also penetrates the central nervous system, whereas palbociclib does not, raising the possibility that it could be used to treat primary or metastatic brain tumors, he added.

How the Study Was Conducted and Results: Patnaik, Shapiro, and colleagues enrolled 225 patients with a variety of types of advanced cancer in the phase I clinical trial designed to evaluate the safety and preliminary efficacy of abemaciclib. In the dose escalation phase, the researchers determined that the maximum tolerated dose was 200 milligrams (mg) every 12 hours; the dose-limiting toxicity was grade 3 fatigue.

In the expansion phase, single-agent abemaciclib was administered to 47 patients with breast cancer, 68 with NSCLC, 17 with glioblastoma, 26 with melanoma, and 15 with colorectal cancer. Among these patients, the most common treatment-related adverse events were fatigue, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, kidney dysfunction, and decreased red and white blood cell counts.

Radiographic responses were observed for some patients with breast cancer, NSCLC, and melanoma. Among the 36 patients with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, 11 had a partial response, with four of the 11 responders having continued prior endocrine therapy, and an additional 18 patients had stable disease. Among the 68 patients with NSCLC, two had a partial response and 31 had stable disease; one patient who had a partial response and 12 who had stable disease were known to have KRAS-mutant NSCLC. Among the 26 patients with melanoma, one had a partial response and six had stable disease. Three of the 17 patients with glioblastoma had stable disease, with two of them continuing to receive treatment without disease progression for 19 and 23 cycles, respectively.

Author Comment: "These data show that abemaciclib is an oral drug that can be taken on a continuous schedule and achieve durable clinical activity against multiple tumors including breast and lung cancers," said Shapiro.

"The results of the trial supported the FDA decision to grant breakthrough therapy designation to abemaciclib (previously known as LY2835219) for patients with refractory hormone receptor-positive advanced or metastatic breast cancer," added Patnaik.

Limitations: Patnaik explained that because this study included 225 patients with different types of cancer, confirmatory clinical trials in specific patient populations are necessary to precisely define the role of abemaciclib in cancer care. Multiple clinical trials have already been initiated to evaluate abemaciclib as a treatment for certain groups of patients with breast cancer and NSCLC, as well as children with primary brain tumors and adults with brain metastases, she noted.

Funding & Disclosures: The study was funded by Eli Lilly and Company. Patnaik has received research funding from Lilly. Shapiro served on an advisory board for Lilly during the conduct of the study; reports receiving personal fees from Lilly, GI Therapeutics, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, and grants from Lilly for work other than reported here; and is an investigator on several trials using other CDK4/6 inhibitors, including palbociclib and ribociclib.

About the American Association for Cancer Research

Founded in 1907, the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) is the world's first and largest professional organization dedicated to advancing cancer research and its mission to prevent and cure cancer. AACR membership includes more than 35,000 laboratory, translational, and clinical researchers; population scientists; other health care professionals; and patient advocates residing in 104 countries. The AACR marshals the full spectrum of expertise of the cancer community to accelerate progress in the prevention, biology, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer by annually convening more than 30 conferences and educational workshops, the largest of which is the AACR Annual Meeting with nearly 19,500 attendees. In addition, the AACR publishes eight prestigious, peer-reviewed scientific journals and a magazine for cancer survivors, patients, and their caregivers. The AACR funds meritorious research directly as well as in cooperation with numerous cancer organizations. As the Scientific Partner of Stand Up To Cancer, the AACR provides expert peer review, grants administration, and scientific oversight of team science and individual investigator grants in cancer research that have the potential for near-term patient benefit. The AACR actively communicates with legislators and other policymakers about the value of cancer research and related biomedical science in saving lives from cancer. For more information about the AACR, visit http://www. .

To interview Amita Patnaik or Geoffrey I. Shapiro, contact Julia Gunther at julia.gunther@aacr.org or 215-446-6896.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that “the most common treatment-related adverse events were fatigue, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, kidney dysfunction, and decreased red and white blood cell counts.” Although the release does not go into specific detail about the number of patients who reported side effects, or the degree of severity of the side effects, the list of harms seems adequate for a drug just beginning the clinical trial process.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, April 14, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- A method designed to target, freeze and destroy a tumor's cellular function seems effective in combating lung tumors, a small ongoing study finds.

At least in the short-run -- meaning three months after the procedure -- the intervention known as "cryoablation" appeared to kill all targeted tumors that had spread to the lung from elsewhere, preliminary results suggest.

However, some patients developed new tumors in that time period, the researchers noted.

The study authors cautioned that while the initial findings are encouraging, the treatment should not be seen as a cure for this type of metastatic (spreading) lung disease. Rather, they said that for certain patients who may not be eligible for more standard surgical approaches, the therapy has potential as an alternative means for offering an improved quality of life for a longer period of time.

"'Promising' is the perfect way to describe our findings," said study lead author Dr. David Woodrum, an interventional radiologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. "But whether or not this minimally invasive approach would ultimately become a primary method of treatment in the future will depend on the long-term results of this trial, which is still under way. At this point I would say that cryoablation has the most applicability as a kind of last-ditch treatment for patients who are not good surgical candidates for a variety of reasons."

Woodrum and his colleagues are scheduled to discuss their findings Sunday in New Orleans at the annual meeting of the Society of Interventional Radiology. Funding for their work was provided by Galil Medical, a medical device manufacturer based in Arden Hills, Minn.

Because this study was presented at a medical meeting, the conclusions should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute points out that while cryoablation (also known as cryosurgery) is a well-known practice, researchers are still in the process of assessing its long-term benefits.

The procedure is performed by an interventional radiologist on patients coping with metastasized lung tumors, the researchers noted. Using CT-imaging equipment, the physician inserts a small needle-like instrument directly into the tumor to deliver the freezing power (at temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius) of liquid nitrogen to cancer cells, while sparing healthy surrounding tissue.

To date, the team behind the new study has used the procedure to tackle a total of 36 tumors in 22 American and French patients --13 men and nine women -- whose average age was 60. Fifteen patients had just one tumor, while the rest had two or more. None of the patients was deemed eligible for standard surgical interventions.

The targeted tumors were less than 3.5 centimeters (about 1.4 inches), which Woodrum described as being "small to medium in size."

The procedure was performed under either general anesthesia or conscious sedation, and lasted anywhere from 45 minutes to nearly three hours. Typically, patients were able to return home the following day.

The result: Among the 15 patients seen roughly three months post-procedure, tumor control was found to be 100 percent, although six patients were found to have developed new lung tumors in the interim.

Among five patients seen six months after the procedure, tumor control continued to be 100 percent.

The authors noted that side effects were minimal, typically involving air or fluid around the lungs after the procedure, and in all cases were resolved quickly.

The team concluded that cryoablation appears to be both safe and effective, at least in the short-term. But they acknowledged that more research needs to be done to track the treatment's impact over the long haul.

"It would be overreaching to say that we're curing cancer with this," Woodrum said. "But this is one of many therapy options that is looking to turn cancer into a chronic fight, and to give patients for whom the choices are limited a chance at a good quality of life with minimal treatment complications."

For his part, Dr. David Carbone, a professor and director of the James Thoracic Center at the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, said that the findings regarding cryoablation are "not incredibly novel," given that the procedure has been around for years.

"And I would say that there are multiple different technologies for doing this kind of very localized approach," he added. He mentioned stereotactic radiosurgery -- which targets the tumor with high-power X-rays -- as another way to go.

"While I've done cryoablation myself in the past, it's not what I typically do," Carbone noted. "Stereotactic is noninvasive and doesn't require general anesthesia, so that's what I'd tend to do, although certainly what approach is ideal will depend on a particular patient's situation and symptoms. But there's no situation in which cryoablation would be the only theoretical option."

For more about cryoablation, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story was cautious in reporting:
“The authors noted that side effects were minimal, typically involving air or fluid around the lungs after the procedure, and in all cases were resolved quickly.
The team concluded that cryoablation appears to be both safe and effective, at least in the short-term. But they acknowledged that more research needs to be done to track the treatment’s impact over the long haul.”
A further caution could have been that we don’t know what patients think about such side effects being described as “minimal” and that we were only hearing this from the researchers announcing their findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For women in their 50s and 60s, the benefits of getting regular mammograms clearly outweigh the risks. But the picture isn't so clear for women in their 40s.

"What we are seeing is that women with mammogram -detected breast cancer require less treatment," Malmgren tells WebMD. "They get more breast -conserving surgery and less chemotherapy ."

The finding comes from a careful study of nearly 2,000 women diagnosed with first-time breast cancer at age 40 to 49. The women were carefully followed since their diagnosis in 1990 to 2008, says study co-leader Judith A. Malmgren, PhD, president of Seattle's HealthStat Consulting.

Feb. 22, 2012 -- When women in their 40s get breast cancer , their tumors need less intense treatment and recur less often if they were first detected during routine mammogram screening.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) says there is no proof that the benefits of routine mammogram screening outweigh the risks for average-risk women in their 40s. The American Cancer Society (ACS) still recommends that women start screening in their 40s -- but only if they are fully aware of the possible harms as well as the possible benefits.

Even the USPSTF accepts the fact that beginning breast cancer screening at age 40 saves lives. It cuts the death rate in these women by about 15%, says Otis Brawley, MD, chief medical officer for the ACS.

"Let's say 10,000 women in the world were going to die of breast cancer that developed in their 40s," Brawley tells WebMD. "If all those women were screened in their 40s, only 8,500 would die."

But the vast majority of women will never develop breast cancer during their 40s. These women will suffer the harms of early screening.

"The issue is, how many women are going to have to be called back because of abnormal mammogram findings?" Brawley says. "How many women are going to end up getting biopsies and then learn they don't have breast cancer? And a certain proportion of women are going to be so inconvenienced so many times with the mammograms they got in their 40s that they will walk away from it in their 50s and 60s when it is a much better test."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did at least mention the risk of false positives and how this could affect whether women would still be inclined to get mammograms as they get older.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - First results from a human trial of an Ebola vaccine from GlaxoSmithKline show it is safe and generates an immune response, scientists said on Wednesday, but larger trials are needed to see if it protects and if a booster is needed.

The vaccine is being developed by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) and GSK against the Zaire strain of Ebola — the one circulating in West Africa — and the first doses for a larger trial arrived in Liberia last week.

That trial is the first of several mid-stage studies planned for West Africa and aims to test GSK’s vaccine and one from Merck and NewLink. Johnson & Johnson and Bavarian Nordic have a vaccine in early-stage clinical tests.

The early-stage Phase I trial of GSK’s vaccine was primarily designed to test safety, but Adrian Hill, who led the work at Oxford’s Jenner Institute, said it was “encouraging” that the shot also prompted responses from the immune system.

“The safety profile is pretty much as we’d hoped and the immune responses are okay, but not great,” he told Reuters.

The data, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, were from 60 healthy volunteers given the vaccine in Britain between Sept. 17 and Nov. 18 last year.

The volunteers got one of three doses - low, medium, or high - and data from 28 days after vaccination showed the shot was safe at these doses, with only mild side effects.

“People typically experienced mild symptoms that lasted for one or maybe two days, such as pain or reddening at the injection site, and occasionally people felt feverish,” Hill said.

However, the antibody response was weaker than was found in a trial of the same Ebola vaccine in macaque monkeys, in which the animals were also found to be protected.

Hill said the lower antibody levels, together with a lower response detected in the immune system’s T-cells, suggested to him that a booster may well be needed.

Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust charity which helped fund the trial, said it provided “good initial evidence that the GSK vaccine will be safe to use in people”.

“However, we still don’t know whether it will provide protection against Ebola infection in a real-world situation,” he said. “That’s why trials in West Africa of this, and the other vaccines in development, must begin as soon possible.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provides just enough information to get a flavor for the potential harms without overly dramatizing them. Example: “The volunteers got one of three doses – low, medium, or high – and data from 28 days after vaccination showed the shot was safe at these doses, with only mild side effects.” And: “People typically experienced mild symptoms that lasted for one or maybe two days, such as pain or reddening at the injection site, and occasionally people felt feverish.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Aggressively driving blood sugar levels as close to normal as possible in high-risk diabetes patients appears to increase the risk of dying from a heart attack or stroke, according to major government study that stunned and disappointed experts.

The startling discovery, announced yesterday, prompted federal health officials to immediately halt one part of the large trial so thousands of the Type 2 diabetes patients in the study could switch to less-intensive treatment.

"As always, our primary concern is to protect the safety of our study volunteers," said Elizabeth G. Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, which is sponsoring the study.

Although the reason for the increased risk remains a mystery, Nabel and other experts stressed that the benefits of blood sugar control have been well established for diabetics and said patients should not make any changes in their care without consulting their doctors.

But the findings cast doubt on a major hope about diabetes treatment -- that pushing levels below current targets would be beneficial -- and would force experts to rethink how to treat one of the nation's leading health problems.

"It's profoundly disappointing," said Richard Kahn, chief scientific and medical officer for the American Diabetes Association. "This presents a real dilemma to patients and their physicians. How intensive should treatment be? We just don't know."

The findings are the second major blow to widespread assumptions about how to protect against heart disease -- the nation's leading killer. Another recent major study found that driving blood cholesterol levels as low as possible did not necessarily slow the progression of heart disease.

"This is the second big surprise," said Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic cardiologist. "This suggests that there are things drugs do that we don't understand. We have to really ask the question: 'How low do you go?' "

An estimated 21 million Americans suffer from Type 2 diabetes, the most common form of the disease, and the number has been increasing because of the obesity epidemic. Diabetes patients' blood sugar levels become abnormally high, causing a host of serious complications including nerve damage, the need for amputations, blindness, and increased risk of heart attacks and strokes.

Many earlier studies had shown that tightly controlling blood sugar significantly reduced the risk of many complications. The new study -- known as the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes, or Accord, trial -- was designed to convincingly test whether various aggressive treatment strategies reduced the risk of heart disease -- the main cause of death among diabetics.

The study involves 10,251 patients ages 40 to 82 at 77 sites in the United States and Canada at high risk for heart disease for any reason, such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol or obesity. About half were placed on a regimen combining diet and exercise with commonly used drugs designed to lower their blood sugar levels to those of the average person with diabetes, while the other half were put on a more intensive regimen designed to drive levels closer to those of someone without diabetes. The patients were further divided into those who also received blood-pressure-lowering medication or drugs to improve their cholesterol levels.

Over about four years, about half of the patients getting intensive treatment achieved blood sugar levels close to normal, and about half the patients in the standard treatment group achieved levels close to the average diabetic.

But a special 10 member panel that was monitoring the study alerted the organizers that 257 patients r eceiving intensive treatment had died, compared with 203 receiving standard treatment, a difference of 54 deaths -- or 3 per 1,000 participants per year, officials said. About half the excess deaths were from heart disease.

"We obviously were surprised," Nabel said. "We were hoping for a positive outcome."

Letters were mailed to all participants Monday notifying them of the results so they could consult with their doctors about switching to the less intensive therapy.

Nabel stressed that while the death rate was higher in the intensive group, the rate in both groups was still lower than would be expected in patients at high risk receiving standard treatment.

"Although there appear to be some benefit of an overall lower death rate in both groups, the [special panel] recommended stopping the trial," Nabel said. "The harm of the very intensive treatment outweighed the potential benefit."

The researchers stressed that the findings would not alter current guidelines or treatment for most diabetics, many of whom can control their blood sugar without drugs.

"Few patients with high cardiovascular risk like those studied in Accord are treated to blood sugar levels as low as those tested in this study," said Judith Fradkin of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

Driving blood sugar levels very low might still prove beneficial for other patients, such as those who are younger, were diagnosed more recently or are not at high risk for heart disease.

"It is not yet known whether controlling glucose to near normal levels will prevent heart disease and extend life in other groups," Fradkin said.

Officials defended the study, saying previous research had suggested that intensive blood sugar lowering would be beneficial.

"Accord is an important study intended to find new answers to help people with Type 2 diabetes reduce their high risk of heart disease," said Denise G. Simons Morton, the project's director.

Despite an intensive analysis, researchers were unable to determine the cause of the excess deaths. Because some of the patients were taking the drug Avandia, which has been the focus of concern that it might increase the risk of heart attacks, the researchers specifically examined whether that was a factor. They determined that it was not.

"We found no link," said William T. Friedewald of Columbia University, who chairs the study's steering committee, adding that the investigation would continue.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story was about the new finding that more intensive management of sugar levels in high risk patients increases mortality risk. Differences in death rates were given in absolute terms. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists are finding more clues to help determine whether people with mild dementia symptoms are at risk for Alzheimer's.

A new study suggests that biomarkers found in cerebrospinal fluid (fluid that surrounds the spinal cord and brain and acts as a protective cushion) could predict who would develop Alzheimer's disease 90% of the time among patients with mild cognitive impairment, a condition characterized by measurable memory problems.

Researchers report these findings in the journal Archives of General Psychiatry.

This is the longest clinical follow-up ever of patients who begin with mild cognitive impairment, researchers reported. Patients were tracked from four to 12 years, with a median of 9.2 years. The research builds on a 2006 Lancet Neurology study that followed patients for a median of 5.2 years, beginning with a group of 137 volunteers with mild cognitive impairment.The new study is important because of the long follow-up period, according to Adam Brickman, assistant professor of neuropsychology at Columbia University School of Medicine, who was not involved in the research.

Knowing which patient with mild cognitive impairment patients may go on to develop Alzheimer's is vital information for researchers, who are looking for treatments for the fatal brain disease. The current thinking is that interventions will be most effective when given to a patient as early as possible, Brickman said. Clinical trials can better focus their efforts if patients are known to be in the early stages of Alzheimer's. Generally, about 30% to 60% of patients with mild cognitive impairment show evidence of underlying symptoms of Alzheimer's, so not everyone with this condition is a good candidate for an Alzheimer's trial.

Researchers focused on two biomarkers previously thought to be involved in Alzheimer's disease: a kind of protein called beta-amyloid, and another protein type called tau. Experts believe a decrease in beta-amyloid in the fluid of the spinal cord is associated with a toxic buildup of that protein in the brain, which causes the formation of plaques linked to Alzheimer's disease. Tau has been tied to neurofibrillary tangles in the brain; researchers find that an increase in tau in cerebrospinal fluid is associated with Alzheimer's also.

The results from the study suggest that beta-amyloid is a much earlier predictor of Alzheimer's disease than tau, which supports the hypothesis that beta-amyloid accumulation in the brain occurs first in the course of the disease.

Some of the participants, who were originally found to be stable with mild cognitive impairment after about five years, went on to develop Alzheimer's disease during the longer follow-up. That suggests that a five-year follow-up period is not long enough to determine how well biomarkers can predict which patients will develop Alzheimer's disease, researchers say.

The association between biomarkers in the fluid and Alzheimer's was also described in studies in December 2009 and August 2010, building on the idea that a spinal tap could be useful in predicting Alzheimer's.

When these sorts of studies get published, Brickman and other doctors get phone calls from aging adults wondering whether they should be getting spinal taps to assess their risk. But it's too early to use this as a diagnostic tool in clinical settings, says Brickman. Down the road, the "fantasy" is that asymptomatic people will be able to get a biomarker test to determine whether they'll one day get Alzheimer's, but that's not possible right now, he adds.

"What I tell people is: If they’re worried about their thinking abilities, that they should make an appointment with a neuropsychology or a neurologist to get an evaluation," Brinkman says. "The way we diagnose Alzheimer’s disease is by evaluating the behavior and the risk factor medical profile, not by looking at biological markers at this point."

As scientists gain more insight into predicting Alzheimer's, aging adults may struggle with the question of whether they want to know their risk, especially since there's still no cure. Some people want to enroll in clinical trials as soon as they start showing symptoms; others would rather be ignorant of their status since there is no cure. In looking for treatments, however, researchers depend on people's willingness to contribute to science.

The Alzheimer's Association runs a system called TrialMatch. Check it out if you're interested in finding a trial for yourself or someone you care about.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did make several stabs at touching on harms, reporting:
“Some of the participants, who were originally found to be stable with mild cognitive impairment after about five years, went on to develop Alzheimer’s disease during the longer follow-up.  That suggests that a five-year follow-up period is not long enough to determine how well biomarkers can predict which patients will develop Alzheimer’s disease, researchers say.”
And it did end with this:
“As scientists gain more insight into predicting Alzheimer’s, aging adults may struggle with the question of whether they want to know their risk,  especially since there’s still no cure.  Some people want to enroll in clinical trials as soon as they start showing symptoms; others would rather be ignorant of their status since there is no cure.”
We think these could have been framed more clearly as potential harms, but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this one.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - When symptom-free people have heart scans to look for clogged arteries, they can end up with overtreatment and side effects, researchers said Monday.

In a study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, they found people who had the scans were much more likely to be put on medications and undergo surgery than those who chose standard health screening.

The scans, called coronary computed tomography angiography or CCTA, produce a detailed image of the heart that reveals cholesterol buildups in the coronary arteries.

If they get big enough, such buildups may cut the blood flow and cause a heart attack. So in theory, treating them early on might help stave off some the more than 1.2 million heart attacks — a third of them fatal — that occur every year in the U.S.

Yet there’s no evidence that treating people based on heart scan results does any good, said Dr. John McEvoy, of Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease in Baltimore, who led the new study.

By contrast, it’s well known that the scans expose patients to a high dose of X-rays, which can increase their likelihood of developing cancer. And the dyes used to enhance the images cause kidney damage in a significant portion of people.

“Testing might lead to more harm than good,” McEvoy told Reuters Health, adding that heart scans may cost $600 or more.

His team looked at 1,000 Korean patients who chose to get a heart scan as part of a health screening program at Seoul National University Bundang Hospital.

The researchers compared those patients to closely matched individuals who opted to forgo the scans — not currently recommended by guidelines — and just get the standard health checkup.

More than a fifth of the patients who got scanned had cholesterol buildups in their arteries, also called atherosclerosis.

Three months later, these individuals were using cholesterol-lowering statins 34 percent of the time and blood-thinning aspirin 40 percent of the time. In those who tested negative for atherosclerosis or didn’t get scanned, less than 10 percent used the medications.

People who got scans also had more additional tests and major heart procedures.

The researchers expected that if the extra drugs and procedures were actually helpful, the treated people would have a lower rate of serious heart problems in the future.

But after another 18 months, there was no such difference. There was just one event in the 1,000 people who had CCTA (one case of hospitalization for chest pain) and one in the 1,000 people who didn’t (a heart-related death).

Currently, whether a patient gets statin or aspirin is based on risk factors such as their age, and how much cholesterol is in their blood. Both drugs have side effects, notably joint problems and bleeding ulcers.

Although the study can’t prove that getting a scan caused the extra medication use, the gap could not be explained by differences in risk factors for heart disease, such as cholesterol levels or smoking.

In an editorial, Dr. Michael S. Lauer of National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Maryland, said the new study serves as a reminder of the downsides of screening.

“Physicians cannot easily ignore diagnoses made with screening tests because it is impossible for them to determine whether their patients have real disease or pseudodisease,” Lauer notes. “Therefore, physicians prescribe tests, medications, procedures, or even surgical procedures, all of which carry inherent risks.”

McEvoy agrees. “With these new imaging techniques, we are left with the dilemma of what to do with the results,” he said.

Even when screening helps predict health problems down the road, Lauer adds, that doesn’t mean treatments are necessarily beneficial.

“Overdiagnosis is threatening to become an increasingly important public health problem because of the enthusiasm for and proliferation of unproven screening tests,” Lauer writes.

McEvoy said there have been several reports of doctors doing CCTA heart scans in healthy patients, although the practice is currently discouraged by the American Heart Association.

According to McEvoy, doctors should focus on patients’ lifestyle and traditional risk factors such as smoking and obesity.

SOURCE: bit.ly/lEEptL and bit.ly/kBzX6J Archives of Internal Medicine, online May 23, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Unlike the competing Wall Street Journal story, this story was clear about the potential harms: “it’s well known that the scans expose patients to a high dose of X-rays, which can increase their likelihood of developing cancer. And the dyes used to enhance the images cause kidney damage in a significant portion of people.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A first-of-its-kind osteoporosis drug lowers the risk of bone fractures better than some existing treatments, two studies suggest, and could soon add a more expensive but easier to manage treatment option to the booming market.

Amgen Inc. will stress that only two shots of its genetically engineered denosumab, which could be approved for sale this fall, are needed each year. That's important because many patients stop taking other drugs due to side effects or frequent dosing.

Wall Street sees denosumab as a potential blockbuster crucial to Amgen. But with many cheaper, heavily advertised treatments, doctors view its expected high cost as a drawback. Genetically engineered drugs, made by altering a cell's DNA or other genetic material, all cost more than $10,000 a year.

"It'll find a particular niche where it'll be used, but I don't see it as taking over the market," said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a professor and osteoporosis researcher at the Mayo Clinic.

Still, he called the drug a "tour de force of modern molecular medicine" because it is potent and was designed by making antibodies cloned over and over from cells in the lab to block one pathway involved in the how the body naturally breaks down bone cells.

Denosumab would be the first osteoporosis treatment that is such a monoclonal antibody — a type of immune cell cloned from the same parent cell to bind to a specific substance. In this case, it targets a molecule in bones that drives formation of cells called osteoclasts that break down bone, a strategy that greatly reduces bone loss.

The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday released its review of denosumab, with staff citing concerns about increased rates of skin infections and some tumors. That report comes just ahead of a meeting Thursday when outside advisers will weigh the drug's safety and effectiveness and recommend whether to approve it.

Amgen shares rose $1.57, or 2.6 percent, to close at $62.81.

Denosumab, an injection just under the skin, would have to compete against eight major types of pills and injected medicines, including estrogen and generic and brand-name Fosamax pills, long the market leader.

Most of those must be given more often, with pills swallowed once a day, week or month, a nasal spray inhaled daily, and one injection under the skin given daily. But another injection given intravenously is only needed once a year, and estrogen, while out of fashion due to its link to breast cancer, is available in skin patches changed once or twice a week.

Those drugs' annual retail cost can range from $385 for generic Fosamax, to roughly $1,250 for most brand-name pills, to $11,100 for injected Forteo, which must be injected daily.

Global sales of osteoporosis treatments, including hundreds of vitamin brands, hit nearly $8.4 billion last year, according to data from IMS Health. About 10 million Americans have osteoporosis.

Analyst Steve Brozak of WBB Securities said denosumab will pass the $1 billion annual sales threshold for blockbusters, but it's unclear by how much.

"You're going to have blowback by insurers" over how much they will pay, he said, but Amgen might try to charge more than $10,000 per year.

Dr. Lenore Buckley, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University, said all these drugs carry some risks. The studies found denosumab caused eczema in some patients, and a dozen of the women got a serious skin infection, cellulitis, that sometimes required hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics.

"Because this drug affects the immune system, the long-term effects on cancer risk or immune function is still unknown," she warned, saying she expects FDA will require Amgen to track risks over time if the drug is approved.

The effectiveness of denosumab and existing drugs appears to plateau after two or three years, she added.

The two studies were released Tuesday by the New England Journal of Medicine.

Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., paid for both. Nearly all the researchers receive consulting, advisory and other fees from the company and competitors, or are Amgen employees. The biotech company designed the studies, handled data collection and analysis, and helped write the journal reports.

One study included 7,868 women, aged 60 to 90, with moderate to severe osteoporosis. Half got denosumab injections every six months for three years. They had 68 percent fewer spine fractures and 40 percent fewer hip fractures than the study participants who got dummy shots.

The second study included 1,468 men with prostate cancer at increased fracture risk due to cancer hormone therapy, although 556 dropped out for reasons from side effects and cancer progression to the study being extended from two to three years. Denosumab cut the risk of spine fractures 62 percent over three years compared to dummy shots. Spine bone density loss was far smaller for those given the drug.

Until recently, studies of osteoporosis drugs just measured changes in bone density, assumed to equate with lower fracture risk. Newer studies also measure fracture rates, but there are no head-to-head studies on that.

However, based on some prior studies, independent experts say denosumab appears more effective at preventing spine fractures than three older pills — Fosamax, Actonel and Boniva — and calcitonin nasal sprays, which all use various pathways to slow down cells called osteoclasts that break down bone. Experts think denosumab prevents spine fractures about as well as Reclast, an intravenously injected drug that slows bone breakdown, and daily just below the skin injections of Forteo, the only drug that stimulates bone-building cells called osteoblasts. And denosumab appears to prevent fractures of the hip, forearm and ankle about the same as all those drugs.

Dr. Jacob Warman, an osteoporosis expert at Brooklyn Hospital Center, said denosumab might have potential as an add-on to existing drugs to boost results. He expects that would be covered by insurers, who pay for multiple medicines for other conditions.

Amgen spokeswoman Kerry Beth Daly said the company has not yet set a price for the drug, but will try to keep it affordable. She said pricing also will reflect denosumab's twice-a-year dosing.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Citing the FDA’s review of denosumab, as well as the adverse risks reported in the trials, the story mentions that this drug is associated with an increased risk of skin infections and some tumors.  The story also points out that its long-term effects on cancer risk and the immune system are unknown. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Britain’s 650,000 people with bipolar disorder should take lithium to help control their condition, despite its reputation for dulling the senses, a significant new study has found.

Researchers claim that although the drug does carry some health risks, its overall effectiveness, especially its ability to reduce self-harm and suicide, mean it should be much more widely used.

The findings are contained in the first study comparing the side-effects of the four main mood-stabilising drugs the NHS prescribes. They have prompted calls for a rethink about attitudes towards lithium, given that only an estimated 10% of those with bipolar disorder use it, mainly because patients fear it will cause loss of personality, weight gain and other problems.

The lead author behind the research told the Guardian that widespread “lithium stigma” among patients is leading to them receiving the wrong treatment and ending up admitted to hospital unnecessarily because their condition is not as well controlled as it could be.

“Lithium is a drug with a bad reputation. It is seen by patients, and some psychiatrists, as a dangerous drug. People rightly have suspicions about it. Patients say that the downsides include emotional numbing – feeling that you aren’t connected with your feelings – as well as tremors,” said Dr Joseph Hayes, a psychiatrist at University College London.

But lithium’s reputation is largely misplaced and based on the experiences of patients from the 1960s to the 1980s who were given too large a dose of the drug, he added. The new research, published in the medical journal PLOS Medicine, found that the side-effects of the mood-stabilising alternatives used by most patients are either the same as or worse than lithium, Hayes said.

The paper, co-written by Hayes and four colleagues from UCL and Oxford University, concluded that: “Lithium remains an important treatment for individuals with bipolar disorder.” It accepts that “there is clear evidence that its use is associated with a number of adverse events.”

However, it adds: “These risks need to be offset with the potentially superior effectiveness and anti-suicidal benefits of the drug compared to other treatment options.”

The researchers studied a nationally representative sample of 6,671 patients across the UK who were treated for bipolar disorder between 1995 and 2013. Of those, 2,148 had taken lithium, 1,670 had used valproate, 1,477 had been on olanzapine and 1,376 had taken quetiapine. They experienced side-effects including chronic kidney disease, thyroid disease, weight gain and high blood pressure.

The researchers’ analysis bore out one of the two main criticisms of lithium, but found the other to be baseless. They found that patients on lithium had a higher risk of suffering kidney function problems and developing hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism and also hypercalcemia. However, none of the drugs caused more severe kidney problems.

Meanwhile, lithium patients were less likely to put on weight than patients on the other drugs. While 15%-20% of those on the three other drugs were more likely to gain more than 15% of their body weight, just 10% of those on lithium put on the same amount of extra pounds. Those on olanzapine added the most weight and experienced high blood pressure as a result.

Separate research has shown that patients on the other three medications are 40% more likely to harm themselves than those on lithium. Bipolar disorder carries one of the highest rates of suicide of any mental illness, alongside schizophrenia and alcohol and drug addiction.

The very limited use of lithium is despite the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) advising in 2014 that it should be the standard treatment for bipolar disorder, which is also known as manic depression and is characterised by manic highs and bouts of depression. That superseded its previous view, outlined in 2006, that any of the four drugs were useful first lines of treatment for the condition, which affects about one in 100 people.

“Lithium stigma, which includes some people in the psychiatric community, leads to people using drugs that are less effective [than lithium]. To me as a doctor that’s a big worry because my main aim is to help people to be well and if you aren’t doing that with the best available evidence then you are failing patients,” said Hayes.

“I think that many patients are missing out quite commonly on the best available treatment. That means that people end up in hospital more often than they need to and end up achieving less in their lives than they could do if they were on lithium. The high suicide rate with bipolar disorder should encourage greater use of lithium. There should be more sensible use of it.”

Stephen Buckley, head of information at the charity Mind, said: “We welcome research which adds to our understanding of treatments and medications for people experiencing mental health problems, including bipolar disorder. But as with all areas of mental health there is still more research to be done.

“Different people will find that different treatments help with managing their mental health problems. This may be medication, talking therapies, or a mixture of both.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a reasonable job in outlining the side effects seen with the four drugs in question and provides them in context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Leaving a bedroom door or window open may help people sleep better, a study from the Netherlands suggests.

Open windows and doors helped reduce carbon dioxide levels and improve ventilation and air flow, which was related to better sleep quality for the healthy young adults in the study.

“We spend nearly a third of our life in the bedroom environment, but the air quality in our sleeping environment is often overlooked,” said study author Dr. Asit Mishra of Eindhoven University of Technology.

“Imagine this - you are in a confined space and have limited ability to adjust the situation (since you are asleep) while you are possibly surrounded by pollutants,” he told Reuters Health by phone. “This is how things are in bed, covered under duvets or a blanket.”

For one night of the study, 17 volunteers slept with an open window or internal door. On another night, the windows and door to the room were kept closed. In the meantime, Mishra and colleagues monitored carbon dioxide levels, temperature, background noise and humidity. The study participants were asked not to drink alcoholic beverages or caffeinated drinks, which could influence sleep. They each slept alone, and the bedroom layout with furniture arrangement was kept consistent.

For measuring sleep quality, participants wore an armband that measures skin temperature, heat flux, bed temperature and skin moisture levels. They also wore a sensor that tracked their movements at night, including indications of restlessness.

Closed environments tended to have less background noise – but they also had significantly higher carbon dioxide levels, which indicated lower ventilation levels.

Open conditions were slightly cooler than closed, although humidity levels were similar across settings, according to the report in the journal Indoor Air.

Notably, carbon dioxide levels were lower when windows or doors were open.

Overall, skin temperature and the bed temperature were higher in closed conditions than open conditions. The number of awakenings and sleep efficiency improved as carbon dioxide levels decreased.

“Opening an internal door can be a reasonably good alternative if you don’t want to open windows, either for noise concerns or security concerns,” Mishra said.

A limitation of the study is that the motion sensor often slipped off the sleepers at night.

“Sleep quality is affected by many factors, such as health and emotional states, bedding conditions and different environmental conditions, including noise levels and temperature,” said Dr. Nuno Canha of the University of Lisbon in Portugal. Canha, who wasn’t involved with this study, researches indoor air quality and sleep during different ventilation patterns. He is also part of LIFE Index-Air, a European research group that focuses on human exposure to pollutants.

In a recent study, Canha and colleagues found that closed doors and windows led to higher levels of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and other substances such as formaldehyde.

“Sleep is essential to our life in several areas: health, well-being and productivity,” Canha told Reuters Health by email. “The exposure we are under while asleep is continuous . . . and we should play it safe in order to breathe better air during sleep.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There appear to be no immediate potential harms, but the story mentions indirect ones like extra noise or concerns about security.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON -- Consuming soy foods (such as soy milk, tofu and edamame) and cruciferous vegetables (such as cabbages, kale, collard greens, bok choy, Brussels sprouts, and broccoli) may be associated with a reduction in common side effects of breast cancer treatment in breast cancer survivors, say a team of scientists led by Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center.

In the study, published in Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, higher intake of cruciferous vegetables and soy foods were associated with fewer reports of menopausal symptoms. Higher soy intake was also associated with less reported fatigue. The breast cancer survivors studied included 173 non-Hispanic white and 192 Chinese Americans including US-born Chinese and Chinese immigrants.

Researchers say breast cancer survivors often experience side effects from cancer treatments that can persist months or years after completion of treatment. For example, because many treatments designed to prevent breast cancer recurrence inhibit the body's production or use of estrogen, the hormone that can fuel breast cancer growth, breast cancer patients often experience hot flashes and night sweats, among other side effects.

The lead author on the study, Sarah Oppeneer Nomura, PhD, of Georgetown Lombardi, said that while further research is needed in larger study populations and with more detailed dietary data, this project addresses an important gap in research on the possible role of lifestyle factors, such as dietary habits, in relation to side effects of treatments.

"These symptoms can adversely impact survivors' quality of life and can lead them to stopping ongoing treatments, she says. "Understanding the role of life style factors is important because diet can serve as a modifiable target for possibly reducing symptoms among breast cancer survivors."

When study participants were evaluated separately by race/ethnicity, associations were significant among white breast cancer survivors; however; while a trend was seen in the benefit for Chinese women, results were not statically significant. Researchers explain Chinese women typically report fewer menopausal symptoms. Most of them also consume cruciferous vegetables and soy foods, making it difficult to see a significant effect in this subgroup. Indeed, in this study, Chinese breast cancer survivors ate more than twice as much soy and cruciferous vegetables.

Whether the reduction in symptoms accounts for longtime use of soy and cruciferous vegetables needs further investigation, says the study's senior author, Judy Huei-yu Wang, PhD, of Georgetown Lombardi's Cancer Prevention and Control Program.

Results obtained in preclinical studies in animals show that biologically active compounds present in both soy and cruciferous vegetables cause breast cancer cells to grow, but have opposite effects in animals that consume these compounds well before cancer is diagnosed and continue consuming them during and after cancer treatments.

Until more research is conducted, breast cancer patients should not suddenly start eating soy, if they have not consumed it before, says Leena Hilakivi-Clarke, PhD, a professor of oncology at Georgetown Lombardi and a co-author of the study.

Researchers also found suggestive associations with lower reporting of other symptoms, including joint problems, hair thinning/loss and memory less in women who consumed more soy foods, but these associations did not reach statistical significance.

Phytochemicals, or bioactive food components, such as isoflavones in soy foods and glucosinolates in cruciferous vegetables may be the source of the benefit, researchers say. Isoflavones bind to estrogen receptors and exert weak estrogenic effects, among other effects. Glucosinolates in cruciferous vegetables influence levels of metabolizing enzymes that can modulate inflammation and levels of estrogen, possibly attenuating treatment-related symptoms.

Co-authors of the study include Chiranjeev Dash, MBBS, MPH, PhD, Leena Hilakivi-Clarke, PhD, and Yun-Ling Zhen, MPH, PhD, from Georgetown Lombardi; Yi-Tin Hwang, PhD, from National Taipei University, Taiwan; Scarlett Lin Gomez, MPH, PhD, from the Cancer Prevention Institute of California; Teresa T. Fung, MS, ScD, from Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health; Shu-Lan Yeh, PhD, from Chang Shan Medical University, Taiwan; and Serena Phillips, RN, MPH, from Milken Institute School of Public Health, George Washington University.

The study was funded by a Lance Armstrong Foundation Young Investigator Award and the National Cancer Institute (CA139408).

The authors report having no personal financial interests related to the study.

Georgetown University Medical Center (GUMC) is an internationally recognized academic medical center with a three-part mission of research, teaching and patient care (through MedStar Health). GUMC's mission is carried out with a strong emphasis on public service and a dedication to the Catholic, Jesuit principle of cura personalis -- or "care of the whole person." The Medical Center includes the School of Medicine and the School of Nursing & Health Studies, both nationally ranked; Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, designated as a comprehensive cancer center by the National Cancer Institute; and the Biomedical Graduate Research Organization, which accounts for the majority of externally funded research at GUMC including a Clinical and Translational Science Award from the National Institutes of Health. Connect with GUMC on Facebook (Facebook.com/GUMCUpdate), Twitter (@gumedcenter) and Instagram (@gumedcenter).

Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center is designated by the National Cancer Institute as a comprehensive cancer center -- the only cancer center of its kind in the Washington, DC area. A part of Georgetown University Medical Center and MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, Georgetown Lombardi seeks to improve the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of cancer through innovative basic and clinical research, patient care, community education and outreach, and the training of cancer specialists of the future. Connect with Georgetown Lombardi on Facebook) and Twitter (@LombardiCancer).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release responsibly devotes some attention to harms. It notes that in preclinical animal studies, “biologically active compounds present in both soy and cruciferous vegetables cause breast cancer cells to grow, but have opposite effects in animals that consume these compounds well before cancer is diagnosed and continue consuming them during and after cancer treatments.”
It also cautions that breast cancer patients shouldn’t start eating soy now if they haven’t consumed it previously, noting that more research is needed to understand potential risks.
Numerous studies have examined the impact of soy-based foods on women with breast cancer — with conflicting results — and we expect this debate will continue. Some recent studies suggest that eating soy, benefits women with breast cancer, particularly at the low rate it is consumed in the American diet.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Many of us theorize that the two are tied — inflammation causes seizures, and seizures cause inflammation,” said Orrin Devinsky, director of the Comprehensive Epilepsy Center at the New York University Langone Medical Center and William’s doctor. “Over time, both of them may feed off each other.”

About 50 million people worldwide, including more than 2.7 million people in the United States, are struggling with epilepsy in some form. Half of all patients are children. Epilepsy can result from brain injury, but in most cases the cause is unknown and may be genetic. Refractory epilepsy, its intractable form, and the medications with which doctors attempt to treat it can cause lifelong problems with learning, memory and behavior.

An epileptic seizure occurs when large groups of neurons in the brain begin firing uncontrollably, disrupting the balance of electrical activity and causing changes in mental function, motor function and behavior. It’s not known what sets off a seizure, but lately scientists like Dr. Devinsky have been gathering evidence that inflammation, the immune system’s response to injuries or foreign organisms, plays a pivotal role.

Scientists have known since the 1950s that inflammation is involved in a particularly vicious brain disorder called Rasmussen’s encephalitis, which starts seizures and usually affects children. Inflammation inflicts such severe damage to the brain that the standard treatment for the condition is hemispherectomy — the surgical removal of one of the brain’s hemispheres. Some researchers also suspect an inflammatory link to another form of epilepsy, infantile spasms, because children with the disease respond to ACTH, a hormone produced in the pituitary gland with strong anti-inflammatory effects.

Eleonora Aronica, a neuropathologist at the University of Amsterdam, has found signs of inflammation in autopsy specimens and surgical resections from patients with a wide range of epilepsies. Annamaria Vezzani, a neuroscientist at the Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research in Milan, has induced epilepsy in mice and rats by injecting kainic acid into their brains, and has observed the activation of a cellular pathway linked to inflammation before and during seizures.

The amount of inflammation in the brain correlates with the frequency of seizures, she also has found. “This is a novel finding,” Dr. Vezzani said in an interview. “It was not known that inflammation was a common feature of different types of epilepsy.”

Normal brain function is regulated by the glial cells, which protect neurons and induce an inflammatory response if the brain is injured. But this response also can contribute to seizures, some experts believe, either because components of the immune system stimulate neurons or because the glial cells’ capacity to regulate the brain is diminished when they become “distracted” by an injury. As Dr. Devinsky noted, seizures in turn may produce further inflammation, perpetuating the cycle.

Now Dr. Vezzani and colleagues are testing a molecule called VX-765 that disrupts the inflammatory process she discovered. In one study, high doses of the drug reduced the number of seizures by about two-thirds in mice with treatment-resistant epilepsy.

Sixty patients enrolled in a subsequent trial did not experience a statistically significant improvement after taking VX-765 for six weeks, but they did begin to experience fewer seizures at the end of the trial.

The drug is now the subject of a Phase 2 trial involving 400 patients. “Anti-inflammatory therapies could at least supplement, and perhaps replace, anticonvulsants,” said Dr. Jacqueline French, a neurologist at the N.Y.U. Comprehensive Epilepsy Center who is leading the new trial.

Replacing anticonvulsants is not merely an end in itself. Although they give many epileptics a better quality of life, they do not affect the course of the disease, only its symptoms. Researchers hope that anti-inflammatories may help ameliorate epilepsy’s underlying causes. “Giving a medication that could treat the epilepsy, as opposed to treating the seizure, would be absolutely novel,” Dr. French said.

But there are dangers to this approach. Steroids — potent anti-inflammatories that some doctors are using for experimental treatments — can have harmful long-term side effects. And it remains unclear whether inflammation might be implicated in all forms of epilepsy or which patients might benefit from anti-inflammatory treatment.

“Like any new field, there’s a lot of enthusiasm and almost a bit of religion involved,” said Dr. Tallie Z. Baram, an epilepsy expert at the University of California, Irvine. “The challenge for the next few years is to find out the limitations, the boundaries, the real mechanisms.”

Still, whatever the role of inflammation in epilepsy, Elisa Moller says that anti-inflammatories were a miracle intervention for her son. At William’s worst point, a night in July 2010, he had a seizure every time he fell asleep, suffering 23 grand mals between midnight and 6 a.m.

Dr. Devinsky had prescribed weekly doses of prednisone, a steroid, and in desperation Ms. Moller decided to administer a mega dose.

“I was taking his life into my hands, I know,” she said. “But the way I looked at it, he was going to die anyway.”

Since that night William has not had another seizure. He continues with the steroids and also follows the ketogenic diet, a high-fat, low-carbohydrate regimen that has proved beneficial for many with intractable epilepsy.

Steroids are “the one thing I refuse to take him off of,” Ms. Moller said. “The past year has been the best time of his life.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Very low in the story, it mentions harms, saying, “But there are dangers to this approach. Steroids — potent anti-inflammatories that some doctors are using for experimental treatments — can have harmful long-term side effects. And it remains unclear whether inflammation might be implicated in all forms of epilepsy or which patients might benefit from anti-inflammatory treatment.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People who cram all their exercise into one or two sessions at the weekend benefit nearly as much as those who work out more frequently, researchers say.



A study of more than 60,000 adults in England and Scotland found that “weekend warriors” lowered their risk of death by a similar margin to those who spread the same amount of exercise over the whole week.



The findings will reassure people who find it hard to make time for a daily exercise routine and opt instead to break a sweat once or twice a week in the hope of keeping fit.



“Millions of people enjoy doing sport once or twice a week, but they may be concerned that they are not doing enough,” said Gary O’Donovan, a physical activity researcher and author on the study at Loughborough University. “We find a clear benefit. It’s making them fit and healthy.”



The UK’s National Health Service recommends that to ward off an early death, people should spend 150 minutes a week performing moderate exercise, or 75 minutes a week doing vigorous exercise. As a rule of thumb, moderate exercise can be done while maintaining a conversation, whereas during vigorous exercise talking at the same time is too hard.



In the study, those who met the physical activity target by exercising through the week had a 35% lower risk of death than the inactive adults, with cardiovascular deaths down 41% and a 21% lower risk of cancer death.



But the weekend warriors also saw substantial health benefits if they met the physical activity target too. Their overall risk of death was 30% lower than the sedentary adults, with the risk of cardiovascular and cancer deaths lower by 40% and 18% respectively.



“Weekend warriors are people who meet the recommended volume of physical activity each week through only one or two sessions. There are doing a large proportion of vigorous exercise and that makes you fitter than moderate exercise,” said O’Donovan. Men and women benefited equally, according to the study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association: Internal Medicine.



The results are based on medical data gathered for 63,591 adults aged 40 and above between 1994 and 2012. Nearly 9,000 of the study participants died in the period.



For those who have resolved to get fit in the New Year, O’Donovan recommends to start with moderate exercise, such as brisk walking, and then to set realistic, incremental goals to boost confidence without running the risk of setbacks due to injury. “A middle aged or older person should do as much as 12 weeks of moderate exercise before introducing vigorous exercise,” he said.



Ulf Ekelund at the Norwegian School of Sport Sciences in Oslo said the study emphasised what researchers have found time and again: that even a small amount of regular exercise wards off death. In the study, those who exercised a little had a 29% lower risk of death than those who did no exercise at all. “The novel finding is that it appears the duration, and possibly the intensity, of leisure time physical activity is more important than the frequency,” Ekelund said.



“My take home message is that the greatest risk reduction and the greatest gain for the individual and for public health is if those who are physically inactive take up some activity,” he added.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although not explicit the story does provide some information on the potential harms before embarking on a “weekend warrior” status.  The lead author of the paper recommended, “… to start with moderate exercise, such as brisk walking, and then to set realistic, incremental goals to boost confidence without running the risk of setbacks due to injury. “A middle aged or older person should do as much as 12 weeks of moderate exercise before introducing vigorous exercise.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Noctiva (desmopressin acetate) nasal spray for adults who awaken at least two times per night to urinate due to a condition known as nocturnal polyuria (overproduction of urine during the night). Noctiva is the first FDA-approved treatment for this condition.

“Today’s approval provides adults who overproduce urine at night with the first FDA-approved therapeutic option to help reduce the number of times a night they wake up to urinate,” said Hylton V. Joffe, M.D., M.M.Sc., director of the Division of Bone, Reproductive, and Urologic Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “It is important to know that Noctiva is not approved for all causes of night-time urination, so patients should discuss their symptoms with their health care provider who can determine the underlying cause of the night-time urination and whether Noctiva is right for them.”

Nocturia (wakening at night to urinate) is a symptom that can be caused by a wide variety of conditions, such as congestive heart failure, poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, medications, or diseases of the bladder or prostate. Before considering Noctiva, health care providers should evaluate each patient for possible causes for the nocturia, and optimize the treatment of underlying conditions that may be contributing to the night-time urination. Because Noctiva is approved only for adults with nocturia caused by nocturnal polyuria, health care providers should confirm overproduction of urine at night with a 24-hour urine collection, if one has not been obtained previously. Health care providers should also be mindful of underlying conditions that can cause nocturia, but that make treatment with Noctiva unsafe, such as excessive drinking of fluids or symptomatic congestive heart failure.

Noctiva is taken daily, approximately 30 minutes before going to bed. It works by increasing the absorption of water through the kidneys, which leads to less urine production.

Noctiva’s efficacy was established in two 12-week, randomized, placebo-controlled trials in 1,045 patients 50 years of age and older with nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria. Although these trials showed a small reduction in the average number of night-time urinations with Noctiva compared to placebo, more patients treated with Noctiva were able to at least halve their number of night-time urinations, and patients treated with Noctiva had more nights with one or fewer night-time urinations.

Noctiva is being approved with a boxed warning and a Medication Guide because it can cause low sodium levels in the blood (hyponatremia). Severe hyponatremia can be life-threatening if it is not promptly diagnosed and treated, leading to seizures, coma, respiratory arrest or death. Health care providers should make sure the patient’s sodium level is normal before starting Noctiva, and should check sodium levels within one week and approximately one month after starting treatment and periodically thereafter. The lower Noctiva dose is recommended as the starting dose for those who may be at risk for hyponatremia, such as the elderly. Noctiva should not be used in patients at increased risk of severe hyponatremia, such as those with excessive fluid intake, those who have illnesses that can cause fluid or electrolyte imbalances, certain patients with kidney damage, and in those using certain medicines, known as loop diuretics or glucocorticoids.

Noctiva should also not be used in patients with symptomatic congestive heart failure or uncontrolled hypertension because fluid retention can worsen these underlying conditions. Use of Noctiva should be discontinued temporarily in patients with certain nasal conditions such as colds or allergies until those conditions have resolved.

Noctiva is also not recommended for the treatment of nocturia in pregnant women. Nocturia is usually related to normal changes in pregnancy that do not require treatment with Noctiva. Noctiva should not be used in children.

The most common side effects of Noctiva in clinical trials included nasal discomfort, cold symptoms (nasopharyngitis), nasal congestion, sneezing, high or increased blood pressure, back pain, nose bleeds, bronchitis and dizziness.

Although there are other FDA-approved medications that also contain desmopressin, none of those medications are approved to treat nocturia.

Noctiva is manufactured by Renaissance Lakewood, LLC for Milford, Pennsylvania-based Serenity Pharmaceuticals, LLC.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The Agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release does well describing harms, providing extensive details on adverse effects, particularly warning that Noctiva can cause a potentially life-threatening drop in blood sodium and shouldn’t be used by those at risk for that condition. The release says the drug will come with a boxed warning and a Medication Guide to draw attention to the risk. It also lists the most common side effects: nasal discomfort, cold symptoms, nasal congestion, sneezing, high or increased blood pressure, back pain, nose bleeds, bronchitis and dizziness.
It cautions against use in pregnant women and children as well as patients with symptomatic congestive heart failure or uncontrolled hypertension and patients with certain nasal conditions such as colds or allergies.
We would have liked to see the news release mention that 4 percent of patients in the trials stopped therapy due to adverse events. Also, an FDA document expressed concern that the drug could mask symptoms of underlying conditions, which was only alluded to in the news release with an advisory that doctors treat underlying conditions that could cause frequent urination.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Dec. 9, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The bone drug zoledronic acid (Zometa), considered a potentially promising weapon against breast cancer recurrence, has flopped in a new study involving more than 3,360 patients.

Zometa did not appear to prevent breast cancer from returning or to boost disease-free survival overall. British researchers presented the disappointing findings Thursday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas.

"As a whole, the study is negative," study author Dr. Robert Coleman, a professor of medical oncology at the University of Sheffield in England, said during a Thursday news conference on the findings. "There is no overall difference in recurrence rates or survival rates [between patients who got the bone drug and those who did not], except in older patients, defined as more than five years after menopause."

That was a possible bright spot in the results.

"In that population, there is a benefit," Coleman said. The older women had a 27 percent improvement in recurrence and a 29 percent improvement in overall survival over the five-year follow-up, compared to those who didn't get the drug.

"There was tremendous hope that this [drug] approach would be a major leap forward," Coleman noted. "There have been other trials that suggest this is the case." In one previous study, the use of the drug was linked with a 32 percent improvement in survival and lowered recurrence in younger women with breast cancer.

Other research has found that healthy women on bone drugs were less prone to develop breast cancer, so experts were hoping the drugs had an anti-tumor effect.

Zometa, marketed by Novartis AG, is used to relieve pain when cancers have spread to the bone -- in part, by slowing bone erosion caused by the disease. It is given intravenously, while other bisphosphonates such as Actonel, Fosamax or Boniva can be taken orally.

In the trial, known as AZURE (Adjuvant Treatment with Zoledronic Acid in State II/III Breast Cancer), Coleman and his colleagues evaluated 3,360 breast cancer patients from 174 participating centers, all with stage II or III cancers but no evidence of metastases (cancer that has spread beyond the original site). About half received the bone drugs plus standard therapy; half just got standard therapy.

The focus was on disease-free survival. After five years, about 400 women in each group either died or had recurrences.

When Coleman's team looked at subgroups, however, they found the benefit among older women, a finding they say warrants more study.

"The younger patients are getting no benefit," Coleman said. "If anything, they are doing a little bit worse."

In addition, there were some troubling side effects among women taking Zometa, including 17 cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (a severe bone disease that can result in death of the jawbone).

Dr. Sharon Giordano, an associate professor of breast medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, was not involved in the study but put it in perspective. Bisphosphonates have been used to treat osteoporosis as well as bone complications of breast cancer treatment, she said.

"The role of bisphosphonates in preventing cancer recurrence has been less clear," she said, noting that multiple studies have had conflicting findings.

As for the benefit found in postmenopausal women, she said, "I would consider this hypothesis-generating and not practice-changing."

Other studies underway may provide a clearer answer, she said.

Since the current study was presented at a meeting, its findings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Said Coleman: "Zoledronic acid cannot be routinely recommended for prevention of cancer returning, but it remains a very good drug for patients where the cancer has already spread to the bone."

Coleman disclosed receiving speaker fees from Novartis; the researchers also received academic grant funding from the drug maker.

For more information on bisphosphonates, visit U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article accurately reported on the incidence of a serious side effect among the women taking zoledronic acid.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 10, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Offering your baby a special formula when weaning off breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of the antibodies associated with type 1 diabetes, if you have a family history of the disease, new research suggests.

When Finnish researchers randomly assigned 230 babies at high risk of type 1 diabetes to receive either a regular infant formula, or one that was extensively hydrolyzed -- which means the proteins in the formula are already partially broken down and more readily available for digestion -- they found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula cut the rate of developing diabetes-linked antibodies in the blood by about half.

"We observed that early dietary intervention [with extensively hydrolyzed formula] decreased the frequency of diabetes-associated autoantibodies, which are markers of an ongoing disease process, by about 50 percent by the age of 10 years," said the study's lead author, Dr. Michael Knip, a professor of pediatrics at the Hospital for Children and Adolescents in Helsinki, Finland.

The results of the study were published in the Nov. 11 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease, which means the body's immune system mistakenly turns against healthy insulin-producing cells in the pancreas, instead of a foreign material, such as bacteria. No one knows for sure what causes this process to begin, but some research suggests that the initial autoimmunity may begin early in life.

Five immune system autoantibodies have been linked to type 1 diabetes. Having one of these antibodies isn't a guarantee that you'll develop type 1 diabetes, but it does indicate an increased risk for the disease. People who have two or more type 1 antibodies have between a 50 and 100 percent risk of developing type 1 diabetes, according to background information in the study.

Previous research has suggested that breastfeeding may offer some protection against the development of these antibodies, possibly because breastfeeding delays the introduction of infant formula, which contains complex proteins. Formula may somehow trigger the development of autoantibodies as these proteins are broken down for digestion.

The current study was randomized and double-blind (meaning neither the parents nor the researchers knew who was getting what), and compared regular baby formula to one that was made easier for babies to digest because the proteins were broken down (extensively hydrolyzed).

Babies were offered the formula during the first 6 to 8 months of life, any time breastfeeding wasn't available. They were then followed till they were about 10 years old, according to the study.

After adjusting the data to try to account for the duration of exposure to one of the study formulas, the researchers found that the extensively hydrolyzed formula reduced the risk of having one diabetes autoantibody by 49 percent, and the risk of having two or more autoantibodies by 53 percent.

How the highly hydrolyzed formula might reduce the risk of developing diabetes-predictive antibodies is unknown, but the researchers speculated that it might contribute to reduced gut permeability or changes in gut microflora, among other things.

According to Knip, the take-home message from the study is that "it is possible to reduce considerably the initiation of the diabetes disease process in at-risk children in a simple and safe way: weaning to an extensively hydrolyzed formula." He added that, "based on the current results, we think that it is justified to recommend weaning to a highly hydrolyzed formula for babies in families with a member affected by type 1 diabetes."

Not everyone agreed with that notion, however.

"The data in this study is not sufficiently strong to support recommending any changes for parents," said the author of an accompanying editorial, Dr. David Harlan, co-director of the Diabetes Center of Excellence at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center in Worcester.

"I think the authors designed this study to address their hypothesis that proteins present in non-hydrolyzed formula might incite an immune response, and by breaking them down, you might eliminate the immune response. But, there are quite a few steps between that and how the immune system or diabetes are triggered," added Harlan's editorial co-author, Dr. Mary Lee, a professor of pediatrics and cell biology and chief of the pediatric endocrine division at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center.

"I think this is an important study because we need to understand what causes type 1 diabetes," said Harlan, who added the caveat: "In this study, while there is an apparent signal, there are also some causes for withholding complete faith in the conclusion that the formula caused diabetes."

Both Lee and Harlan stressed that there is currently no definitive evidence to suggest that the use of standard cow's milk formulas leads to an increased incidence of diabetes compared to breastfeeding. The hydrolyzed formula is also considerably more expensive than standard formula, experts point out.

Learn more about type 1 diabetes from the American Diabetes Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There are no real “harms” with using formula, either cow’s milk formula or extensively hydrolyzed formula.  It appears the latter may be a better choice because there are fewer proteins broken down for digestion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But a number of new controlled trials and meta-analyses like Dr. Moore’s suggest that topical Nsaids are as effective as their oral counterparts for treating osteoarthritis in the knee and hand as well as musculoskeletal injuries like soreness and tendinitis.

The main advantage of a skin cream is that it bypasses the stomach and much of the bloodstream, theoretically minimizing serious side effects. Oral Nsaids can be toxic to the kidneys, and they increase the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. And some, including Vioxx and Bextra, were taken off the market after they were linked to heart attacks and strokes.

“The turning point for topical Nsaids was the fright over heart problems with Vioxx,” Dr. Moore said. “Suddenly there were tons of folks who thought topical Nsaids were a good idea.”

Dr. Roy D. Altman, a rheumatology professor at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, said the drugs might be especially helpful for “the elderly or those taking multiple medications, who were not getting treated but who can now use topical Nsaids and get some benefit.”

Another leading pain researcher, Dr. Roger Chou, an associate professor of medicine at Oregon Health and Science University, noted that the skin creams delivered “very high joint concentrations of the topical Nsaid, higher than with standard oral doses, with very low blood levels” — less than 5 percent of those found with oral Nsaids.

In clinical trials, the skin creams are linked to a higher rate of redness, irritation and rash. And the three topical Nsaids sold in this country — Voltaren gel, the Flector Patch and Pennsaid, a liquid — all contain the Nsaid diclofenac, whose oral version has been linked to liver damage.

The risks in the most vulnerable population — people with other illnesses, like liver disease, or those on blood thinners — are not known, because these patients are generally excluded from studies. One analysis of 19 studies of older adults found that about 15 percent of patients had gastrointestinal complaints, although not life-threatening ones.

“Future research needs to be done using patients with co-morbidities to know that these agents are safe in the highest-risk population,” said the author of the analysis, Dr. Una Makris, an associate research scientist at the Yale School of Medicine.

Still, in one of the only head-to-head trials between topical and oral Nsaids, subjects taking the pills had a much higher rate of indigestion, diarrhea, abdominal pain, abnormal liver tests and anemia than those using the creams.

No randomized, controlled study has assessed the risks for serious events like heart attacks, kidney failure and gastrointestinal bleeding, but other types of studies have found no association between topical Nsaids and these serious risk factors.

The American College of Rheumatology is rewriting its guidelines for osteoarthritis management and will include topical Nsaids in the recommendations, said Dr. Altman, who is on the guidelines committee.

Sports medicine and pain doctors are also recommending them for problems like tennis elbow, Achilles tendinitis and overuse injuries and strains. “We used them off label for a while before they were approved,” said Dr. Robin M. Gehrmann, the director of sports medicine at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. “Now that you can just write a prescription, I use them in my practice a lot more.”

Since the Food and Drug Administration approved the first topical Nsaid in 2007, sales in the United States have soared — to more than $264 million in 2009, according to IMS Health, a health care research company. The average copayment for a month’s supply of Voltaren gel or Pennsaid is around $30.

“I think many people are not aware of topical Nsaids, or there is a perception that they don’t work well, or people confuse topical Nsaids with other topical drugs, like the topical salicylates or capsaicin,” Dr. Chou said.

The topical painkillers are not for everyone. Aside from the possible risks to people with other illnesses, the drugs are not helpful for patients with pain throughout the body, like fibromyalgia, and should not be used along with oral Nsaids.

Nor are they recommended for stress fractures or tendon tears, because anti-inflammatory drugs in general have been shown to slow healing of tendons and bones.

And young, healthy patients may not want to bother with creams or gels, which have their maximum effect if applied four times a day. “It’s easier to pop a pill,” Dr. Altman said.

But for immediate relief of my tennis-related muscle pull, the cream was handy and helpful.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml"/>



The story summarizes the reported side effects of topical NSAIDS. What’s more, the reporter points out that the potential risks in people who have other health problems or are taking other drugs have not been well studied. That insight is something we see too rarely.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The authors acknowledged certain weaknesses in their study. For example, they did not examine the safety of the herbal remedy, only its effectiveness.

Dr. Bruce P. Barrett, an associate professor of family medicine at the University of Wisconsin who was not involved with the review, said he was not convinced of the value of combining the studies in a single analysis.

“If you’re testing the same intervention on the same population using the same outcome measures, then meta-analysis is a very good technique,” Dr. Barrett said. “But here every one of those things fails.” One of Dr. Barrett’s papers on echinacea was included in the analysis.

Other experts also expressed skepticism. J. David Gangemi, director of the Institute for Neutraceutical Research at Clemson University, said he found the study interesting, but added, “I think that many of the people who have dedicated their careers to clinical trials in studying these effects are not at all convinced from this analysis that there is this large reduction in incidence and duration of disease.”

Dr. Gangemi is the senior author of a 2005 study, published in The New England Journal of Medicine and included in the review, that found no benefit in the herb.

There are several possible reasons that even a carefully devised single study might fail to show an effect that actually exists. There are more than 200 species of virus that cause colds, Dr. Coleman said, and a study could test one species against which echinacea proves ineffective, while leaving open the question of whether it works for others.

In addition, some studies might not use large enough doses of the herb; others might use a species of echinacea that is less effective. Some might not have a large enough sample to find a small but statistically significant effect.

Dr. Barrett said there was probably little harm in using echinacea, and he was cautiously optimistic that the herb does have a very small positive effect.

“There’s some danger of kids getting a rash, and it would be inadvisable to give it to women in the early stages of pregnancy,” he said. “But if adults believe in echinacea, they’re going to get benefits — maybe from placebo — but they’ll get benefits.”

Dr. Coleman, who described himself as “not much of a pill taker,” hedged a bit when asked if he planned to use echinacea himself. “I’ll probably consider taking it if I feel a cold coming on,” he said. “These results have pushed me toward the idea. Whether I’m actually going to take it, well, we’ll see.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article points out that the herb has some side effects, and quotes a physician mentioning the most common one (a rash, especially in children) and the most important contraindication (pregnancy). It also points out that the study did not take potential harms into account, alerting readers to the possiblity of others not mentioned here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy may work slightly better than soy at reducing menopausal hot flashes, a new study says.

Women who took such hormones had fewer hot flashes, on average, than women who took soy - and both had fewer than those who took a placebo, or “dummy pill.”

“The bottom line for someone who is very disturbed by hot flashes, the best treatment is hormones, and the next tier would be soy,” said Dr. Gloria Bachmann, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Jersey.

However, a 2002 landmark study by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) found that such treatments can increase the risk of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke. That means that if women do take hormones, Bachmann told Reuters Health, it should be the lowest dose and for the shortest possible period of time.

And not every woman needs treatment, notes Bachmann, who was not involved in the study. Women with severe or frequent hot flashes or whose hot flashes keep them up at night, should consider treatment, she said.

Women typically suffer between 30 and 150 hot flashes a month, said Dr. Rafael Bolanos-Diaz, professor of health economics at San Marcos University in Lima, Peru, who co-authored the study.

Women who took hormones had an average of 24 fewer hot flashes per month, while those who took soy had 12 per month fewer. The study did not look at whether eating soy in food has the same effect on hot flashes as supplements, Bolanos-Diaz said.

The researchers looked at 19 studies on how a treatment, either hormones or soy, compared to a placebo. They compared the average number of hot flashes in 760 women who had treatment with 770 who did not.

The study was published in Menopause: The Journal of the North American Menopause Society.

Soy hasn’t been studied as much as hormone replacement to treat hot flashes, and doctors don’t know exactly how it works. It’s thought to have similar effects to estrogen on the brain, bones, and blood vessels, Bolanos-Diaz told Reuters Health by email.

Soy supplements also have side effects: Nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the NIH. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

“For some women, hormone therapy is the best option, for some soy is best, and for some, it’s just watchful waiting until the hot flashes subside,” Bachmann said.

SOURCE: bit.ly/hBua85 Menopause: The Journal of The North American Menopause Society, online March 3, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Adequate job reminding readers of the risks reported from the 2002 Women’s Health Inititiative study (although we wish it had given the absolute risk data).  And it cited what the NIH reports as side effects of soy supplements – but again without numbers.  Adequate nonetheless.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 21, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- New guidelines issued by three leading cancer organizations suggest that more breast cancer patients should consider radiation therapy after a mastectomy.

Overall, the guidelines say there's enough evidence to show radiation treatment after a mastectomy decreases the risk of breast cancer recurrence, and that even women with smaller tumors and three or fewer lymph nodes involved can benefit from the therapy.

"The new guidelines say there is clear evidence that the benefit of [post-mastectomy radiation therapy] extends to women with limited lymph node involvement," said Dr. Stephen Edge. He is vice president for health care outcomes and policy at Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo, N.Y. Edge was co-chair of the panel that developed the new guidelines.

"The guideline is timely," said Dr. Janna Andrews, an attending physician in radiation medicine at Norwell Health Cancer Institute, in Lake Success, N.Y. "The field of post-mastectomy radiation is changing. It's always up for discussion now as to who needs [post-mastectomy radiation therapy]."

The new guidelines help clarify what used to be a gray area, Andrews explained. "In the past, if a woman had a small tumor, less than 5 centimeters, and not more than three or four positive lymph nodes, many doctors would say she does not need [post-mastectomy radiation therapy]," she said.

The guidelines don't offer a single formula for which patients need radiation therapy, Edge noted. But they do focus on the group of women for whom there is the most debate about the value of radiation.

"There is a great deal of controversy about whether women with one, two or three lymph nodes [with cancer] have sufficient risk to warrant radiation," he said. "For women with four or more lymph nodes involved, everyone would recommend radiation."

The guidelines also strongly support input from all specialists who treat breast cancer in making the decision about radiation treatment. That typically includes the surgeon, radiation physician and an oncologist.

Doctors need to weigh the risks and benefits, Edge added. Side effects can include redness of the skin, swelling and skin breakdown severe enough to compromise future breast reconstruction, he explained.

Edge said that doctors need to consider patients individually. For instance, he explained, ''a woman 65 who has microscopic involvement in a single lymph node and an estrogen-receptor positive cancer would be very different from a 38-year-old who has three lymph nodes involved and so-called triple-negative breast cancer." The younger woman, he said, would typically be advised to get radiation.

The older woman, because her risk is lower, should have a discussion with her doctor to decide if the benefit outweighs the risk, Edge noted.

Andrews said that one take-home message for patients is to expect the surgeon to have consulted with the radiation oncologist and others on her team. If a woman's doctor tells her she does not need radiation after a mastectomy, the woman should be told why and she should ask if the radiation oncologist weighed in on the decision.

Edge was a panel representative from the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which created the guidelines along with the American Society for Radiation Oncology and the Society of Surgical Oncology.

All three groups published the guidelines online this week in their respective journals: the Journal of Clinical Oncology, Practical Radiation Oncology and the Annals of Surgical Oncology.

To learn more about radiation in breast cancer treatment, visit BreastCancer.org.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does address the need to “weigh the risks and benefits.” The story notes: “Side effects can include redness of the skin, swelling and skin breakdown severe enough to compromise future breast reconstruction.” Those are important points, and we’re glad the story made them.
We wish the story had also discussed that there can also be more serious health effects from radiation, including the possibility of increased risk of a second cancer. Also, surgical complications may be increased in patients who require radiation therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hematology researchers have used a single injection of gene therapy to correct a rare bleeding disorder, factor VII deficiency, in dogs. This success in large animals holds considerable potential for a safe, effective and long-lasting new treatment in humans with the same bleeding disorder.

"Our finding has great clinical relevance for patients with factor VII deficiency," said study leader Paris Margaritis, D. Phil., a hematology researcher at the Raymond G. Perelman Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics (CCMT) at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). "These dogs have the type of mutation found in the majority of patients with this disorder, so this approach could lead to a sustained gene therapy in people."

The Margaritis team collaborated with University of North Carolina (UNC) scientists, led by Tim Nichols, M.D., professor of Medicine and Pathology at the UNC School of Medicine.

Factor VII deficiency is rare, found in about one in 300,000 to one in 500,000 people. Because a gene mutation impairs normal production of a blood clotting factor, patients may suffer excessive bleeding in the central nervous system or GI tract, or after surgery or an injury. Female patients may suffer excessive menstrual bleeding.

Factor VII (FVII) deficiency has a range of severity, with about 40 percent of patients having severe disease. They are most commonly treated with regular infusions of clotting factor. Unlike hemophilia, a better-known bleeding disorder that predominantly affects males, factor VII deficiency strikes males and females equally.

Gene therapy proposed for bleeding disorders involves introducing DNA carrying the code to produce the specific clotting factor lacking in patients. Researchers at CHOP and elsewhere have bioengineered an adeno-associated virus (AAV), which does not cause disease, as a vector to deliver DNA into cells where it can express enough factor to make the blood clot normally. Over the past 15 years, CHOP hematology researchers have performed clinical trials of gene therapy for hemophilia B that have helped define efficacy and dosing levels in humans.

The CCMT at CHOP houses a clinical-grade laboratory that manufactures gene therapy vectors, including the AAV vectors used in the current study. Margaritis, a member of the CHOP group long engaged in hemophilia research, currently leads a laboratory focused on factor VII deficiency as well as hemophilia.

"We developed a unique animal model of this disease after identifying dogs with naturally occurring factor VII deficiency," said Margaritis. "Our investigations enabled us to design the corrective gene to insert into our virus vector in the current study."

The CHOP team collaborated with scientists at UNC who have a long-established colony of dogs for hematology research. Based on previous work by Margaritis, the UNC team identified dogs for this gene therapy study.

Nichols, the director of UNC's Francis Owens Blood Research Laboratory, characterized factor VII deficiency in four individual dogs. Using the AAV vectors supplied by Margaritis, Nichols injected the dogs with varying dosages and monitored their health outcomes and biological markers over several years.

The treated dogs had expressed levels of clotting factor VII that would be therapeutic in humans, with long-term stability. In one dog, the effects persisted nearly three years. Based on kidney function, liver function, and blood measurements in the dogs, the treatment was safe, and did not elicit unwanted immune responses.

The current study sets the stage for clinical trials in humans. This gene therapy may especially benefit young children with severe bleeding from factor VII deficiency, such as patients receiving care in CHOP's hematology program.

"This work is very exciting and promising," said Nichols, who added, "The FVII-deficient dogs tolerated the initial gene therapy infusions very well and have had no adverse side effects over several years of follow up. In other related studies in dogs with hemophilia B, similar positive findings have translated to people with hemophilia B." Both Nichols and Margaritis agreed: "The table is now set to propose clinical trials that would treat people who suffer from FVII deficiency."

The National Institutes of Health (grants HL064190 and HL63098), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Pennsylvania Department of Health supported this study. In addition to his CHOP position, Margaritis is a faculty member at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

"Sustained correction of FVII deficiency in dogs using AAV-mediated expression of zymogen FVII," Blood, published online Dec. 23, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release addresses harms in a couple of places, as in this excerpt:
“The FVII-deficient dogs tolerated the initial gene therapy infusions very well and have had no adverse side effects over several years of follow up.”
and in a quote by the lead researcher:
“Based on kidney function, liver function, and blood measurements in the dogs, the treatment was safe, and did not elicit unwanted immune responses.”
But as this study was done in canines, we would have liked a bit more detail on how harms might  manifest in human clinical trials.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug, apixaban (Eliquis), appears better than the old standby warfarin in preventing strokes in people with the abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation, a new study finds.

Over 2.6 million Americans are affected by atrial fibrillation, and many take warfarin (also known as Coumadin) to prevent dangerous clots that can cause a stroke. Warfarin is notoriously tricky to modulate, however, and needs to be closely monitored -- usually through monthly doctors' visits. If the drug's activity isn't checked regularly it can trigger severe bleeding episodes, the most serious of which can happen in the brain.

"Warfarin is labor-intensive to manage," said study researcher Dr. Jack Ansell, chairman of the department of medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Sometimes it impairs the patient's quality of life and the outcomes are very dependent on how well the drug dosing is managed," he added. "This [new] drug has a lot of advantages over warfarin."

With apixaban, patients can use a standard dose that doesn't need monitoring and adjusting, Ansell said. Also, unlike warfarin, apixaban has few interactions with other drugs or foods, he added.

The study was funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer, the makers of apixaban.

Apixaban is a so-called Xa inhibitor, a class of anticoagulants (anti-clotting drugs) that work by blocking factor X, a protein involved in blood clotting. Ansell expects drugs in this class will have a major effect on how atrial fibrillation is managed in the future.

Another similar drug, Pradaxa (dabigatran), has been on the market for about a year and many patients with atrial fibrillation have been switched or started on it, he said.

"Once [apixaban] is available it is going to be very difficult to avoid offering this drug to patients," he said.

The issue of cost remains a factor, however. While generic warfarin is just pennies a dose, any new brand-name drug is likely to be much more expensive. According to Laura Hortas, a spokeswoman for Bristol-Myers Squibb, because apixaban is still an experimental drug its price tag remains uncertain.

The new report was published online Aug. 28 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with its presentation at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Paris.

For the trial, more than 18,000 patients with atrial fibrillation and a heightened risk for stroke were randomly assigned to receive either apixaban or warfarin.

Over an average of 1.8 years of follow-up there were fewer strokes or clots among patients taking apixaban (1.27 percent a year), compared with patients taking warfarin (1.6 percent per year), the researchers found.

This means that apixaban prevented six patients from having a stroke, 15 patients from having a major bleeding event and eight patients from dying, the researchers said in a Duke University news release.

The major effect on stroke was preventing hemorrhagic stroke, which is caused by bleeding in the brain and is the most serious type of stroke. According to the researchers, apixaban reduced this risk by 50 percent, preventing four patients from having this type of stroke and two patients from having an ischemic stroke (cause by a vessel blockage) or stroke of uncertain origin.

As to apixaban's expected higher price tag, Ansell said that since the drug does not require monitoring and the incidence of stroke and major bleeding are less, savings in doctors' visits and stroke treatment should more than compensate.

The new trial comes on the heels of another study on apixaban that was stopped early due to safety concerns. In that trial, published in July in the New England Journal of Medicine, apixaban's use was associated with raised odds for bleeding -- without providing patients with any reduction in heart attack risk.

However, "in that case, apixaban was given to patients with coronary artery disease who were also taking two other blood thinners," Ansell noted. "The three of them together showed that the risk of bleeding was just too high and there was no real benefit in that population. But, that's an entirely different problem, compared with atrial fibrillation," he said.

Commenting on the latest study, Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles agreed that "atrial fibrillation substantially increases the risk of stroke and death."

Warfarin reduces the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, but it also boosts the odds of bleeding and is often difficult to manage, he said.

"Apixaban is now the first oral anticoagulant [blood thinner] to show a statistically significant improvement in survival over warfarin in atrial fibrillation patients," Fonarow said. "This represents a very important therapeutic advance in the care of patients with atrial fibrillation."

For more information on atrial fibrillation, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provided good insight about possible problems associated with apixabane in patients with coronary artery disease who were simultaneously taking two blood thinners in addition to apixabane.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dominic Gessler lifts two squirming mice from their cages. Sherri Epstein flinches, but Gessler coaxes her to hold out her hands. He places the small animals in her palms, and they skitter in tiny circles, tickling her skin. “Now,” says Gessler. “Which one used to have Canavan disease?”

A few miles away, at Epstein’s home in Worcester, Massachusetts, a young woman lies in bed, her thin limbs bent and still, her curly red hair splayed across a pillow. This is Rachel, Epstein’s 17-year-old daughter, born with Canavan disease—a debilitating, fatal brain disorder. As a newborn, Rachel opened her mouth as if to scream but made no sound. As an infant, she never moved in her sleep. When Rachel failed to lift her head by six months of age, an early intervention therapist suspected she had cerebral palsy. Epstein wishes it had been so. Instead, Rachel had inherited a mutated version of a gene called ASPA from each of her parents. Without a healthy copy of that gene, her cells could not produce a protein needed to break down acid in the brain. So the acid built up, then slowly ate away at the insulation protecting Rachel’s neurons, turning her white matter into a sponge pocketed with fluid-filled sacs. As a result, Rachel does not talk; she cannot see or control her limbs or other bodily functions; she has seizures and will likely not live to adulthood.

There is no treatment and no cure for Canavan disease. Yet standing in a room at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, Epstein holds a mouse that once had the same symptoms as Rachel—but now runs effortlessly over her outstretched fingers. Weeks before, the mouse was treated with a single intravenous injection of a gene therapy drug developed in the lab of Gessler’s doctoral adviser, microbiologist Guangping Gao. The drug is the fruit of Gao’s 23-year career in gene therapy.

Gao did not always believe the drug would ever make it out of the laboratory, because the field of gene therapy has been plagued with seemingly insurmountable obstacles, including the deaths of test subjects. Over the past five years, however, there has been a resurgence of gene therapy in neuroscience. Scientists now argue it is our best, and perhaps only, chance at curing many diseases of the brain. And attuned to the multibillion-dollar potential of this new class of drugs, large pharmaceutical companies including Novartis, Shire, AstraZeneca and GSK are joining the fray. More than 20 biotech companies are currently developing viral gene therapies while others are working to directly edit genes.

“Gene therapies are coming along fast and furious. They’re going to earn their place,” says Kevin Starr, co-founder of Third Rock Ventures, a venture capital firm invested in three gene therapy companies. “We are probably in the greatest innovative period of understanding human disease and how to make cures ever.”

The concept of gene therapy is straightforward, beautiful even: Fix an illness caused by a faulty gene by replacing or supplementing a healthy new copy of the gene. In other words, use genes as medicine. For example, one of the earliest human tests of gene therapy was in 1990, when two young girls with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) received repeated infusions of their own white blood cells modified to fix a defective gene. It worked—with continued treatments, both children showed signs of a restored immune system and went on to lead normal lives.

Gao first met a Canavan patient in 1993, at a party celebrating his discovery of the gene and mutations that caused the disorder. A family wheeled over their 6-year-old with Canavan disease to the young scientist, who realized that the boy had donated tissue to his research project. “I’d held his DNA in my hands. I had found what was wrong with his DNA,” recalls Gao, then a Ph.D. student. Yet he had no way to fix it. At that moment, “I knew what I would do for the rest of my life—find a cure for the disease,” says Gao. “And other than gene therapy, there was no other way.”

Gene therapy is well-suited for treating inherited brain diseases. First, most drugs can’t get through the brain’s formidable blood-brain barrier, but something small, like a virus with a healthy gene tucked inside, can do it. Additionally, the brain is a closed compartment, so the risks of gene therapy are minimized—other parts of the body, the liver or the lungs, say, are undisturbed.

In the early ’90s, Gao was a student without a lab of his own. So he sought out James Wilson at the University of Pennsylvania, a rising star in the field of gene therapy. For the next 13 years, Gao would work for Wilson, engineering new and better viruses for the therapies, called “viral vectors.” These molecular FedEx trucks can be loaded with healthy versions of genes and deliver them to the correct location in the body.

Gao was in the right place at the right time. By 1999, more than 115 gene therapy clinical trials were approved in the U.S, ranging in illnesses from cancer to blood disorders to graft-versus-host disease. Wilson eagerly moved from the lab into human trials, starting with five studies utilizing a modified version of an adenovirus, a common virus known to cause respiratory infections in people. One of those trials enrolled a teenager named Jesse Gelsinger.

Gelsinger suffered from a genetic liver condition kept under control with pills and diet, but he volunteered for the study to help find a cure for infants with a fatal form of his disorder. When Gelsinger received the gene therapy in September 1999, the adenoviral vector triggered a violent immune response that damaged his liver and shut down his lungs. Four days after the injection, he was dead.

His death shuttered gene therapy funding and research in the United States. Europeans continued on, buoyed by an announcement in 2000 that gene therapy had cured a group of 20 children with SCID. But within a few years, five of them had developed leukemia from the treatment. One died, and scientists fled the field. Gao, who was not directly involved in the clinical trial that led to Gelsinger’s death, doesn’t like to talk about it now, saying only that he doesn’t blame Wilson. Gao kept his head down and quietly continued to work on other types of safer viral vectors.

The most promising candidate was adeno-associated virus (AAV)—a virus that grows in the presence of adenovirus but is a completely different type. AAVs are not quite as efficient as adenoviruses at getting genes into human cells, but they are much safer: The human immune system barely notices the virus’s outer coat or “dress,” as Gao calls it. And AAVs do not integrate into the genome of human cells, which is what caused leukemia in some of the SCID patients.

In 2008, Gao struck out on his own, taking a job as director of a brand-new gene therapy center at UMass. The paint on his office walls was still wet when Sherri Epstein walked in. A part-time administrative assistant in the building next door, Epstein had seen Gao’s appointment in a local newspaper. Epstein introduced herself and told Gao about Rachel and her previous attempt at gene therapy. Five years earlier, doctors running the first-ever Canavan gene therapy trial drilled six tiny holes into Rachel’s skull, inserted thin catheters and delivered their drug to parts of her brain. It was safe, but it didn’t work.

Not long after that initial meeting, Epstein brought Rachel to visit the lab. Once again, Gao was standing in front of a desperate parent and dying child.

At the time, only one gene therapy had been commercially approved in the world: a cancer drug in China. Regulators in the U.S. and Europe were highly skeptical of the safety and efficacy of such treatments. Gao knew he had to be careful and was determined to not repeat the errors of his predecessors by rushing into human trials. Instead, he spent the next eight years methodically producing a novel gene therapy for Canavan disease. He has spent over $2 million in federal and university research funds developing and testing it in hundreds of mice with the disease.

Gao's graduate student Seemin Ahmed initiated the lab work in 2010, and accomplished a proof-of-concept with a first-generation gene therapy that could partially rescue the disease, based on AAV9, an ideal AAV vector to get into the brain. The AAV9 therapy is so good at slipping into the brain that one can deliver the drug intravenously into the blood, and it passes through the blood-brain barrier to penetrate all areas of the brain. No drilling into the skull required. Gessler, a young German scientist studying to be a neurosurgeon, joined the project in 2012 and has since built on Ahmed's work, optimization the therapy with an improved gene construct that produces 10 times as many copies of the needed protein as earlier versions.

Gessler will never forget the first time he tested the optimized therapy in a live animal. He injected it into a young, sick mouse, hunched over with no control over its muscles. When Gessler returned to assess the results, he couldn’t find the mouse. He worried he had mislabeled a cage. He hadn’t. The mouse was there, acting just as healthy as the control mice.

Today, the treatment has cured Canavan disease in two different strains of mice engineered to have the disease. A dozen freezers line the long hallway in Gao’s laboratory, each filled to the brim with preserved tissues and viruses. “We have the therapy. We are ready,” says Gao, grinning like a schoolchild. The last barrier is financial but not impossible to overcome. Gao estimates it will require $10 million to $12 million to launch the first human clinical trials—but the potential profits are already attracting biotech attention. Two companies, which Gao declined to name, have approached him about getting involved in the effort.

The office of Voyager Therapeutics in Cambridge, Massachusetts, epitomizes a trendy startup: glass doors, whiteboard walls, minimalist orange-accented décor and a communal area with free drinks and snacks. It smells like caffeine and money.

But unlike tech startups, this office is flanked on either side by laboratories full of microscopes and viruses. The company is developing gene therapies for a handful of central nervous system disorders, including Parkinson’s, Huntington’s and Lou Gehrig’s disease. Voyager CEO Steven Paul has worked in the pharmaceutical industry developing drugs for brain disorders for over 35 years and witnessed the tribulations of gene therapy. He’s ardent that now is finally the right time.

Investors agree. Venture firms have invested more in gene therapy since 2010 than they did during the whole previous decade, and therapies for the brain far and away lead the pack, according to Dow Jones VentureSource. Last February, when Voyager was just a year old, it inked a deal with Genzyme for $100 million up front and up to $745 million in future milestone payments, including for the company’s severe brain disease programs. Voyager followed that with $60 million in investor financing in April and an $81 million initial public offering in November. Philadelphia-based Spark Therapeutics, developing gene therapies for rare eye diseases, accumulated $268 million in funding after going public in just two years and scoring a sizable licensing deal with Pfizer. Cambridge-based Bluebird Bio ended last year with a whopping $866 million in cash and cash equivalents.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This one is difficult to evaluate, since most of the current research relates only to animal studies. However, early in the story, the writer reflects on the well-publicized death of a clinical trial participant in 1999 that brought gene therapy trials to an abrupt halt in the United States.  Other passages in the story also suggest caution, as does a source later in the story, who notes that risk accompanies many therapies. These details are sufficient to indicate there could be significant harms if these methods move into human testing, and that’s enough to rate as Satisfactory. However, it could have been made clearer that researchers really don’t know the harms yet.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Dupixent (dupilumab) injection to treat adults with moderate-to-severe eczema (atopic dermatitis). Dupixent is intended for patients whose eczema is not controlled adequately by topical therapies, or those for whom topical therapies are not advisable. Dupixent can be used with or without topical corticosteroids.

“FDA’s approval of Dupixent demonstrates our commitment to approving new and innovative therapies for patients with skin disease,” said Julie Beitz, M.D., director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “Eczema can cause significant skin irritation and discomfort for patients, so it is important to have a variety of treatment options available to patients, including those patients whose disease is not controlled by topical therapies.”

Atopic dermatitis, a chronic inflammatory skin disease, is often referred to as “eczema,” which is a general term for several types of inflammation of the skin. Atopic dermatitis is the most common of the many types of eczema; onset typically begins in childhood and can last through adulthood. The cause of atopic dermatitis is a combination of genetic, immune and environmental factors. In atopic dermatitis, the skin develops red, scaly and crusted bumps, which are extremely itchy. Scratching leads to swelling, cracking, “weeping” clear fluid, and finally, coarsening and thickening of the skin.

Dupixent is administered as an injection under the skin. Dupixent’s active ingredient is an antibody (dupilumab) that binds to a protein [interleukin-4 (IL-4) receptor alpha subunit (IL-4R )], that causes inflammation. By binding to this protein, Dupixent is able to inhibit the inflammatory response that plays a role in the development of atopic dermatitis.

The safety and efficacy of Dupixent were established in three placebo-controlled clinical trials with a total of 2,119 adult participants with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis not adequately controlled by topical medication(s). Overall, participants who received Dupixent achieved greater response, defined as clear or almost clear skin, and experienced a reduction in itch after 16 weeks of treatment.

Dupixent can cause side effects such as serious allergic reactions and eye problems, such as pink eye (conjunctivitis) and inflammation of the cornea (keratitis). If patients experience new or worsening eye symptoms such as redness, itching, pain or visual changes, they should consult a health care provider. The most common side effects include injection site reactions; cold sores in the mouth or on the lips; and eye and eyelid inflammation, including redness, swelling and itching.

The safety and efficacy of Dupixent have not been established in the treatment of asthma. Patients who also have asthma should not adjust or stop their asthma treatment without talking to their physicians.

The FDA granted the application for Dupixent Priority Review and Breakthrough Therapy designation.

The FDA granted the approval of Dupixent to Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The Agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release gets an acceptable rating in this category since it mentions that the drug can cause serious allergic reactions and eye problems including conjunctivitis (pinkeye) and keratitis (inflammation of the cornea). It also cautions that people with asthma shouldn’t use the drug since it hasn’t been tested for safety in these patients.
The release should also have noted that regulators don’t know if there are any long-term harms associated with Dupixent use. None of the trials exceeded 16 weeks.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA--Palbociclib, a new oral drug whose efficacy in combating breast cancer has been demonstrated alone and in combination with endocrine therapy, also has potential to combat other types of cancer, according to a literature review and additional original research conducted by experts at the Abramson Cancer Center (ACC) in the University of Pennsylvania published this month in JAMA Oncology.

Palbociclib targets the rapid division of tumor cells by inhibiting the activity of the enzymes CDK4 and CDK6, which propel cell division and increase in number in most cancers. It is the first CDK4/6 inhibitor to be approved for the treatment of breast cancer.

"All living cells undergo cell division and palbociclib's unique capacity to halt the cell division process (also known as the 'cell cycle') therefore has potentially broad applicability," said the study's lead author Amy S. Clark, MD, MSCE, an assistant professor of Hematology/Oncology at Penn's Perelman School of Medicine and ACC. "Pairing palbociclib with other anti-cancer therapies such as endocrine therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy can create a powerful combinatorial effect with real promise for addressing a variety of cancers." For example, amplification of CDK4 is reported in a high percentage of melanomas and esophageal cancers.

Targeted therapy uses medication and other interventions to more accurately identify and attack cancer cells, usually while doing no or little damage to normal cells.

"This drug has minor effects on normal cells other than neutrophils (white blood cells)," said the study's senior author, Peter J. O'Dwyer, MD, a professor of Hematology/Oncology at Penn and director of the Developmental Therapeutics Program at the ACC. "In tumors, it can cause shrinkage, or more commonly, arrest of growth. As we discover new functions for the CDK4/6 target of this medicine, we are likely to use it in combinations to make other anti-cancer agents work better."

In addition to inhibiting the cell cycle, palbociclib has been shown, for example to alter several recently described non-cell cycle functions of CDK4/6, a finding expected to expand its therapeutic role, O'Dwyer added.

Assessing 130 relevant publications in the literature, as well as interpreting their own continuing studies, the all-Penn team found that in addition to its safety and effectiveness in fighting certain types of breast cancer, early trials of palbociclib have shown promise of effectiveness in cases of lymphoma, sarcoma, and teratoma, tumors that while rare, often afflict younger patients.

A phase 2 trial showed that, among 17 patients with previously treated mantle-cell lymphoma, palbociclib resulted in one complete response and two partial responses. Although, median progression-free survival was four months, five patients had progression-free survival greater than one year. Another phase 2 trial with 29 sarcoma patients treated with palbociclib showed a progression-free survival of 66 percent at 12 weeks.

Also, combining palbociclib with other anti-cancer agents is feasible, and early results in myeloma and some solid tumors have led to more definitive studies.

In both breast and other cancer trials, palbociclib has been shown to be safe with once-daily dosing, and its main adverse effect is reversible neutropenia, an abnormally low count of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell that helps fight infections. The lower their neutrophil count, the more vulnerable patients are to infectious diseases. In such cases the drug is temporarily discontinued and reintroduced at a lower dose. Other side effects included fatigue (33 percent), nausea (30 percent), diarrhea (18 percent), constipation (12 percent), and rash (12 percent).

At the recommended doses, evidence of the desired drug effect in tumors has been obtained using novel PET imaging at Penn. These tools can help to individualize patient therapy going forward.

Other Penn co-authors are Thomas B. Karasic, MD; Angela DeMichele, MD, MSCE; David J.Vaughn, MD; Mark O'Hara, MD; Rodolfo Perini, MD; Paul Zhang, MD; Priti Lal, MD; Michael Feldman, MD, PhD; and Maryann Gallagher, RN.

The study was funded by Pfizer Inc and the National Institutes of Health (5P30 CA16520-25).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes the drug’s side effects, including the most common one which renders patients more susceptible to infections. However, it needs to be pointed out that the studies involved very small numbers of patients and the emergence of more serious side effects may not be seen until the drug is observed in a larger population.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Considering having a surgeon remove your cancerous prostate using a robot? You might want to see a surgeon who has done at least 80 operations for the best results, according to the authors of a new research review.

And while the robot-assisted operation is now the “dominant approach” to this surgery in the US and is gaining popularity in other wealthy nations, there’s still too little information on how patients fare after the surgery, Dr. Declan G. Murphy of the Peter MacCallum Cancer Center in Melbourne, Australia and his colleagues write.

Laparoscopic surgery, in which a surgeon performs the operation through small incisions, usually with the help of a surgical robot, has been touted as carrying a lower risk of incontinence and impotence than the standard “open” form of the surgery.

But a US study on nearly 9,000 men published in October 2009 found that while open and minimally invasive surgery were equally good for getting rid of prostate cancer, the risk of incontinence and impotence was higher with the minimally invasive approach.

In the current study, Murphy and his team looked at 68 studies of robot-assisted laparoscopic surgery to better understand its downsides. Lack of information on outcomes isn’t only a problem for robot-assisted surgery, but “bedevils” the scientific literature on prostate removal overall, the researchers note in the journal European Urology.

In about one in 250 surgeries, the robot failed to work properly. There was also a lack of data on how well patients functioned after surgery, and how patients with high-risk prostate cancer fared long-term.

And while some studies showed low complication rates, the researchers add, those rates went up when doctors used a standardized approach to reporting complications. The authors did not compare robotic surgery complication rates to traditional surgery rates.

The researchers also found that surgeons who have done fewer than 20 of the robot-assisted procedures can achieve “acceptable operating times.” Keeping surgeries shorter is a goal because it usually means fewer complications. It may be necessary, however, for surgeons to do 80 or more procedures to ensure that they do not leave cancerous tissue behind.

Also, the researchers add, robot-assisted surgery is no easier to perform and has no better outcomes in patients with conditions that can worsen surgical outcomes, such as being obese, having a large prostate, or having had previous surgery in the area.

Finally, the researchers note, expenses associated with the procedure—the robot costs at least 1.8 million ($2.6 million) to install, 100,000 ($145,000) a year to run, and 1,500 ($2,200) extra for each surgical case-mean the procedure is “prohibitively” expensive “for many hospitals and indeed many countries.”

The researchers conclude: “The significant learning curve should not be understated, and the expense of this technology continues to restrict access to many patients.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The story provides readers with some potentially interesting questions to raise with a doctor (e.g. how many of these surgeries have you done using this equipment; is this approach the best for the type of cancer I have, i.e. early or more advanced).  The story mentions in passing potential harms such as impotence and incontinence, referencing a study published in October.  
However – the story did not really follow-up on one of the key issues it raised.  For example, the story mentioned that a surgeon will have to do 80 procedures with this equipment to ensure that they don’t leave any cancerous tissue behind.  The story could have completed this thought and indicated the ramifications of leaving cancerous tissue behind in terms of health consequences.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Health officials say influenza is circulating unusually early this year with cases in every state – and nearly all the infections are swine flu.

The highest concentrations of flu cases are in the Southeast and a few other states. The report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Friday also came with good news: Testing of vaccines for swine flu show that they work with a single dose and take effect rapidly.

Supplies of swine flu vaccine are expected to be available in mid-October. But the seasonal flu vaccine is available now, and officials are encouraging people to get it.

Dr. Anne Schuchat of the CDC says the swine flu broke out in the spring and "never went away." Currently 98 percent of the flu viruses circulating are swine flu. Schuchat says cases are mainly in children and young adults.

THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below.

WASHINGTON (AP) – Fighting the swine flu may have gotten more manageable.

Australian and U.S. researchers said Thursday that one dose of the new swine flu vaccine looks strong enough to protect adults – and can begin protection within 10 days of the shot.

Australian drug maker CSL Ltd. published results of a study that found 75 percent to 96 percent of vaccinated people should be protected with a single dose – the same degree of effectiveness as the regular winter flu shot. That's remarkable considering scientists thought it would take two doses.

U.S. data to be released Friday confirm those findings and show the protection starts rapidly, Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institutes of Health told The Associated Press.

"This is quite good news," Fauci said.

The dose question has an important ramification: It means people will have to line up for influenza vaccinations twice this year instead of three times – once for the regular winter flu shot and a second time to be inoculated against swine flu, what doctors call the 2009 H1N1 strain.

Thursday's swine flu vaccine reports center on adults; studies in children aren't finished yet.

But scientists had feared that people of all ages would need two shots about a month apart because the new H1N1 strain is so genetically different from normally circulating flu strains that most of the population has little if any immunity.

Chinese manufacturers gave the first hint a week ago that one dose could be enough. But different manufacturers make different formulations of the vaccine, so more evidence was needed.

Thus the CSL study, rushed out by the New England Journal of Medicine late Thursday, is welcome news. In a study of 240 adults, half younger than 50 and half over, one shot prompted the same kind of immune response indicating protection that is seen with regular flu vaccine. And a standard 15-microgram dose – not the double dose that also was tested – was enough.

CSL, which is one U.S. vaccine supplier, found the same side effects in its study that people experience with regular flu vaccine, which is no surprise since this shot is merely a recipe change from the annual standby. About 45 percent of recipients had mild reactions such as a headache, sore arm or redness at the shot site.

On Friday, the NIH is set to release results of its own studies of hundreds of adults that confirm that one shot works, Fauci said. Plus, the U.S. work shows that people are protected eight to 10 days after that inoculation, he said.

One dose means tight supplies of H1N1 vaccine won't be stretched so thin after all. The U.S. has ordered 195 million doses, based on the hope that 15 micrograms was indeed the right dose. Had it taken twice that dosage, or two shots apiece, half as many people could have received the vaccine.

The winter flu vaccine is widely available now, and U.S. health authorities urged people to get it out of the way now before swine flu shots start arriving in mid-October.

Despite all the headlines about swine flu, which has become the main influenza strain circulating in the world, doctors do expect some garden-variety flu to hit this fall too – the kind that every year kills 36,000 Americans and hospitalizes 200,000.

"Take some individual responsibility to stay healthy during the flu season," said Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who scheduled her own seasonal shot for Friday. Waiting to get the first inoculation out of the way "is not in anybody's best interest," added Dr. Nancy Nielsen, past president of the American Medical Association. She said busy doctors need to have completed regular vaccinations by the time they have to deal with H1N1 shots.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


 
The story says that the participants in the H1N1 flu vaccine trials reported side effects similar to those seen with seasonal flu vaccination; that is, almost half had some soreness or rash at the injection site or a headache.
 However, the story should have pointed out that these small and very brief trials don’t reveal whether the new H1N1 flu shots may be linked to the sort of rare cases of Guillain-Barre diseases that were seen during the rushed attempt to vaccinate people against a variety of swine flu in 1976.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The controversy over when a woman should get mammograms is about to heat up again.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of experts whose members are appointed by the federal government, issued a final set of recommendations late Monday saying that women between the ages of 50 and 74 should get routine screening once every two years. The task force's guidelines are important because insurers and government programs often follow the panel's recommendations in deciding whether to cover certain preventive services.

The task force's final recommendation is likely to be controversial because some other groups say the screening should start earlier. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, for example, recommends that regular screenings begin at age 40, while the American Cancer Society calls for women to start yearly screening at age 45 and then move to screening every two years starting at age 55.

Congress has sided with proponents of earlier screening. Last month, in anticipation of Monday's release of the task force’s final recommendation, lawmakers took preemptive action: It directed insurers to ignore the task force's latest guidelines and, instead, to rely on its 2002 recommendation. That called for annual mammograms to begin at 40. As a result of the congressional action, women in their 40s will continue to be able to get annual mammograms at no cost.

The differences over when to start regular screening reflect the growing concern that the benefits of mammograms may have been oversold, and that they don't outweigh the anxiety and potential harm caused by over-diagnosis and false positives from the tests.

[In major shift, these guidelines scaled back breast cancer screening for women in their 40s]

The debate over when to start regular screening involves only women of "average risk" who don't have specific risk factors for breast cancer such as the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genetic mutations or a family history of the disease. They're also not aimed at diagnostic mammography, which takes place once a woman has a symptom such as a lump. The screening recommendations are not binding on doctors, hospitals or insurers.

In releasing its final recommendations, the task force confirmed an earlier guidance it issued that said screening mammography had the greatest benefit for women ages 50 to 74. For women in their 40s, the likelihood of benefit is less and the potential harms are proportionally greater, it said. The most serious potential harm is unneeded treatment for a type of cancer that would not have become a threat to a woman's health during her lifetime.

The congressional action, which was included in the recently enacted spending law, has drawn criticism from some experts.

“The U.S. Congress thinks it's perfectly acceptable, even preferred, for a scientific document from 14 years ago to guide coverage policy on screening for breast cancer in women,” says Kenneth Lin, a Georgetown University family medicine doctor who teaches preventive and evidence-based medicine.

Part of the problem is the common perception that women deserve free mammogram coverage and that the scientific community is basing its decision on cost or rationing, said Lawrence Gostin, a Georgetown University law professor and expert on public health.

Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, said the task force's guidelines for women in their 40s — that they should discuss whether to get mammograms with their doctors and make individual decisions — come closest to following the evidence accumulated over the past three decades. Women should trust that process, she said.

Despite the decades of marketing of mammography to women, "women are capable of understanding the complexities of the issue, evaluating the evidence and making their own health decisions," she said in a statement.

"At some point we will have to decide that we are not going to pay for interventions that lack a high level of medical evidence," she said. "At this time, what does concern us very much are attempts by Congress to interfere with the makeup and process of the US Preventive Services Task Force."

The task force first suggested in 2009 that breast cancer screening begin at 50 instead of 40, touching off enormous criticism. In 2010, Congress passed the Affordable Care Act, which required that certain preventive services be provided for free — if those services got a strong recommendation from the task force. But it included an amendment that effectively directed insurers to use the 2002 recommendations for mammograms. That meant that women who were 40 and older could get mammograms at no cost.

In April 2015, the task force came out with its latest draft guidance, basically reaffirming its 2009 recommendations that the greatest benefit of mammography screening is for women between 50 and 74.

Worried that millions of women under 50 could lose their free annual mammogram coverage if the guidelines became final, several health-care groups, including ACOG, the American College of Radiology and the Susan G. Komen Foundation, lobbied Congress to block that from happening.

Language was included in the spending bill that says any recommendations of the task force related to breast cancer screening, mammography and prevention refers to those “issued before 2009.”

Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.) was among the lawmakers who pushed for the language to be included. In a statement, she said her number one priority was to ensure that women can get mammograms if they and their doctors decide it's the right thing to do. "This means making sure that cost is not a deterrent to care," she said.

Several groups that lobbied for congressional action said in a statement last month that the task force recommendations conflict with those of other organizations. This results in confusion and puts more than 22 million women at risk of losing of losing insurance coverage for mammograms.

This post has been updated.

The simple way doctors can make patients feel understood

How cancer will affect Americans in 2016: in seven charts

Omega 3 is still good for the brain. But 'fish oil supplements just don't cut it.'
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story addresses harms briefly in two places. In one place, the story refers to “the anxiety and potential harm caused by over-diagnosis and false positives,” though it doesn’t explain what over-diagnosis or false positives mean (potentially leaving many readers in the dark). The story also notes that “The most serious potential harm is unneeded treatment for a type of cancer that would not have become a threat to a woman’s health during her lifetime.” But it doesn’t give readers any idea of how serious this harm might be, or how common this scenario is. In short, the story does enough to earn a Satisfactory rating, but could have (and should have) done more. It’s worth noting that the New York Times piece did a top-notch job discussing harms.
The story does, however, make clear that women should be informed consumers, and that — if well-informed — women should have the authority to weigh potential benefits against potential harms and make their own decisions about when and how often to get screened. That’s an important point, and one worth making.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CDC To Doctors: Anti-HIV Pill No Magic Bullet Against Virus

In November, researchers revealed a encouraging finding: taking a pill can greatly reduce the risk of getting HIV. Now health officials are warning doctors that preventing the disease will take more than just writing a prescription.

The pill, called Truvada, is already on the market for treating HIV infections. But the landmark study, involving 2,500 men who have sex with men, showed that taking Truvada faithfully can reduce the risk of infection by as much as 92 percent.

That touched off a lot of celebrating. It's the first time anybody's shown that taking a pill can prevent HIV – and it was the first new weapon against HIV unveiled in many years.

To make sure it works, though, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says doctors need to do a number of things:
• Prescribe Truvada only for men at high risk of getting infected – that is, only for men who have sex with men, those who have multiple sex partners, and those who live in areas where there's a lot of HIV circulating.
• Test patients before prescribing it to make sure they're not already infected. That'll help avoid creating viruses resistant to the drug when patients miss doses. For the same reason, patients should get an HIV test periodically while on the drug.
• Counsel patients on Truvada to use condoms faithfully, because the drug isn't a sure bet against the virus.
• Above all, tell patients they must take the drug every day – not just when they've had risky sex.

The study makes that last point very clear. Overall, men who took Truvada had a 44 percent lower risk of HIV infection. But those who said they took the drug at least 9 out of every 10 day had a 73 percent lower risk.

That doesn't tell the whole story. When researchers tested the blood of patients for traces of Truvada, they found many who claimed to have taken the pill regularly weren't telling the truth. Among those whose tests showed they really did take it every day, the risk of HIV infection was 92 percent lower than those not on the drug.

There's one other thing, the CDC says. Make sure patients understand that warding off HIV isn't cheap. Each pill currently costs around $36, which adds up to more than $13,000 a year. Some insurers might pay, but some might balk.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Several clear points were made about harms:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATLANTA (Reuters) - A noninvasive procedure that freezes and kills problem-causing heart tissue was nearly 10 times better at eliminating a potentially serious heart rhythm disorder than conventional anti-arrhythmic drugs, researchers said on Monday.

A clinical trial of Medtronic Inc’s (MDT.N) cryoablation system looked at 245 patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, a condition marked by intermittent episodes of abnormal heart rhythm that causes the upper chambers of the heart to quiver.

A small pilot study funded by St. Jude Medical Inc STJ.N compared the two therapies in a sicker population of patients and also found that the procedure worked better than drugs.

Atrial fibrillation is the most common heart disorder, affecting 2.2 million Americans and 10 million people worldwide. It significantly raises the risk of stroke.

Patients in the Medtronic-sponsored trial who underwent the cryoablation procedure — which involves using a catheter to freeze away the heart tissue where the problem originates — was just as safe as drugs used to treat the condition and far more effective, meeting the study’s primary goal of eliminating atrial fibrillation one year after the procedure.

Dubbed Stop-af, the Medtronic trial showed that almost 70 percent of patients who had cryoablation remained free of the condition after one year, compared with just 7 percent of patients who received drug therapy, according to data presented at the American College of Cardiology meeting in Atlanta.

“This is the best data we have at this point in support of cryoablation (to treat atrial fibrillation),” said Dr. Douglas Packer of Mayo Clinic, the lead investigator of the study.

Over 3 percent of patients treated by cryoablation experienced a serious condition — a narrowing of the pulmonary vein in 7 out of 228 patients, one of whom required another procedure to widen the vein.

Damage or irritation to the nerve that controls the diaphragm was reported in 11 percent of the cryoablation procedures, but none of the cases was considered serious, with 98 percent resolved by the 12-month follow-up.

Complications related to the atrial fibrillation itself were also monitored. During the follow-up period, 97 percent of patients who got the procedure and 92 percent of the drug therapy patients did not suffer heart attack, stroke or death.

Less than 1 percent of patients treated with cryoablation were hospitalized for a recurrence of the disease, compared with 6 percent in the drug group.

Patients in the pilot study had advanced atrial fibrillation and tended to have other medical problems, such as high blood pressure, diabetes or coronary artery disease,

Packer, who also led the pilot study, dubbed Cabana, acknowledged that the main limitation of this study was its small size, but said it lays the foundation for a larger one.

He said the larger study, which will include 180 centers, is currently enrolling patients.

Anti-arrhythmic drugs eliminate atrial fibrillation in about half of all patients but can have adverse side effects.

Cryoablation is an alternative that is growing in popularity. Over the past decade, more patients have been referred for ablation procedures when drugs proved ineffective.

Catheter ablation involves inserting a thin tube into a blood vessel, usually through a site in the upper leg or neck, and then threading it though the body until it reaches the heart. When it reaches the area of the heart that causes abnormal rhythms, the tissue is ablated, or destroyed.

The procedure has been used to treat arrhythmias for years. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration initially cleared ablation catheters to treat arrhythmias, such as atrial flutter, but not atrial fibrillation.

Only Johnson & Johnson (JNJ.N) has an ablation device approved by U.S. health regulators specifically to treat atrial fibrillation.

The Medtronic device, which the company added to its portfolio with the 2008 acquisition of CryoCath, has been approved in Europe and Australia.

Medtronic shares were up 3.7 percent to $45.55 in late-morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The story did mention several of the harms associated with the use of this device along with the incidence with which they were observed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON – November 13, 2015 – A clinical trial among more than 300 patients has found that the drug ranibizumab (Lucentis) is highly effective in treating proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), a complication of diabetes that can severely damage eyesight. The results, published by the Journal of the American Medical Association, demonstrate the first major therapy advance for the condition in nearly 40 years.

Funded by the National Eye Institute (NEI) and conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), the trial compared Lucentis injections with a type of laser therapy called panretinal photocoagulation, which has remained the gold standard for PDR since the mid-1970s. Although laser therapy preserves central vision, it can damage night and side vision, so researchers have sought therapies that lack these side effects.

The trial results “provide crucial evidence for a safe and effective alternative to laser therapy against PDR,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D.

“Patients who received Lucentis showed a little bit better central vision, much less loss of their side vision, and substantially less risk for surgery than patients who received laser treatment,” said Lloyd Paul Aiello, M.D., Ph.D., director of the Beetham Eye Institute at Joslin Diabetes Center and Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School. “These findings will change the available treatment options for patients with PDR.”

Diabetic retinopathy damages blood vessels in the light-sensitive retina in the back of the eye. As the disease worsens, blood vessels can swell and lose their ability to function properly. Diabetic retinopathy becomes proliferative when lack of blood flow in the retina increases production of a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which can stimulate the growth of new, abnormal blood vessels. These new vessels are prone to bleeding into the center of the eye, sometimes requiring a surgical procedure called a vitrectomy to clear the blood. The abnormal blood vessels can also cause scarring and retinal detachment. Untreated, PDR is associated with high risk of visual loss. Lucentis is among several drugs that block the effects of VEGF.

Dr. Aiello and George King, M.D., Chief Scientific Officer at Joslin Diabetes Center and Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School, pioneered the study of VEGF in diabetic eye disease, beginning in the early 1990s. (Their work followed a distinguished Joslin tradition—the basic laser photocoagulation technique was developed in the 1960s by Dr. Aiello’s father, Lloyd M. Aiello, M.D., and grandfather, William P. Beetham, M.D.)

About 7.7 million U.S. residents have diabetic retinopathy, a leading cause of blindness among working-age Americans. Among these, about 1.5 percent have progressed to PDR.

The DRCR.net enrolled 305 participants (394 eyes) with PDR in one or both eyes at 55 clinical sites across the country. Eyes were assigned randomly to treatment with Lucentis or laser. About half of the eyes assigned to the laser group required more than one round of laser treatment. In the other group, Lucentis was injected into the eye once per month for three consecutive months, and then as needed until the disease resolved or stabilized.

Because Lucentis is commonly injected to treat diabetic macular edema (DME)—a build-up of fluid in the center of the retina—the study permitted the use of Lucentis for DME in the laser group, if necessary. Slightly more than half (53 percent) of eyes in the laser group received Lucentis injections to treat DME. About 6 percent of eyes in the Lucentis group received laser therapy, mostly for issues other than DME.

At two years, vision in the Lucentis group improved by an average of about half a line on an eye chart, compared with virtually no change in the laser group.

Participants treated with laser generally lost substantial peripheral vision, but those given injections did not, emphasized Jennifer Sun, M.D., M.P.H., Associate Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School and physician at the Beetham Eye Institute.

“This was a clear benefit associated with the anti-VEGF medication,” said Dr. Sun, who as the DRCR.net nationwide Protocol Working Investigator was instrumental in the study’s development. “Many of our patients who have laser treatment notice that they have more tunnel vision, which can lead to difficulties as they go about activities of daily life. The use of anti-VEGF treatment rather than laser for PDR could help prevent these symptoms.”

Additionally, the need for vitrectomy surgery was lower in the Lucentis group (8 of 191 eyes) than in the laser group (30 of 203 eyes).

Overall, the drug’s benefits are particularly clear for people with both PDR and DME. “We know that this drug will help treat both conditions at the same time, so this is an especially appealing treatment alternative for these patients,” Dr. Aiello noted.

“Lucentis should be considered a viable treatment option for people with PDR, especially for individuals needing anti-VEGF for DME,” said Jeffrey G. Gross, M.D., of the Carolina Retina Center in Columbia, South Carolina, who chaired the clinical study.

The study also suggested that Lucentis may help prevent DME. Among people without this condition at the start of the study, only 9 percent of Lucentis-treated eyes developed it, compared with 28 percent in the laser group. Scientists will follow up on that result as the DRCR.net continues to track patients for a total of five years.

A separate clinical trial, now getting underway, will examine whether anti-VEGF injections given at an earlier stage of diabetic eye disease can help prevent people from developing both DME and the sight-threatening PDR stage of the disease at all, Dr. Aiello said.

The trial reported today “is a major study that may substantially change our approach to treatment of PDR,” summed up Dr. Sun. “Laser still has a role in the treatment of PDR for some patients, but anti-VEGF therapy gives us another tool in our search for better vision outcomes in our patients with diabetes.”

Founded in 1898, Joslin Diabetes Center is world-renowned for its deep expertise in diabetes treatment and research. Joslin is an independent, non-profit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and a federally-designated Diabetes Research Center. Joslin is dedicated to finding a cure for diabetes and ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives. We develop and disseminate innovative patient therapies and scientific discoveries throughout the world.

Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit www.joslin.org.

Joslin Research comprises the most comprehensive and productive effort in diabetes research under one roof anywhere in the world. With 30‐plus faculty‐level investigators, Joslin researchers focus on unraveling the biological, biochemical and genetic processes that underlie the development of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and related complications.

Joslin research is highly innovative and imaginative, employing the newest tools in genetics, genomics and proteomics to identify abnormalities that may play a role in the development of diabetes and its complications. Joslin Clinic patients, and others with diabetes, have the option of participating in clinical trials at Joslin to help translate basic research into treatment innovations.

Joslin has one of the largest diabetes training programs in the world, educating 150 M.D. and Ph.D. researchers each year, many of whom go on to head diabetes initiatives at leading institutions all over the globe. For more information, visit www.joslinresearch.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that one study volunteer in the Lucentis group developed an eye infection and stated that “serious systemic adverse events,” namely cardiac arrest and stroke, occurred at similar rates among the two groups undergoing the two different procedures. We’ll rate that satisfactory for the disclosure although the release might have gone even further by mentioning the other side effects named in the study including inflammation and elevated intraocular pressure which occurred in both treatment groups.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
America's favorite dietary supplements, multivitamins, modestly lowered the risk for cancer in healthy male doctors who took them for more than a decade, the first large study to test these pills has found.

The result is a surprise because many studies of individual vitamins have found they don't help prevent chronic diseases and some have even caused problems.

In the new study, multivitamins cut the chance of developing cancer by 8%. That is less effective than a good diet, exercise and not smoking, each of which can lower cancer risk by 20% to 30%, cancer experts say.

Multivitamins also may have different results in women, younger men or people less healthy than those in this study.

"It's a very mild effect and personally I'm not sure it's significant enough to recommend to anyone" although it is promising, said Dr. Ernest Hawk, vice president of cancer prevention at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and formerly of the National Cancer Institute.

"At least this doesn't suggest a harm" as some previous studies on single vitamins have, he said.

Hawk reviewed the study for the American Association for Cancer Research, which is meeting in Anaheim, Calif., where the study was to be presented on Wednesday. It also was published online in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

About one-third of U.S. adults and as many as half of those over 50 take them. They are marketed as a kind of insurance policy against bad eating. Yet no government agency recommends their routine use "regardless of the quality of a person's diet," says a fact sheet from the federal Office of Dietary Supplements.

Some fads, such as the antioxidant craze over vitamins A and E and beta-carotene, backfired when studies found more health risk with those supplements, not less. Many of those were single vitamins in larger doses than the "100% of daily value" amounts that multivitamins typically contain.

Science on vitamins has been skimpy. Most studies have been observational — they look at groups of people who do and do not use vitamins, a method that can't give firm conclusions.

Dr. J. Michael Gaziano, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and VA Boston, led a stronger test. Nearly 15,000 male doctors who were 50 or older and free of cancer when the study started were given monthly packets of Centrum Silver or fake multivitamins without knowing which type they received.

After about 11 years, there were 2,669 new cancers, and some people had cancer more than once. For every 1,000 men per year in the study, there were 17 cancers among multivitamin users and more than 18 among those taking the placebo pills. That worked out to an 8% lower risk of developing cancer in the vitamin group.

Multivitamins made no difference in the risk of developing prostate cancer, which accounted for half of all cases. They lowered the risk of other cancers collectively by about 12%. There also was a trend toward fewer cancer deaths among multivitamin users, but the difference was so small it could have occurred by chance alone.

Side effects were fairly similar except for more rashes among vitamin users. The National Institutes of Health paid for most of the study. Pfizer Inc. supplied the pills and other companies supplied the packaging.

The main reason to take a multivitamin is to correct or prevent a deficiency, "but there may be a modest benefit in reducing the risk of cancer in older men," Gaziano said.

Cancer experts said the results need to be confirmed by another study before recommending multivitamins to the public. These participants were healthier — only 4% smoked, for example.

For people who do want to take multivitamins, doctors suggest:

— Be aware that they are dietary supplements, which do not get the strict testing required of prescription medicines.

— Ask your doctor before taking any. Vitamin K can interfere with common heart medicines and blood thinners, and vitamins C and E can lower the effectiveness of some types of chemotherapy. For people having surgery, some vitamins affect bleeding and response to anesthesia.

— Current and former smokers should avoid multivitamins with lots of beta-carotene or vitamin A; two studies have tied them to increased risk of lung cancer.

Copyright 2012 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that side effects were similar between vitamin and placebo group participants, with the exception of their being more rashes among vitamin users. The story also touches on potential harms from dietary supplements in general (e.g. they are minimally regulated and not subject to strict testing for purity) and for specific groups (e.g. people on blood thinners or with cancer, whose vitamin use might interfere with their treatment).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 20, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have developed a blood test that they say could help physicians predict whether pregnant women will deliver their babies prematurely.

The test isn't ready for prime time, however, and it's not foolproof: a study found that it misses some premature births and incorrectly predicts others.

Still, the test "should be an important tool for an obstetrician who currently has no clue" if premature birth is a possibility until it happens, said Brigham Young University (BYU) chemistry professor Steven W. Graves.

Physicians will "be able to use a simple blood test and then know that this woman is at increased risk or reduced risk of a preterm birth," said Graves, whose laboratory performed the research in the study.

About 10 percent of births are premature, and the rate rises to 30 percent among women who have already had a baby prematurely, Graves said. Premature birth can lead to a long list of medical problems and puts babies at risk of dying.

In the new study, the researchers examined blood samples from 80 women who went on to have normal births and 80 who had premature births. They tried to find signs in the blood that indicate what kind of birth the women would have.

The researchers developed a screening method that looked for so-called peptide biomarkers in the blood that -- in tandem with several other proteins -- predicted 80 percent to 90 percent of the premature births at 28 weeks of gestation. The false positive rate -- referring to tests that wrongly indicated premature birth -- was 20 percent.

The test wasn't as effective at 24 weeks of gestation.

"This may simply indicate that some of the causes for preterm birth may not pre-exist before the pregnancy," Graves said. "Most probably don't, but develop or become apparent as the pregnancy progresses. The closer to the preterm birth, the more likely you are to have significant changes in the physiology of the woman that is observed in the blood."

The test may cost $150 to $250, Graves said. It would require several years to go through the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval process. BYU and the University of Utah have a patent on the test and have licensed it.

Even if the test is found to indicate that a birth will be premature, physicians would have limited options. One option is to provide drugs that dampen the immune system so the baby's lungs develop faster, said Dr. Jennifer Wu, an obstetrician-gynecologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Wu said the study results are promising, but more research is needed to confirm that the test is reliable. "If you are going to be alarming a patient by saying that she may have premature delivery, you want to make sure that's truly the case."

The study appears in the May issue of the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

For more about premature birth, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: It mentioned that the false positive rate was 20%, so we’ll give it a passing grade. We wish, though, that it had included some expert comment on the significance of a false positive rate that high.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ANN ARBOR, Michigan -- Even as treatment options for laryngeal cancer seemed to improve, survival rates did not. For the most advanced patients, 50 percent survival was the norm, whether patients had surgery to totally remove the voice box or alternative treatment with chemotherapy and radiation to try to avoid surgery.

But the head and neck oncology team at the University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center came up with a different approach: Give patients a single dose of chemotherapy and see who responds to it. The responders can continue with combination chemotherapy and radiation. The non-responders can be referred immediately for surgery.

After a decade of using this approach, researchers are reporting "exceptional" survival rates nearing 80 percent, even for the most advanced patients. The team published their outcomes in JAMA Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery.

"In trying to match the biology of the tumor to the treatment, all of the patients get better outcomes," says study author Gregory T. Wolf, M.D., professor and chair emeritus of otolaryngology - head and neck surgery at Michigan Medicine.

"This approach allows us to enhance quality of life for all of our patients. Many patients can spare their voice box by having chemotherapy and radiation. But that's only good if the treatment works. For patients who must go on to receive surgery, by selecting them up front, we can spare them the complications that may occur when the voice box is removed following multiple cycles of chemotherapy with radiation," adds study author Francis Worden, M.D., professor of hematology/oncology.

The Michigan Medicine team first tested the idea in 1995. They found that patients whose tumor shrunk by more than half after one round of chemotherapy were more likely to do well with chemotherapy and radiation and have an excellent chance of saving their voice box. If the tumor did not respond after that first dose, patients would likely fail on the chemotherapy and would do better going straight to surgery.

In a clinical trial, they saw disease-specific survival rates of 80 percent in patients with advanced disease. This was unheard of. And it wasn't just those who responded to the chemotherapy. The non-responders who were immediately referred for surgery had better outcomes too.

"We adopted the treatment approach and started offering it to all our laryngeal cancer patients," Wolf says. As part of a Specialized Program of Research Excellence, or SPORE, grant, the team was already maintaining long-term follow-up data on patients. Wolf suggested they look back and see if they were still maintaining such strong outcomes with this approach. The results surprised even him.

Over 10 years, 153 stage 3 and 4 laryngeal cancer patients were treated at Michigan Medicine, with about half receiving the induction chemotherapy. The remainder elected to proceed straight to surgery or chemo-radiation without the induction dose.

Average disease specific survival at five years for the induction chemotherapy patients was 79 percent - equivalent to the results in patients with early stage disease, and significantly better than the 66 percent survival for patients who had chemo-radiation without the induction strategy.

"This adds ammunition to the idea that we need to pick individual therapies more carefully. Both chemo-radiation and surgery are difficult treatments with their share of challenging long-term effects. But if we tailor treatments to the individual biology of the tumor and characteristics of the patient, we'll get the best results," Wolf says.

The study did find lower functional preservation of the larynx in the induction chemotherapy group compared to those who elected chemoradiation. Two-thirds of the induction group achieved organ preservation, while more than three-quarters of the chemo-radiation patients did.

Wolf notes, however, that chemoradiation often severely damages the larynx, which may cause problems with eating or swallowing years later.

The induction approach can be done anywhere, but requires intense collaboration among surgeons, medical oncologists and radiation oncologists. All three must be involved to assess the patient and refer to the appropriate therapy.

Even that single dose of chemotherapy can be debilitating and toxic for some patients. Wolf hopes future research will reveal a way to tailor treatment without the need for the induction chemotherapy.

Funding: National Cancer Institute grants P50 CA097248 and P30 CA046592, and the Sinabaldo and Diane Tozzi Research Fund
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release states: “Even that single [initial] dose of chemotherapy can be debilitating and toxic for some patients.” That’s enough to earn it a marginal satisfactory mark here. The release would have been better if it had noted that radiation, surgery and chemotherapy all carry serious side effect risks. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Radiation from CT scans done in 2007 will cause 29,000 cancers and kill nearly 15,000 Americans, researchers said on Monday.

The findings, published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, add to mounting evidence that Americans are overexposed to radiation from diagnostic tests, especially from a specialized kind of X-ray called a computed tomography, or CT, scan.

“What we learned is there is a significant amount of radiation with these CT scans, more than what we thought, and there is a significant number of cancers,” said Dr. Rita Redberg, editor of the Archives of Internal Medicine, where the studies were published.

“It’s estimated that just from the CT scans done in one year, just in 2007, there will be 15,000 excess deaths,” Redberg said in a telephone interview.

“We’re doing millions of CT scans every year and the numbers are increasing. That is a lot of excess deaths.”

CT scans give doctors a view inside the body, often eliminating the need for exploratory surgery. But CT scans involve much higher radiation dose than conventional X-rays. A chest CT scan exposes the patient to more than 100 times the radiation dose of a chest X-ray.

About 70 million CT scans were done on Americans in 2007, up from 3 million in 1980. Amy Berrington de Gonzalez of the National Cancer Institute and colleagues developed a computer model to estimate the impact of so many scans.

They estimated the scans done in 2007 will cause 29,000 cancers. A third of the projected cancers will occur in people who were ages 35 to 54 when they got their CT, two-thirds will occur in women and 15 percent will arise from scans done in children or teens.

The researchers estimated there will be an extra 2,000 excess breast cancers just from CT scans done in 2007.

Redberg, who wrote a commentary on the studies, said U.S. doctors’ enthusiasm for the tests has led to an explosion in their use that is putting patients at risk.

“While certainly some of the scans are incredibly important and life saving, it is also certain that some of them were not necessary,” Redberg said.

In a separate study, Dr. Rebecca Smith-Bindman of the University of California, San Francisco, and colleagues analyzed data from 1,119 patients undergoing the 11 most common types of diagnostic CT scans at four institutions in 2008.

They found radiation dosage varied widely between different types of CT studies, from a median or midpoint of 2 millisieverts for a routine head CT scan to 31 millisieverts for a scan of the abdomen and pelvis, which often involves taking multiple images of the same organ.

By comparison, the average American is exposed to about 3 millisieverts of radiation a year from ground radon or flying in an airplane — a level not considered a risk to health.

The researchers said efforts need to be taken to minimize CT radiation exposure, including reducing the number of unnecessary tests, cutting the dose per study, and standardizing the doses across facilities.

Imaging equipment makers such as GE Healthcare, Siemens, Philips and Toshiba Medical Systems are working to develop low-dose CT scanners.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly describes the harm of radiation exposure from CT scanning. The story could have also mentioned that excessive CT scanning can also lead to unecessary follow-up testing and/or procedures for suspicious findings that turn out to be benign.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A small, preliminary study finds that ginger root supplements seem to reduce inflammation in the intestines -- a potential sign that the pills might reduce the risk of colon cancer.

However, more study needs to be done, and the researchers aren't yet recommending that people head to the supplements' aisle or start gobbling up more ginger at meal times.

"If you want to add ginger to part of a healthy diet, that's great. But you can't make any conclusions about definite health benefits" based on the study findings, said lead author Suzanna M. Zick, a naturopathic physician and research associate professor at University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor.

The study, funded by the U.S. National Cancer Institute, was published online Oct. 11 in Cancer Prevention Research.

Ginger, an herb, is found in supplements and in many foods such as ginger snaps and Asian dishes. Research has supported its use to treat stomach problems such as nausea and vomiting; the U.S. National Library of Medicine says it's "likely safe," although some people may develop mild side effects.

Previous research in animals has suggested that ginger can reduce inflammation but isn't potentially toxic to the stomach like aspirin, Zick noted. And scientists have linked chronic inflammation in the gut to colon cancer, suggesting that easing this inflammation could reduce the risk of the disease.

In the new study, Zick's team randomly assigned 30 people to take pills containing 2 grams of ground ginger root extract or a "dummy" placebo pill each day for 28 days. They measured the level of inflammation in the participants' intestines before and after the test period.

The amount of ginger in the pills is equivalent to 20 grams of raw ginger root, the authors said. That is probably well beyond what most people would eat in their regular diet, Zick noted. As for cost, she said that a month's supply of similar ginger supplements typically runs about $10 to $30.

The researchers found that the level of inflammation in the subjects who took the ginger pills fell by an average of 28 percent, while staying about the same in those who took the placebo.

If more funding becomes available, the researchers hope to launch a larger study, Zick said. But for now, she said, "if you want to embrace ginger because you like the taste, go ahead," but there's no solid evidence that it prevents colon cancer.

Dr. Andrew Chan, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and a gastroenterologist at Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, said the findings are promising because they hint at how ginger may prevent colon cancer.

It's already clear that people with inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease are at higher risk of colon cancer, he noted. "We know there are anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin that appear to have anti-cancer properties. And we know there are certain basic mechanisms which seem to be common to both inflammation and cancer," he said.

Still, Chan said, "it's much too early to tell whether ginger has anti-cancer properties."

There's more on ginger at the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Barely satisfactory.
The story only says that previous animal research showed ginger “isn’t potentially toxic to the stomach like aspirin.”
What about in people?
The story states that the National Library of Medicine that ginger is “likely safe…although some people may develop side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The last five years have been exhausting for Andrea Turner. Lights out for the 69-year-old meant sleeping for a couple of hours before being jolted awake in the middle of the night and lying there electrified.

“I was exhausted all the time, from the time I woke to the time I went to bed,” says Turner. “It was like how can I make it through this day because I am so tired? I thought since I'm older so that's what it is.”

It wasn’t until a mother-daughter vacation that Turner’s daughter noticed something interesting when her mother slept. Turner would make little gasping sounds throughout the night. This discovery, and the unrelenting exhaustion, led Turner to Stanford University where she underwent a sleep study. The doctors measured everything from brainwaves to breathing — what they found surprised Turner.

“It was 41 times per hour that I would stop breathing,” says Turner. “And then the doctors looked piece by piece, and realized that what I have is sleep apnea.”

Turner’s nightly interrupted breathing increased her chances of heart attack or stroke by three to four times, according to Dr. Robson Capasso, associate professor of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery at Stanford University.

Roughly 18 million Americans suffer from sleep apnea and as many as 90 percent are undiagnosed, because gasps and choking sounds aren't always so severe they wake someone up. The condition more commonly affects men, as well as people who are overweight, over 40, and have large necks. Women with sleep apnea may suffer poorer heart health than men, according to a recent study.

Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when the soft tissues of the mouth and airway, especially the tongue, block air flow into the lungs. This causes breathing to stop multiple times throughout the night, and oxygen levels in the body to fall —which was happening to Turner. The drop in oxygen while sleeping is a significant risk factor for cardiovascular disease, say experts.

After being diagnosed, Turner tried an external continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine, which proved too cumbersome for her continued use. What's more, a recent study in the New England Journal of Medicine found that the bulky CPAP machines — standard treatment for many patients with sleep apnea — doesn't help prevent heart attacks or stroke, although it does help patients sleep better and improve mood.

Instead, Turner underwent a relatively new procedure: implanting a pacemaker-like device called Inspire for obstructive sleep apnea. Approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2014, the device is a remote-controlled chest implant plus two thin wires that runs under the skin monitoring a patient’s breath, delivering a mild electric current at night.

A clinical trial of Inspire therapy found a 78 percent reduction in the number of sleep apnea events per hour for patients.

“This is definitely an interesting solution for a good number of people,” said Capasso.

Inspire is an invasive procedure, so it is not recommended as a first-line treatment and not everyone is a candidate.

The price tag for the Inspire device is $20,000, with surgery costing extra. Insurance companies are reviewing requests on a case-by-case basis.
• should be over the age of 22
• have a diagnosis of moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea
• be unable to use or get consistent benefit from CPAP

Dr. Sanjeev Kothare, professor of neurology at NYU Langone Medical Center, cautions about using Inspire unless sleep apnea patients meet the requirements for the procedure. For Kothare, the out-of-pocket expense for the device, the risks of surgery, plus the potential for the mechanism —which moves the tongue forward — to break, doesn’t make it a viable option for everyone.

The main side effect from the device is that people can wake up with a sore tongue. But for Turner that’s a small price to pay for a goodnight’s sleep.

“Before, I'd be awake constantly, but when I sleep now, I am asleep. I'm not waking up.”

Signs of sleep apnea, according to the National, Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, include:
• Dry mouth or sore throat when you wake up
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says the main side effect from the device is “that people can wake up with a sore tongue.” We’ll give this a barely passing satisfactory. (What about people who may have suffered adverse reactions or complications from surgery?)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hormone therapy is the only FDA-approved treatment for hot flashes related to menopause, but many women are reluctant to undergo hormone therapy because its long-term use has been linked to an increased risk for breast cancer and stroke .

The study was presented in Chicago at the annual meeting of the North American Menopause Society (NAMS).

In a manufacturer-funded study, the drug Serada proved to be more effective than placebo for preventing hot flashes and reducing their severity.

Oct. 6, 2010 -- An extended-release version of the seizure and pain drug gabapentin may be one step closer to becoming the first approved nonhormonal treatment for menopause -related hot flashes .

In earlier studies, immediate-release gabapentin was shown to be an effective treatment for hot flashes. But side effects, including dizziness and daytime sleepiness, were commonly reported by users.

Michael Sweeney, MD, who is vice president of research and development for Serada manufacturer Depomed Inc., says the company’s slow-release gabapentin formulation avoids many of these side effects.

About 60% of women who took the experimental drug in one study reported side effects, compared to about 50% of women taking placebo pills. About 8% and 18% of Serada users reported daytime sleepiness and dizziness, respectively, compared to about 3% and 8% of women who took a placebo.

“These side effects, when they did occur, tended to occur early in treatment and disappear within a few weeks,” Sweeney says.

Researchers presented findings from two studies of Serada at the NAMS meeting.

In one study, the number of daily hot flashes experienced by postmenopausal women taking 1,800 milligrams of the drug per day declined from around 10 to around 2. But a similar reduction in hot flashes was seen in women who took placebo pills instead of the slow-release gabapentin.

In the second study, about 65% of women taking Serada reported significant improvement in hot flash symptoms after 12 weeks of treatment, compared to 45% of women taking placebo.

NAMS founder and former executive director Wulf Utian, MD, says Serada does not appear to be as effective as hormonal therapy, but it may be a useful alternative treatment for women who can’t take hormones or don’t want to.

Utian is now an independent consultant and was a co-author of one of the studies.

“Estrogen and estrogen-progestin drugs are about 95% effective for treating hot flashes,” he tells WebMD. “This drug was about 60% to 65% effective, which is about the same efficacy that has been reported with antidepressants [for treatment of hot flashes].”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This article is featured in Newsweek's Special Edition: Nature's Remedies—Heal Your Body.

One of the leading causes of disability in the United States isn’t physical—it’s mental. According to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America (ADAA), 15 million adults—approximately 6.7 percent of the population—suffer from major depressive disorder, which is most often treated through a combination of talk therapy and medication. Those who struggle with depression have imbalanced levels of serotonin, which maintains mood, and dopamine, which controls the pleasure and reward zones. The brain’s synapses control how much of these chemicals are released, and drugs like Zoloft effectively prevent the little serotonin being produced from reabsorbing back into the nerve cells from which they were released, resulting in a higher concentration of serotonin. Some pill-averse patients have longed for a natural cure for depression, while others complain that the drugs they’re on aren’t enough. Hope for both groups may have arrived through an unlikely source: magnets. Researchers discovered they can harness the power of magnetism to increase serotonin production and combat depression through a process called Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS).

“Each [symptom of depression] maps onto a given circuit of the brain,” neurologist Alvaro Pascual-Leone told NPR in April 2016 about treating patients using TMS. “The reason why that circuit of the brain is not functioning properly...has to do with a deficit of a certain chemical in the brain. But the point is that if we can identify the circuit that causes the symptoms, we can target that circuit and make it function better through brain stimulation. So, in a sense, [TMS is] not a treatment...for the ultimate cause of the disorder, but it’s an intervention that improves how the patient is able to function.”

TMS has a lot in common with a traditional MRI scan. In fact, the only clue TMS treatment contains magnets at all is that patients must remove any jewelry and stow their credit cards (to prevent demagnetization) before treatment. According to Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine’s description of the technique, a coil is fitted to the front of a patient’s head so the electromagnetic pulses can target the prefrontal cortex of the brain, which controls emotion. A physician then tests the machine to see how much power is needed to affect the patient’s reflexes. Once the patient’s thumb involuntarily twitches, the current is strong enough to affect the patient’s brain activity. At this point, specific symptoms can be targeted depending on the patient’s needs.

The biggest drawback to TMS, according to advocates, is the limitations on just who can undergo the treatment. Though it was approved by the FDA in 2008, its use is federally restricted with exemptions only for those with severe depression, autism or Parkinson’s. Even those who are approved to undergo the treatment face another barrier as TMS is not widely covered by health insurance. Its efficacy varies from patient to patient and, like most prescriptions for depression, TMS has its own set of side-effects. The most common, not surprisingly, are headaches. Although one-third of patients have reported experiencing painful scalp sensations and facial twitching, these tend to fade after several treatments.

Despite these setbacks, researchers are optimistic about TMS—and not just as a form of treatment for depression. Experiments treating Parkinson’s and autism, the other two conditions for which TMS is approved, have seen some success among neurologists. More studies will be needed to determine whether this method can be used as a widespread treatment for other brain-related disorders, but if today’s research is any indication, TMS could be a key to improving the lives of Americans suffering from a multitude of disorders.

This article was excerpted from Newsweek's Special Edition: Nature's Remedies—Heal Your Body. For more on the definitive guide to alternative methods of healing the mind, body and soul, pick up a copy today.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Side effects are a feature of this story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new insomnia drug helped people get a bit more shut-eye in a lab study, researchers report.

The drug, known as suvorexant, is being developed by Merck Research Laboratories, which funded and conducted the study. The medication is not available yet, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing it for possible approval, the researchers said.

In the United States, about 10 percent of people say they have chronic insomnia, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. There are sleep aids on the market, but they do not work for everyone and they can have side effects that include sleepwalking, daytime drowsiness and confusion.

Suvorexant works differently from those drugs, zeroing in on specific brain chemicals involved in the ability to sleep, explained study author Dr. William Herring, executive director of clinical research at Merck.

The study, published online Nov. 28 and in the Dec. 4 print issue of the journal Neurology, included 254 healthy adults with primary insomnia, which means it wasn't caused by an underlying physical or mental health problem.

All of the patients spent four weeks on one of four doses of suvorexant and another four weeks on placebo pills. They had their sleep monitored in a sleep lab on their first night with each treatment, and then came back again after four weeks.

Overall, Herring's team found, people slept better with the drug, although the improvement was not dramatic.

At the outset, when patients spent eight hours in bed, they were typically asleep for 66 percent of that time. One day on suvorexant boosted that by anywhere from 5 percent to 13 percent, relative to the placebo. Between 21 and 37 fewer minutes were spent awake during those sleep periods.

There was still a benefit four weeks later. One expert pointed out, however, that the benefit was small.

"The amount of additional sleep was not tremendous," said Dr. Carl Bazil, director of the division of epilepsy and sleep at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center.

The effect was essentially comparable to what has been seen with other sleep medications, said Bazil, who was not involved in the research.

But, he said, suvorexant is seen as a potentially important development in the world of sleep medicine, because the drug blocks specific brain chemicals called orexins, which help keep people awake. Standard sleep medications work more widely throughout the brain, Bazil explained, which is why they can have a host of side effects.

"The way [suvorexant] works makes a lot of sense," Bazil said. "The hope is that it will help some people who haven't responded to [other drugs], and have fewer side effects."

It's promising news, Bazil added, that there were no serious side effects in this study.

The most common side effects were sleepiness (reported by about 10 percent of patients on the two higher doses of suvorexant), headache (reported by about 5 percent), dizziness and abnormal dreams (5 percent).

There are still many questions, including whether the drug would benefit people with insomnia due to a health condition, which doctors call secondary insomnia.

The study also excluded adults aged 65 or older -- an age group commonly affected by insomnia. But, Herring said, seniors were part of a larger, 12-month trial, and Merck has submitted those results to the FDA.

Another sleep specialist said the findings show "some potential benefit" from suvorexant, but he cautioned insomnia sufferers against relying completely on any drug.

"Medication can be important," said Dr. William Kohler, who directs the Florida Sleep Institute in Spring Hill. "But in the long run, the best methods for treating insomnia are behavioral techniques."

Kohler said cognitive behavioral therapy -- where people learn to change the thoughts and habits that affect their sleep quality -- is a proven way to manage insomnia. For most people, he said, medication should be a temporary treatment; behavior change is the long-term fix.

Bazil agreed: "I look at most people with insomnia as someone who developed bad sleep habits."

A drug, ideally used for a short time, may help encourage sleep and get people on the right track, Bazil said. "But those bad sleep habits -- you've got to address them too," he added.

"The problem," Kohler noted, "is that we don't want to make behavior changes. We want to pop a pill."

Learn more about insomnia and good sleep habits from the National Sleep Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story reported:
“there were no serious side effects in this study.
The most common side effects were sleepiness (reported by about 10 percent of patients on the two higher doses of suvorexant), headache (reported by about 5 percent), dizziness and abnormal dreams (5 percent).”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Neil M. Bressler of Johns Hopkins University, the chairman of the group that conducted the trial, said a two-line improvement in vision would allow some people to read normal-size print or to drive again.

Lucentis is not approved as a treatment for macular edema. But it is approved for another eye disease, age-related macular degeneration.

So doctors can — and some already do — use the drug off-label for the diabetic condition. With this successful Phase 3 trial, insurers will now be more likely to pay for such off-label use.

Some doctors criticized the organizers of the trial for testing Lucentis rather than another Genentech drug, Avastin, which works in the same way as Lucentis.

Although it is a cancer drug, Avastin is often used off-label for eye diseases because it is far cheaper than Lucentis, costing only $20 to $100 a dose, compared with $2,000 for Lucentis.

Avastin is undercutting sales of Lucentis, which totaled $1.1 billion in the United States last year.

Organizers of the trial conceded that a major reason Lucentis was chosen was that Genentech, which is now owned by Roche, agreed to provide the drug free of charge and to contribute $9 million in additional financing — but only if Lucentis were used.

“Obviously you can’t underplay $9 million,” said Dr. Ferris of the eye institute, which is part of the part of the National Institutes of Health. But he said there were other factors as well, like a belief that Lucentis might have been the better drug.

Dr. Philip J. Rosenfeld, a professor of ophthalmology at the University of Miami, said the decision was “clearly a case of pay to play” since Genentech’s money dictated the choice of drugs.

Retinopathy results from damage to the blood vessels in the eye. In macular edema, fluid from those damaged vessels leaks into the macula, the part of the retina that is responsible for the straight-ahead vision important for driving, recognizing faces and reading.

Lucentis, also known as ranibizumab, works by drying up leaky blood vessels and preventing the growth of new ones.

John Bevan, who has diabetic macular edema, said that every two months or so he used to have an incident in which blood leaked into his eye, blurring his vision.

“It’s like a paintball hits a plate-glass window — there’s a big splat and it drips downward and takes three days to a week to dissipate,” said Mr. Bevan, the school superintendent in north central Indiana. He said treatment with Lucentis in the clinical trial virtually eliminated those incidents.

The trial involved 691 patients, some of whom had both eyes treated, resulting in 854 total eyes. There were four treatment groups: One group got Lucentis injections into the eye as often as every four weeks, plus laser therapy. Another got Lucentis, with laser therapy used only after six months and only if needed. The third group got laser therapy plus injections into the eye of triamcinolone, a steroid sold by Allergan under the name Trivaris. The fourth group got laser therapy plus a sham injection.

After the first year, only 3 to 4 percent of the eyes treated with Lucentis suffered a visual loss of two or more lines compared to 13 percent that got only laser therapy.

Researchers said the results seem to be holding up for the second year of the three-year trial.

About 1 percent of those getting Lucentis injections suffered an inflammation of the eye from an infection.

The steroid treatment did not improve eyesight more than laser therapy alone and caused side effects.

Results of the trial were published online on Tuesday by the journal Ophthalmology.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  While the story did include the common side effect of the drug in the study, there were other potentially important complications that were not mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Double chin got you down? There's now a shot for that.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a new treatment for adults with "moderate-to-severe fat" below the chin, known as submental fat. The drug, Kybella, is a form of synthetically derived deoxycholic acid, which the body produces naturally to help absorb fats.

Kybella is aimed at destroying fat cells when injected in the area below the chin, while leaving surrounding tissue essentially unaffected. The FDA warned, however, that the treatment also has the potential to kill other types of cells, such as skin cells, if injected improperly.

Patients can receive as many as 50 injections of the drug in a single treatment, the agency said, with up to six treatments administered no less than a month apart. That might seem like a lot of pain for the pleasure of a slimmed-down chin, but currently patients looking to part with their double chins must have fat removed through more invasive means, such as liposuction.

[More women want big butts and the stats don't lie]

The market for the new drug could be a big one.

According to a survey last year by the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery, nearly 70 percent of respondents listed "excess fat under the chin/neck" as a key concern about their appearance. And Americans repeatedly have demonstrated a willingness to shell out money for aesthetic treatments intended to improve their appearance, if not their overall health. A top example: Annual sales of the anti-wrinkle drug Botox have surged to $2 billion in recent years.

Keith Leonard, chief executive of Kythera, the California-based firm that developed Kybella, said at a conference last month that he believes the new treatment "can drive a very large market and leave very satisfied patients."

The FDA said Kybella demonstrated safety and efficacy in two clinical trials involving more than 1,000 adults. A reduction in chin fat was "observed more frequently" in patients receiving the treatment than in those who got a placebo.

[Seriously, why does anyone under 18 still have access to a tanning bed?]

That said, the agency warned Wednesday that the new drug can cause serious side effects, including trouble swallowing or nerve damage to the jaw that can result in an uneven smile or muscle weakness in the face. The most common side effects included swelling, bruising, pain, numbness, redness and areas of hardness in the vicinity of the injection. FDA officials said Kybella should be administered only by a "licensed health care professional," and shouldn't be injected anywhere other than below the chin.

A Kythera representative said Wednesday that the new treatment likely won't be available until June, as it must train doctors to administer Kybella, and that the company would not have more details about the potential cost of the drug until after its launch.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes the FDA’s warning that “the new drug can cause serious side effects, including trouble swallowing or nerve damage to the jaw that can result in an uneven smile or muscle weakness in the face.” It then lists side effects, which included “swelling, bruising, pain, numbness, redness and areas of hardness in the vicinity of the injection.”
This is sufficient for a Satisfactory rating. But the story could have could have mentioned a key concern cited by the FDA in the second sentence of its news release: “Using Kybella for the treatment of fat outside of the submental area is not approved and is not recommended.” A reworded version of that warning is repeated twice more in the news release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Welcome to Dear Julia, a weekly column where readers can submit everyday health questions on anything from the science of hangovers to the mysteries of back pain. Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.

What's the difference between Tylenol, Advil, and aspirin? Which is the best to take for pain?

I used to take acetaminophen (usually referred to by its brand name, Tylenol) for the occasional headache or sore muscle, mostly because that's what we used in my house growing up. I didn't think much about whether it was more or less effective than any other type of over-the-counter pain reliever, and I suspect the same is true for many folks. Acetaminophen, after all, is the most popular over-the-counter painkiller worldwide.

So I was surprised when I found out there's a huge gap between how pain researchers think about this drug and how the public does. More specifically, every researcher I contacted for this piece said some variation of what Andrew Moore, a pain researcher at Oxford University, told me: Tylenol doesn't actually work that well for pain. To be more exact, he said, "I can't imagine why anybody would take acetaminophen."

Moore has done a number of systematic reviews on over-the-counter pain medications, looking at all the available evidence to figure out which ones work best for various problems. I asked him to describe the overall success rates for the most common three: acetaminophen (like Tylenol), ibuprofen (like Advil), and aspirin.

Like all good evidence-based medicine thinkers, he was able to provide a very practical answer: "If you’re talking about aspirin in doses of 500 to 1,000 mg or two tablets, 30 percent of people get relief from acute pain. For acetaminophen at doses of 500 to 1,000 mg, about 40 percent have a success. For ibuprofen, in its normal formulation at something around 400 mg or two tablets, about 50 percent have success."

Now, Moore was referring here to acute pain that strikes after a specific event, like a surgery, a cut, or a burn, but his message was simple: Ibuprofen seems to work best, followed by acetaminophen, and then aspirin.

For ongoing (or chronic) pain — a sore lower back, say, or the kind of degenerative arthritis that typically develops with age — ibuprofen still outperforms acetaminophen.

"WE FOUND THAT [TYLENOL] IS INEFFECTIVE ON BOTH PAIN AND DISABILITY OUTCOMES FOR LOW BACK PAIN" A 2015 systematic review of high-quality evidence, published in the BMJ, found that acetaminophen didn't seem to help most sufferers of chronic low back pain, and that it barely alleviates pain in people with osteoarthritis. As the researchers wrote, "We found that [acetaminophen] is ineffective on both pain and disability outcomes for low back pain in the immediate and short term and is not clinically superior to placebo on both pain and disability outcomes for osteoarthritis."

A limitation of the study is that the evidence on acetaminophen was mainly for acute low back pain, but as the University of Leeds's Philip Conaghan explained, "There is very little long-term data [on chronic back pain], and if a drug doesn't work in the acute problem, it seems unlikely to work in the chronic phase — though back pain may be even more complex than osteoarthritis pain."

The study also noted that patients on acetaminophen "are nearly four times more likely to have abnormal results on liver function tests compared with those taking oral placebo."

Other studies, like this well-designed randomized control trial of people with knee pain, have similar conclusions: Acetaminophen doesn't perform as well as ibuprofen, and it's linked to higher rates of liver problems. (Ibuprofen also has potential side effects; more on that below.)

So what about the occasional headache? What works best for that?

It turns out this is another fascinating problem area for pain researchers. Moore has looked at all the evidence for what he calls "infrequent tension headaches" and found "it is surprising how poor [the research] is and how little it tells us." Either the outcomes in studies are badly defined, the studies have too few participants to say anything concrete, or many people in the studies actually seem to have chronic headaches as opposed to the ordinary ones the researchers are allegedly studying.

"Most people would say, if you look at the data, take an ibuprofen tablet," Moore said. "Acetaminophen is just not a very good analgesic [pain reliever], yet it’s the go-to drug because it’s thought to be safe."

And that's where things get even more interesting: Acetaminophen isn't actually that safe.

"We always thought [acetaminophen] was safe, but there are increasing signals of accidental overdose in people who are regularly using it for chronic pain, and some liver toxicity," explained Conaghan, who has studied adverse events data related to this popular drug.

Between 1998 and 2003, acetaminophen was the leading cause of acute liver failure in the US. There are also hundreds of related deaths every year — though keep in mind that millions of people take drugs with acetaminophen, so these more extreme side effects are rare (especially if you're only taking them in small doses occasionally). Still, for the drug's minimal pain-killing benefits, the risks may not be worth it. 



"Don't believe that just because something is over-the-counter, it’s safe," Conaghan added. (He advised people to see their doctor if they're taking any of these painkillers for more than a few days — particularly if they're on other drugs already.)

"[Tylenol] is an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether"

Kay Brune, a professor of pharmacology and toxicology at Germany's Friedrich-Alexander University who has also studied the toxicity of painkillers, was even more direct in his thoughts on acetaminophen: "It's an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether."

Aspirin is safer than acetaminophen, he said, though to be used as a pain reliever it requires much higher doses — which can have side effects like stomach upset. Aspirin also interferes with blood coagulation for days after taking it. "If you take one gram of aspirin," Brune explained, "you're at risk of bleeding for another four days." This is why aspirin has its place as a protective agent against strokes and heart attacks for people at a higher risk.

Ibuprofen doesn't have these two problems — it's less toxic than the others in the doses that give people pain relief. But it has other side effects. "Ibuprofen puts people at risk of bleeds in the gastrointestinal tract and kidney damage — so it's not free of risk," said Brune. Using it in high doses also seems to raise blood pressure and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke — one reason the Food and Drug Administration recently warned people should only use ibuprofen (and other "nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs," or NSAIDS, like naproxen) for short periods of time and in small amounts.



I asked Brune about what he'd suggest for the occasional headache or sore muscle. "Taking 400 mg of ibuprofen won't cause measurable harm," he answered. "Of all drugs we have available, for most indications, it's also the most effective one."

Is acetaminophen good for anything?

If the research community seems to have sided with ibuprofen for pain, is acetaminophen good for anything?



Yes. There are some groups of people with health complications who shouldn't take ibuprofen. For example, patients with kidney, gastric, cardiovascular, or bleeding problems may need to avoid NSAIDS like ibuprofen, so doctors might suggest Tylenol in these cases. 



There's also some evidence that NSAIDS may increase the risk of psychosis and cognitive impairment in the elderly, so doctors may avoid prescribing these drugs for older patients. And Tylenol is generally considered safer than Advil or aspirin for pregnant women.



Fever is another area where acetaminophen can help, said Moore. According to one systematic review, acetaminophen seems to be safe for treating very young kids with fever, and you can give children as young as 3 months old acetaminophen, whereas you need to wait until kids are at least 6 months old to safely treat them with ibuprofen. This may help to explain the popularity of drugs like Tylenol for kids.

But a final caveat here: If your child is older than 6 months, it's not all that clear that acetaminophen outperforms ibuprofen for reducing fevers, and the same is true for adults. So keep that in mind the next time you confront your medicine cabinet.

Send your questions to Julia via the submission form or @juliaoftoronto on Twitter. Read more about Dear Julia here.

Watch: How Americans got stuck with endless drug ads
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story comprehensively describes the harms from each drug based on different uses and patient populations. We especially liked this quote: “Don’t believe that just because something is over-the-counter, it’s safe.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Also missing, Nelson said, are randomized studies that would indicate how often patients should be screened. One of the best studies the panel found focused on healthy women over age 65 and concluded that screenings spaced eight years or less apart did not make much of a difference in identifying which women would be more at risk for fractures.

The report identified possible benefits of screening, but noted that there is no solid evidence — in the form of randomized trials, medicine’s gold standard — comparing fracture rates of patients who have been screened with those who have not been screened.

But the panel is in the process of updating its recommendations, which were issued in 2002. A preliminary report in July packed a surprise: No direct evidence was found that testing patients for low bone density helped avoid broken bones. “It’s still amazing to me,’’ said the report’s lead author, Dr. Heidi Nelson, a professor at Oregon Health & Science University.

The task force offers no advice for women younger than 60 or for men of any age, though men account for at least 20 percent of US patients with osteoporosis.

The US Preventive Services Task Force, which sets standards on disease prevention and primary care, suggests that all women get a bone density screening by age 65, or by 60 if a patient might be at high risk for fractures. Risk factors include being female, having a family history of osteoporosis or broken bones, being small and thin, and having low levels of sex hormones, in addition to older age.

One of the first dilemmas patients typically encounter is when to get screened for osteoporosis, and then how often to repeat the test — a painless body scan that measures bone density.

“What is right in 2010,’’ she said, “might not be right in 2011 in a rapidly evolving medical science.’’

Dr. Felicia Cosman, clinical director of the National Osteoporosis Foundation and a professor at Columbia University, said the swirl of new information makes it critical for patients to review with their physicians their treatment decisions.

Even the issues of how much vitamin D adults should take and whether calcium supplements help keep bones strong have been matters of debate.

The safety of one of the most popular types of medication used to lessen the risk of fractures — bisphosphonates, such as Fosamax and Boniva — has also been questioned.

Over the past several months, studies have raised questions about the effectiveness of screening for osteoporosis, a silent disease that weakens the bones of an estimated 10 million Americans, most over age 50.

Sorting through all the recent news about osteoporosis, or low bone density, can be dizzying.

A task force of specialists appointed by the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research reported last month that long-term use of bisphosphonates, typically beyond five years, may increase a patient’s risk of an unusual but serious type of thigh fracture. The panel reviewed 310 such cases and concluded that they represent less than one-half of 1 percent of all American patients taking bisphosphonates. However the panel also said it believed the number of such fractures is under-reported.

There is little dispute over the conclusion of several studies that bisphosphonates can be effective in lowering patients’ risk of fractures, some by as much as 50 percent. But in recent months, questions have grown about their safety.

Bisphosphonates — the class of drugs that includes Fosamax, Boniva, and others — were approved by federal regulators in 1995 and have since been prescribed for millions of patients. Taken orally or by injection, the drugs work by slowing the growth of cells that break down bones, giving the edge to other cells that rebuild them.

When it comes to the most popular type of osteoporosis treatment, bisphosphonates, the question is not so much about how much to take, but whether there are harmful consequences from long-term use.

An updated report on recommended levels for both nutrients is due next month from the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academy of Sciences, which advises the federal government.

There are fewer differences of opinion among health professionals about calcium levels, with most recommending about 1,200 daily milligrams for adults over 50. However, the most extensive study on the calcium question, done by the Women’s Health Initiative as a randomized controlled trial, was inconclusive. It found no significant reduction in fractures in the study population, which received supplements of 1,000 milligrams of calcium and 400 international units of vitamin D daily.

Beyond the screening question, many physicians routinely ask patients about their calcium and vitamin D intake. The federal government recommends just 400 international units daily of vitamin D for adults over age 50, while the National Osteoporosis Foundation recommends 800 to 1,000 units. Some doctors suggest doubling those higher amounts for post-menopausal women.

Waiting until women are in their 60s to scan will result in missing many who could be diagnosed and treated, she said. “The reason you want to find people at the time of menopause is because there is acceleration [of bone loss] at this time,’’ Cosman said. This is when estrogen plummets, and estrogen helps protect bone health.

“I believe all women should have a bone screening test approximately at the time of menopause,’’ said Cosman, emphasizing that “this is my personal opinion as a specialist who treats women,’’ and not representative of her position with the National Osteoporosis Foundation.

In the absence of clear guidelines, many physicians make their own judgment calls.

“The thigh is one of the strongest bones in the body and it’s unusual for it to break,’’ said Columbia University professor Dr. Elizabeth Shane, the task force cochair and a specialist who has prescribed the medications to many of her osteoporosis patients.

Her task force recommended that an international registry be created for tracking such cases to help researchers better pinpoint which patients might be at risk. It also called on the US Food and Drug Administration to change medication labeling to alert physicians and patients to the possibility of these unusual fractures, and to urge awareness of possible warning signs: prolonged groin or thigh pain.

In a statement, the FDA said it is reviewing the data and is considering changing the labeling on bisphosphonates. It also recommended that patients report groin or thigh pain to their physicians, but did not suggest they stop taking the medications unless ordered to do so by their doctors.

In August, a team of researchers reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association that bisphosphonate use was not linked to an increased risk of stomach or esophageal cancer. The scientists reviewed about 80,000 patient records from a 6 million-person database in Britain.

But in September, a different group of scientists used the same database and concluded in an article in the British Medical Journal that bisphosphonates appeared to double the risk of esophageal cancer after about 5 years of use. Still, this group stressed the risk was very small, resulting in 2 cases of throat cancer in 1,000 people ages 60 to 79, compared with the normal rate of 1 per 1,000.

Some doctors are giving their patients “drug holidays’’ in which they take them off the prescriptions for a while.

Physicians face a tough choice when it comes to frail patients who have brittle bones. If they pull them off the medications because of the possible risk of serious side effects with longer-term use, there is little else to prescribe.

For Dr. Douglas C. Bauer, a professor at the University of California-San Francisco and a researcher who also treats many osteoporosis patients, the hardest decision is when to stop the drugs in patients who still have low bone density after five years of treatment but are not especially frail.

“It was appropriate to treat them to begin with, but you are not clear on added benefit for prolonged use beyond five years,’’ he said. “So I ask them, ‘What would you like to do?’ And I explain the data and say it’s a gray area, and I say we can decide together.’’
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  
The article provided substantial information about potential side effects such as cancer of the esophagus and thigh fractures related to the use of bisphosphonates. However, it would have been useful for the article to also report the conclusion of the US Preventive Services Task Force that bisphosphonates are not consistently associated with serious adverse events.
   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This Test Can Determine Whether You've Outgrown A Food Allergy

An estimated 4 percent of Americans have food allergies, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has concluded that allergies are a growing public health concern. But diagnosing allergies can be tricky, and kids can outgrow them, too.

Now, a new study sheds light on the effectiveness of a test called a food challenge to determine whether a person can tolerate a food they once reacted to.

Jula Cieciuch, a fifth-grader who lives in Telluride, Colo., recently took a food challenge to find out if she was still allergic to eggs.

When she passed, she was ecstatic. After years of avoiding all foods with eggs, she was a bit shocked. "For so long, it was: You can't eat this. You can't eat this," Jula says. " I was very emotional!"

She's also outgrown allergies to walnuts and almonds. "It's a huge relief ... it has really opened up her diet — a lot," her mom, Kendall Cieciuch, told us. Once you can eat eggs, you can eat cakes and breads and frittatas, and lots of other baked goods.

Jula is still allergic to some foods, including milk and cashews, so she still needs to be careful. But Kendall says every time she's crossed a food off her allergy list, "it makes life a little easier."

Jula Cieciuch's story is not uncommon. About 70 to 80 percent of children with an egg allergy will outgrow it. And about 20 percent of kids outgrow peanut allergies.

In Jula's case, her allergists at National Jewish Health in Denver, Colo., repeated the standard allergy blood tests last summer. That's when they realized she may have outgrown her egg allergy. 

 

The blood test measures the levels of a certain type of antibody, immunoglobulin E (IgE). The higher the level, the more likely a person is to have an allergic reaction. Jula's blood revealed a drop in antibody count.

 

But the only way to confirm that it was safe for Jula to eat egg was to take the food challenge test. Basically, the test entails eating small quantities of the foods you've been allergic to. The testing is done under medical supervision.

"What they do is give you a really small dose, like a crumb, basically," explains Jula. Then after 20 minutes or so, if you don't have any reaction, "you can take a dose that's a little bigger." If you can eat an entire egg, you pass.

A new study published in the Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology illuminates just how many people come to find out they can eat foods they've long avoided. 

 

 Researchers studied the results of about 6,300 food challenges. The tests were done in adults and children whom doctors suspected had become tolerant to foods they'd once reacted to.

 

"We found that 14 percent of the patients challenged had mild or moderate allergic reactions," explains study author Carla Davis, an allergist and director of the Food Allergy Program at Texas Children's Hospital. "If the symptoms were treated with just Benadryl or another antihistamine, they were considered mild or moderate. She says 2 percent of the reactions were more serious, requiring treatment with epinephrine.

But the vast majority of patients, 86 percent, did not have an allergic reaction. In other words, they tolerated the food just fine. She says the results aren't that surprising, since allergists had classified these patients as low-risk for reacting to the foods they were being tested for.

 

"I think [the results] are very encouraging," Bruce Lanser, a pediatric allergist who directs the Pediatric Food Allergy Program at National Jewish Health in Denver, told us. He was not involved in the study, but he says the findings mirror what he sees in his clinical practice. "We know a certain percentage will outgrow [their] allergies," Lanser says. "And the last thing I want to miss is the opportunity to get a food into a kid's diet."

He says many of the patients in the study may have outgrown their allergy, just like Jula did. "But it's also possible [some of them] never truly had a food allergy." As we've reported, people sometimes misinterpret the symptoms of a condition such as lactose intolerance for a food allergy.

Lanser says it can be tricky to diagnose food allergies. That's because the two main tests doctors use — the blood test and the skin prick test — only reveal part of the story. "Both tests only measure sensitization," he explains. "All they can tell us is how likely you are to react when you eat the food."

 

And that's where the oral food challenge comes in. It's become the gold standard test to rule out an allergy.

 

So, if you or your child tested positive for a food allergy years ago, you may want to consider seeing an allergist again.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: As the story explains, patients who experienced either mild or serious allergic reactions to the oral food challenge were treated with antihistamines or epinephrine respectively. For the 86% of patients who passed their food challenges with no adverse reactions, no harm was involved.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Marijuana appears to improve the memory and learning abilities of old mice. Scientists discovered low doses of its main psychoactive ingredient—cannabinoid THC—can reverse the age-related decline in cognitive abilities, a finding that could lead to scientists figuring out a way of slowing brain aging in humans.

Researchers are increasingly examining THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) for its potential medical benefits. In the U.K., Oxford University recently launched a £10 million ($13 million) program to “identify new medical therapies through research into the molecular, cellular and systems mechanisms of cannabinoids.” Meanwhile, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has now approved several medications derived from THC.

Many scientists are currently looking at its potential use as a treatment for neurological conditions, including multiple sclerosis, epilepsy and Parkinson’s disease.

In a study published in Nature Medicine on Monday, researchers led by Andreas Zimmer, from the University of Bonn, Germany, have shown how THC can provide significant benefits to mice when it comes to age-related cognitive decline.

THC interacts with receptors in the brain’s endocannabinoid system, which is involved in many physiological functions, including pain, mood, memory and appetite. Previous research has also shown activity in the endocannabinoid system declines as we get older, indicating it plays a role in the progression of aging.

To study what effect THC has on the aging brain, scientists gave low doses of THC to mice at three different life stages—two months, 12 months and 18 months. The latter two groups represented mature and old age.

The team carried out three experiments. The first involved a water maze, where mice have to learn and then remember how to navigate their way to the end. In a control group, mature and old mice performed worse than the young group. However, when treated with THC, the older groups improved at the task, while the young mice fared far worse. (The study’s authors noted that this was in “good agreement with the known detrimental effects of THC on cognition in young animals and humans.”

Next, they created a task where mice had to locate a specific object. Older mice treated with THC performed to the same standard as young mice that had not been given the drug. A third test relating to partner recognition also showed THC led to improved memory in mature and older mice. “Together, these results reveal a profound, long-lasting improvement of cognitive performance resulting from a low dose of THC treatment in mature and old animals,” the scientists write.

Further research showed what might cause the improvement, with THC appearing to restore hippocampal gene transcription patterns—activity in the brain relating to memory and learning—to a similar state seen in young mice.

The team argues that while they do not yet know if these findings would be same in humans, it could lead to new treatments to prevent cognitive decline in older people: “Cannabis preparations and THC are used for medicinal purposes,” they write. “They have an excellent safety record and do not produce adverse side-effects when administered at a low dose to older individuals. Thus, chronic, low-dose treatment with THC or cannabis extracts could be a potential strategy to slow down or even to reverse cognitive decline in the elderly.”

Zameel Cader, associate professor in clinical neurosciences at Oxford University, is involved in the institution’s $13 million cannabis research project. Commenting on the Nature Medicine study, he tells Newsweek the paper is “very interesting on a number of levels.”

“First of all there’s clearly growing interest in the potential therapeutic role of cannabinoids and in this particular case THC on various human conditions,” he says. “This paper is addressing a possible role for that compound in memory and cognition, which is relevant to disorders such as Alzheimer’s and other dementias.”

He said that while it is important to remember the study was carried out on mouse models, the differences in the effect of the drug on younger animals versus older animals tells us a lot about our understanding of the differences between old and young brains.

Moving this research forward, however, will be problematic: “Testing in humans is going to be difficult. This is a challenge faced by anyone wanting to develop a therapy for a human disorder such as dementia. Human lifespan is very extensive. So the question would be, when would be the most appropriate time to give these kinds of medications? Over what period of time do you need to evaluate the effects? In humans it could be years before an effect is noticed.”

“Finally, there is the issue surrounding safety. With a cannabinoid like THC, which does have adverse effects in certain individuals, there would be worries about the chronic dosing of this kind of medicine. We would need to assess the safety first before going into seeing whether it would improve cognition."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The report might have mentioned if any or all of the test mice sustained any ill effects (physically or mentally) but it did quote a scientific expert about the potential adverse effects for humans using cannabinoids.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved three new indications for Ilaris (canakinumab). The new indications are for rare and serious auto-inflammatory diseases in adult and pediatric patients:

All three syndromes are hereditary diseases that are characterized by periodic attacks of fever and inflammation, as well as severe muscle pain. There are no previously approved therapies for TRAPS or HIDS/MKD.

“For the first time, patients with TRAPS and HIDS/MKD, two painful and life altering diseases, have access to a treatment that may help improve their quality of life,” said Badrul Chowdhury, M.D., Ph.D, director of the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Rheumatology Products in FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

Ilaris was previously approved for another periodic fever syndrome called Cryopyrin-Associated Periodic Syndromes (CAPS) and for active systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Health care professionals should review the prescribing information in the labeling for detailed information about the approved uses.

Approvals for the new indications were based on clinical studies, including safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetic data. The most common adverse reactions for these indications are injection site reactions and being more susceptible to catching colds.

Ilaris can cause serious side effects, including increased risk of serious infections. Ilaris can lower the immune system’s ability to fight infections. Other serious side effects include decreased ability to fight infections (immunosuppression) and allergic reactions. Patients experiencing any symptoms of an allergic reaction should call their healthcare provider, including: rash, itching and hives, difficulty breathing or swallowing, and dizziness or feeling faint. Patients should not get live vaccines if receiving Ilaris. Patients should not receive Ilaris if they are allergic to canakinumab or any of the ingredients in Ilaris.

Ilaris is manufactured and distributed by Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, of East Hanover, New Jersey.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency is also responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release includes a discussion of harms warranting a borderline satisfactory rating. But the side effects information is similar to that found on product labeling — it follows the regulatory requirements concerning product labels — but provides no data on harms from the trials behind the drug’s approval. It could have been more informative with a few more details.  In addition, the information on harms appeared to be contradictory. One paragraph says common responses to the drug were minor reactions and susceptibility to colds; the next paragraph lists serious side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, April 26, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- After a stroke, many patients are given the clot-busting intravenous drug alteplase, but another drug may be more effective, Australian researchers report.

Among more than 200 stroke victims, TNKase (tenecteplase) was about twice as effective as alteplase in restoring blood flow to the brain, and it also resulted in less disability, the scientists found.

"Tenecteplase is likely to become the preferred medication for clot-dissolving in stroke patients," said lead researcher Dr. Bruce Campbell, head of the stroke department at the Royal Melbourne Hospital in Parkville. "It is likely to change stroke treatment guidelines and clinical practice."

Campbell said tenecteplase is more effective than alteplase because of differences in the enzymes in each drug.

Although both drugs work in the same way, tenecteplase is better at attacking and dissolving clots, and more resistant to factors that inhibit the breakdown of clots, he said.

For either drug to be most effective, it needs to be given as soon as possible after a stroke occurs. In this study, patients were given the drugs within 4.5 hours after the onset of a stroke, Campbell said.

Although tenecteplase appears to be more effective for stroke patients, it's not approved for that use in the United States, according to Dr. Rohan Arora, director of stroke at Long Island Jewish Hospital in Forest Hills, N.Y.

In 2000, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved tenecteplase for use after a heart attack, Arora said.

"Tenecteplase is being widely used in developing countries, such as India," he said. "One reason is it's cheaper than alteplase."

In the United States, tenecteplase costs about $5,800, versus alteplase, which costs $8,000, Arora said.

In addition, tenecteplase is easier to give, requiring only a single injection, while alteplase requires an injection and an IV drip, he added.

Arora explained that tenecteplase is not widely used in the United States for heart attack patients because these patients are typically treated with angioplasty or heart bypass surgery.

For the new study, which did not receive drug company funding, Campbell and his colleagues randomly assigned 202 stroke patients to either alteplase or tenecteplase before surgery to remove clots.

The researchers specifically looked to see which drug was better at restoring blood flow to clot-blocked blood vessels in the brain, and which drug resulted in patients having better outcomes.

The investigators found that 22 percent of the patients treated with tenecteplase had more than 50 percent of blood flow return to the brain, compared with 10 percent of those treated with alteplase.

Patients treated with tenecteplase also had better functional outcomes after 90 days than those given alteplase, the findings showed.

Bleeding into the brain, the most serious side effect of either drug, occurred in 1 percent of patients, regardless of which drug they received, Campbell said.

The report was published April 26 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on stroke, visit the National Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned a feared complication of clot-busting stroke drugs: often-fatal brain bleeds, which it said occurred in 1% of patients regardless of which drugs they received. It did not say that one of the two patients in the study who had a brain bleed died from it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Millions of people take a low-dose aspirin daily in hopes of reducing their chances of having a heart attack. For women, might aspirin also help prevent breast cancer?

The researchers analyzed data on 57,164 women, most in their early 60s, who had no history of breast cancer. About 23 percent of the women reported taking a low-dose aspirin (81 milligrams), 18 percent took ibuprofen, 11 percent took full-strength aspirin (325 mg) and about 10 percent took a COX-2 inhibitor or another nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). All were taking the medication at least three times a week.

Over seven years, 1,457 women got a breast-cancer diagnosis. Those taking low-dose aspirin were 16 percent less likely to have developed any type of breast cancer, compared with women who took no NSAID. They were 20 percent less likely to have developed the most common type: breast cancer that is hormone-receptor-positive and HER2-negative. The study did not find similar links between regular-dose aspirin or other NSAIDs and the risk for breast cancer.

[Certain adults should take a daily baby aspirin, expert panel says]

Who may be affected?

Women. About 1 of every 8 women in the United States will develop breast cancer at some point. Those who take a daily low-dose aspirin, also called a baby aspirin, usually do so to prevent cardiovascular disease, the leading cause of death for women older than 25. Aspirin has been shown to help keep blood from clotting, which can help prevent heart attacks and ischemic stroke (the type caused by a blocked blood vessel in the brain). However, aspirin can increase the risk for internal bleeding, so women should talk with their doctors before starting a low-dose aspirin regimen, for any reason.

The researchers suggested that the difference in results between low- and regular-dose aspirin may have been attributable to most women taking low-dose aspirin more often than three times a week, even daily, for cardiovascular protection as opposed to more-sporadic use of regular-dose aspirin for pain relief. Hormone therapy and alcohol use were more prevalent among the participants than normal; both are considered risk factors for breast cancer and may have affected the results. Data on aspirin and other NSAID usage came from the women’s responses on questionnaires. Most of the participants were white.

Information on breast cancer is available at cancer.gov. Learn more about the benefits and risks of aspirin at heart.org (search for aspirin).

The research described in Quick Study comes from credible, peer-reviewed journals.

Vitamin E supplements do not seem to stave off dementia

If you’re taking something for heartburn, it may have other, less desirable effects

Eating whole-grain foods may be a plus for blood pressure
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that aspirin can increase risk for internal bleeding, and says that women should consult a doctor before beginning a daily-aspirin regimen. This is satisfactory–but barely–since the magnitude of this potential harm is not mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Feb. 11, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Just in time for Valentine's Day comes word that eating dark chocolate appears to lower your risk of stroke or lessen the likelihood of death after a stroke.

But the findings, based on a review of existing research, aren't conclusive, and they don't prove that chocolate is good for your heart. And dietitians say too much chocolate can be harmful.

Still, two of the three studies analyzed in the review provide yet another suggestion that health benefits lurk in chocolate, dark chocolate in particular, said review co-author Dr. Gustavo Saposnik.

If choosing among white chocolate, milk chocolate or dark chocolate, "I'd definitely go with the dark chocolate," said Saposnik, director of the Stroke Research Unit at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto.

The review authors, who found three studies on chocolate consumption and stroke between 2001 and 2009, are scheduled to report their findings at the American Academy of Neurology's annual meeting in Toronto in April.

One study found no significant association between chocolate consumption and risk of stroke or death from stroke. But another found that the stroke rate was 22 percent lower in people who ate chocolate once a week, and a third reported that death from stroke was 46 percent lower in those who ate 50 grams of chocolate once a week.

The health benefit may come from antioxidants called flavonoids that are present in chocolate, Saposnik said. Antioxidants are thought to prevent cell damage.

In years past, "the message was that chocolate consumption might be associated with higher LDL [bad] cholesterol or perhaps higher incidence of cardiovascular disease," he said. "Today, we know that all chocolates are not the same."

So, should you and your sweetheart add dark chocolate to your diet? "I'm not sure we can provide any recommendation at this time," Saposnik said.

For one thing, it's possible that some factor other than chocolate could be helping lower the risk of stroke. Those who eat more chocolate could be wealthier and have better access to health care, for instance, or go to the gym more often.

Saposnik said more studies will help clarify the association between chocolate and stroke risk.

For now, said registered dietitian Katie Clark, "caution should be taken not to promote chocolate as a health food," even though it's fine in moderation.

Chocolate is a major source of saturated fat, which raises bad cholesterol and boosts heart disease risk, said Clark, an assistant clinical professor at the University of California at San Francisco.

But Keith-Thomas Ayoob, an associate professor at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City who studies nutrition, said chocolate does have its benefits. "Several studies indicate that even a little chocolate can help reduce blood pressure and increase blood flow through the arteries. Both are good for heart health," he said. "It's nice to know that chocolate isn't bad for you, assuming you eat modest amounts and don't become overweight by overeating it."

The National Stroke Association has more on stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did discuss the possible harms of higher LDL cholesterol "or perhaps higher incidence of cardiovascular disease" from chocolate. But it didn’t provide any evidence.  Nonethless we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Specialists at The Christie and The University of Manchester have made a breakthrough which could potentially improve detection and treatment of anal cancer, as well as have wider implications for other cancers.

Anal cancer is a rare form of cancer, but cases have increased dramatically in recent years. Research is urgently needed to improve detection and treatment and to save lives. The findings of this project will play a crucial role in these efforts going forward.

Funded by the Bowel Disease Research Foundation (BDRF) charity, the work has been published in the Lancet Oncology journal.

The study worked with data on more than 10,000 patients, examining whether current methods of checking if anal cancer has spread to lymph nodes are giving experts an accurate picture of survival rates. The research team was led from Manchester, working hand in hand with centres in Leeds and Switzerland.

Anal cancer that has spread to lymph nodes is linked to a worse prognosis and lower chance of survival.

The project's findings however have uncovered a phenomenon suggesting rates of lymph node spread are being overestimated, potentially leading to overtreatment of patients with chemo radiotherapy.

This can result in damaging side-effects, and doctors are particularly keen to avoid it in cases where it offers little benefit to the patient at potentially great cost.

The results will be crucial to future large scale trials looking at optimum care for anal cancer patients. By identifying a unique phenomenon, these results will be taken into account by future work and ultimately could lead to better diagnosis of tumour stage and thus better treatment.

Christie consultant and University of Manchester Professor of Cancer Studies and Surgery, Andrew Renehan, leads the Manchester Cancer Research Centre (MCRC) Anorectal Organ Preservation Research Group. He said: "These high-profile results will play a vital part in improving patient care. Our research team has done a wonderful job highlighting an important and as yet unrecognised issue in the staging of cases of anal cancer.

"These findings will help us to better understand how anal cancer patients should be treated, ultimately improving survival rates and quality of life. It is crucial that we tackle what is becoming an increasingly common form of cancer through research studies like this. These findings could provide learnings for other cancers too."

Christie patient Jill De Nardo, who is 58 from Buxton, was diagnosed with anal cancer in 2010. She said: "My first thought on diagnosis was that I wanted to survive, I gave little thought to long term or late effects of treatment. Fortunately my treatment has been successful and seven years on my own late effects are manageable but will only get worse. Many are not so fortunate and live daily with the discomfort and impact of side effects such as joint pain and continence issues."

Jill adds: "Anal cancer is on the increase and those of us who have been through what at times was gruelling radiotherapy regimen, welcome this study and the impact it will have on the treatment plans of patients in the future."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release makes refers to the harm of over treatment and side effects, but never quantifies them. A quote from a patient refers to “joint pain and continence issues” suffered by some patients but it’s unclear which treatments were responsible.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 11, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Jane Adrian, 61, a landscape architect in Glendale, Calif., saw her parents and two co-workers suffer from the painful, blistering condition known as shingles, so when the vaccine became available, she got it.

Even though the vaccine is only about 55 percent effective, "it's better than nothing," she said. "Now I feel relieved."

A study of a cross-section of adults enrolled with a health-management organization in southern California shows that the vaccine provides protection for many older adults without many side effects.

The findings are published in the Jan. 12 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Shingles is caused by the herpes zoster virus and only strikes people who have had chicken pox. It usually starts as a rash on one side of the face or body, often causing pain, itching and tingling. About a million cases occur in the United States each year, and attacks can last two to four weeks.

"Even after the rash has healed, the pain can last for months or even years," said lead study author HungFu Tseng, a research scientist at the Kaiser Permanente Division of Research and Evaluation in Pasadena, Calif.

Zostavax, as the vaccine is called, was approved in 2006, based on the results of clinical trials. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends the shot for eligible people aged 60 and older.

Tseng's team wanted to test the vaccine's real-world performance, so they compared 75,761 vaccinated members of the Kaiser Permanente health plan to 227,283 members who elected not to have the shot. Kaiser funded the study.

In vaccinated individuals, the rate of shingles was 6.4 cases per 1,000 people in a year while it was twice that -- 13 per 1,000 -- in the unvaccinated population, the investigators found.

The vaccine also reduced the risk of ophthalmic herpes zoster (infection that affects the eye) by 63 percent and hospitalization by 65 percent.

Those who had been vaccinated were more likely to be white, female and in better overall health than the unvaccinated people, the researchers noted. Lack of awareness, concerns about effectiveness or safety, and cost may have kept some people from getting the shot, Tseng said.

"People 60 and over can consider talking to their physician about the possibility of receiving the vaccine to reduce their risk, and the doctor can evaluate if they are eligible," said Tseng.

Patients with leukemia, lymphoma, HIV or an allergy to any ingredients in the vaccine are ineligible for the shot.

"It does bolster our confidence that it's effective in the real world," said Dr. Bruce Hirsch, an attending physician in infectious diseases at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., who was not involved with the study.

But the vaccine can cost a couple of hundred dollars, he said, perhaps making it out of reach for those with limited resources.

Because shingles is not contagious and doesn't present a risk of death, Hirsch said he would recommend the flu vaccine and the pneumococcal vaccine over this one for uninsured patients who would have to pay out-of-pocket.

"This study helps me in terms of advising patients and prioritizing," Hirsch added.

While less reliable than some childhood vaccines, which are usually 90 percent effective in preventing certain illnesses, the shingles vaccination is still worthwhile, said Dr. Ciro Sumaya, professor of health policy and management at Texas A&M Health Science Center School of Rural Public Health.

"I think it's a very good vaccine, and it's a safe vaccine, but obviously there needs to be continuing surveillance of usage of the vaccine to make sure there are no adverse effects that are seen in one in a 100 million cases versus one in five or 10,000 people," said Sumaya, also a member of CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.

For now, he advises getting it. "It's protecting against a severe disease, particularly in elderly adults," he said, "so the benefit, I think, is overwhelming that we should be using this because it's recommended."

The CDC has more on the shingles vaccine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


This story briefly refers to this vaccine providing protection against shingles “without many side effects.” While many stories would stop there (if they even acknowledged the potential for side effects), this report goes further to include the comment from an independent source that “I think it’s a very good vaccine, and it’s a safe vaccine, but obviously there needs to be continuing surveillance of usage of the vaccine to make sure there are no adverse effects that are seen in one in a 100 million cases versus one in five or 10,000 people.” 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MINNEAPOLIS - People who eat vegetables, fruit and whole grains may have lower rates of depression over time, according to a preliminary study released today that will be presented at the American Academy of Neurology's 70th Annual Meeting in Los Angeles, April 21 to 27, 2018.

The study found that people whose diets adhered more closely to the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet were less likely to develop depression than people who did not closely follow the diet. In addition to fruit and vegetables, the DASH diet recommends fat-free or low-fat dairy products and limits foods that are high in saturated fats and sugar. Studies have shown health benefits such as lowering high blood pressure and bad cholesterol (LDL), along with lowering body weight.

"Depression is common in older adults and more frequent in people with memory problems, vascular risk factors such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol, or people who have had a stroke," said study author Laurel Cherian, MD, of Rush University Medical Center in Chicago and a member of the American Academy of Neurology. "Making a lifestyle change such as changing your diet is often preferred over taking medications, so we wanted to see if diet could be an effective way to reduce the risk of depression."

For the study, 964 participants with an average age of 81 were evaluated yearly for an average of six-and-a-half years. They were monitored for symptoms of depression such as being bothered by things that usually didn't affect them and feeling hopeless about the future. They also filled out questionnaires about how often they ate various foods, and the researchers looked at how closely the participants' diets followed diets such as the DASH diet, Mediterranean diet and the traditional Western diet.

Participants were divided into three groups based on how closely they adhered to the diets. People in the two groups that followed the DASH diet most closely were less likely to develop depression than people in the group that did not follow the diet closely. The odds of becoming depressed over time was 11 percent lower among the top group of DASH adherers versus the lowest group. On the other hand, the more closely people followed a Western diet--a diet that is high in saturated fats and red meats and low in fruits and vegetables--the more likely they were to develop depression.

Cherian noted that the study does not prove that the DASH diet leads to a reduced risk of depression; it only shows an association.

"Future studies are now needed to confirm these results and to determine the best nutritional components of the DASH diet to prevent depression later in life and to best help people keep their brains healthy," said Cherian.

Register now for the 2018 AAN Annual Meeting Press Room in Los Angeles, April 21-27, 2018

The study was supported by the National Institute on Aging.

Learn more about brain health at http://www. .

The American Academy of Neurology is the world's largest association of neurologists and neuroscience professionals, with over 34,000 members. The AAN is dedicated to promoting the highest quality patient-centered neurologic care. A neurologist is a doctor with specialized training in diagnosing, treating and managing disorders of the brain and nervous system such as Alzheimer's disease, stroke, migraine, multiple sclerosis, concussion, Parkinson's disease and epilepsy.

For more information about the American Academy of Neurology, visit http://www. or find us on Facebook, Twitter, Google+, LinkedIn and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does not address potential harms. However, there are few (if any) harms associated with adopting a well-balanced diet that is high in fruits and vegetables. While it is always wise to consult a physician before making significant lifestyle changes, we feel that this is not necessarily something that a news release needs to state explicitly. With that in mind, we give this a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most angioplasties not necessary, study finds

NEW ORLEANS — More than half a million people a year with chest pain are getting an unnecessary or premature procedure to unclog their arteries because drugs are just as effective, suggests a landmark study that challenges one of the most common practices in heart care.

The stunning results found angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevent heart attacks and give lasting chest-pain relief.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

Drugs are better today than they used to be and do a surprisingly good job, said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

"It may not be as bad as we thought" to leave the artery alone, she said.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

It involved 2,287 patients throughout the U.S. and Canada who had substantial blockages, typically in two arteries, but were medically stable. They had an average of 10 chest pain episodes a week — moderately severe. About 40 percent had a prior heart attack.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation. Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4 1/2 years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group — about 19 percent of each.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.

At the start of the study, 80 percent had chest pain. Three years into it, 72 percent of the angioplasty group was free of this symptom as was 67 percent of the drug group. That means you would have to give angioplasties to 20 people for every one whose chest pain was better after three years — an unacceptably high ratio, Nissen said.

After five years, 74 percent of the angioplasty group and 72 percent of the medication group were free of chest pain — "no significant difference," Boden said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned the percent of individuals in each group that initially had angina and then compared that with the percent affected at 3 and 5 years.  It also mentioned the rates of heart attack and death in both treatment groups.
While the story mentioned 1/3 of those in the medication-only group later went on to have a stent put in or had coronary bypass surgery, it could have compared this with the number of individuals in the stent and medication group who went on to either have an additional stent placed or had bypass surgery. (30% vs. 20%) 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ILC 2017: The study evaluated the use of a direct-acting antiviral treatment in children aged 6 to 11, for whom the standard of care has been pegylated interferon plus ribavirin

April 21, 2017, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: A study presented today that evaluated an investigational dosage of once-daily ledipasvir 45 mg/sofosbuvir 200 mg (LDV/SOF) in children aged six to 11 years infected with the Hepatitis C virus (HCV), found that 99% of children (n=89/90) had undetectable levels of HCV-RNA 12 weeks after treatment. The study, presented at The International Liver Congress™ 2017 in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, also showed that the fixed-dose combination of LDV/SOF was well-tolerated, and no patients experienced a serious adverse event considered related to the study drug.

Around 180 million people globally have chronic HCV infection,1 including approximately 15 million people in the EU.2 The prevalence of HCV infection in children varies from 0.05%-0.36% in the United States and Europe and up to 1.8%-5.8% in some developing countries.3 While direct-acting antivirals have been used to treat and cure adult patients with HCV,4-7 until now children have been mainly treated for 24 to 48 weeks with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (RBV), an older treatment which causes severe side effects.8

"Direct-acting antivirals have transformed the treatment of adults with chronic HCV, however, studies of these new therapies in children are required," said Dr Karen Murray, University of Washington School of Medicine and Seattle Children's, Seattle, United States, and lead author of the study. "These data establish the use of the oral direct-acting antivirals as an important treatment option in HCV-infected children aged six to 11 years old."

This ongoing, open-label study enrolled 90 children aged between six and 11 years with chronic HCV, mostly genotype 1 (n=86). Children with HCV genotype 1 infection received 12 weeks of treatment (n=85) or 24 weeks of treatment if they had cirrhosis and failed prior treatment with pegylated interferon plus RBV (n=1); genotype 3 patients received LDV/SOF plus RBV for 24 weeks (n=2); genotype 4 patients received LDV/SOF for 12 weeks (n=2). Most children were male (59%), white (79%), treatment naïve (80%), and vertically infected (97%). Of the study population, 89/90 achieved a sustained virologic response 12 weeks after treatment (SVR12); one treatment-naïve genotype 1 patient with cirrhosis relapsed. No children discontinued the study due to side effects or had a severe or life-threatening adverse event related to the study drug. The most common side effects reported in 10% or more of patients were headache, fever, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, cough, fatigue, sore throat and nausea.

"This study is a breakthrough for the management of children aged six to 11 years old with Hepatitis C, demonstrating that the new DAA regimen is highly efficacious and, more importantly, safe in this group of HCV-infected children", said Prof Frank Tacke, University Hospital Aachen, Germany, and EASL Governing Board Member.

This annual congress is the biggest event in the EASL calendar, attracting scientific and medical experts from around the world to learn about the latest in liver research. Attending specialists present, share, debate and conclude on the latest science and research in hepatology, working to enhance the treatment and management of liver disease in clinical practice. This year, the congress is expected to attract approximately 10,000 delegates from all corners of the globe. The International Liver Congress™ 2017 will take place from April 19 - 23, at the RAI Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

About The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL)

Since its foundation in 1966, this not-for-profit organisation has grown to over 4,000 members from all over the world, including many of the leading hepatologists in Europe and beyond. EASL is the leading liver association in Europe, having evolved into a major European Association with international influence, with an impressive track record in promoting research in liver disease, supporting wider education and promoting changes in European liver policy.

For more information, please contact the ILC Press Office at:

Session title: Parallel session: Advances in the treatment of HCV 

Time, date and location of session: 16:00 - 18:00, Friday 21 April, Hall 5 

Presenter: Karen Murray, United States of America 

Abstract: Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir ± ribavirin for 12 or 24 weeks is safe and effective in children 6-11 years old with chronic hepatitis C infection (PS101), 17:30 - 17:45

1 EASL Recommendation on Treatment of Hepatitis C 2016. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

2 World Health Organization. Global Alert and Response - Hepatitis C. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

3 Pawlowska M, Malgorzata et al. What's new in hepatitis C virus infections in children? WJG. 2015;21(38):10783-10789.

4 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for untreated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1889-98.

5 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for previously treated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1483-93.

6 Kowdley KV, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 8 or 12 weeks for chronic HCV without cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1879-88.

7 Sulkowski MS, et al. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir for previously treated or untreated chronic HCV infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 16;370(3):211-21.

8 Jara P, Hierro L. Treatment of Hepatitis C in children. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;4(1):51-61.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release does an adequate job, stating that the combination therapy “was well-tolerated, and no patients experienced a serious adverse event considered related to the study drug.” It adds: “The most common side effects reported in 10% or more of patients were headache, fever, abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, cough, fatigue, sore throat and nausea.”
But one important caveat wasn’t mentioned: Often negative effects aren’t apparent until after a drug goes on the market and is used by a large and diverse population of patients. For example, if the drug resulted in a fatal complication in 2 out of 100 children, this small study could easily have missed that. It’s risky to call a drug “safe” until it’s been used in a very large number of patients.
This is particularly true when drugs are fast-tracked for approval by the FDA, as Harvoni’s use in children is expected to be. As HealthNewsReview.org reported in January, Harvoni is among the new generation of hepatitis C drugs that are generating serious adverse effects that warrant further scrutiny. Hence, there could be unknown risks in extending this therapy to kids.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DURHAM, N.C. - Most high-risk lung cancer patients might not need annual low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) screenings if they are cleared of disease in their initial test, according to a study led by a Duke Cancer Institute researcher.

The researchers found that even former heavy smokers appear to have a reduced incidence of lung cancer if their initial LDCT screening is negative, suggesting that less frequent screening might be warranted.

"This has significant public policy implications," said Edward F. Patz, Jr., M.D., the James and Alice Chen Professor of Radiology at Duke and lead author of a study published online March 21, 2016 in The Lancet Oncology journal. "Not screening patients annually could save millions in health care costs and spare patients the radiation exposure and the downstream effects of false positive screenings."

Patz and colleagues analyzed data from the National Lung Screening Trial, a large prospective study that randomly assigned former smokers to either receive three annual low-dose CT scans or three chest radiographs for the early detection of lung cancer. Patients were ages 55-74 who had smoked for the equivalent of 30 years (one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years, etc.).

The researchers identified study participants in the CT-scan group whose initial screening was negative. They then compared those patients to other CT-scan recipients whose screenings detected an abnormality to assess any differences in lung cancer incidence and lung cancer-specific deaths.

Of the initial 19,066 participants with a negative initial LDCT scan, 444 (2 percent) were diagnosed with lung cancer at the time of the last available follow-up. In the first year after a negative screen and before the scheduled first annual screen, 17 patients (0.09 percent of all initial negative LDCT participants) were diagnosed with lung cancer.

An additional 75 patients (0.4 percent of the initial negative group) were diagnosed with lung cancer between the first and second annual screening. The incidence of lung cancer at the first screen among those who were initially negative was 0.34 percent, compared to 1 percent of patients who were diagnosed during the baseline screening.

The researchers determined that eliminating the first annual screening after the initial negative test might have resulted in, at most, an additional 28 lung cancer deaths in the LDCT group (186 vs. 212 deaths per 100,000 per years) over the course of the study.

"Our analysis suggests that annual screens may not be warranted for patients who have had an initial negative scan, and future risk prediction and cost-effectiveness models could incorporate these data to improve screening guidelines," Patz said.

He added that improving the accuracy of LDCT screening for lung cancer would also significantly reduce the number of annual screens. Nearly 40 percent of LDCT patients in the National Lung Screening Trial had false positives sometime during the seven years the study examined

In addition to Patz, study authors include Erin Greco, Constantine Gatsonis, Paul Pinsky, Barnett S. Kramer, and Denise R. Aberle.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Excessive radiation exposure and risk of false positives were both mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Dec. 5, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using gene therapy, German researchers report that they managed to "correct" a malfunctioning gene responsible for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a rare but devastating childhood disorder that leads to prolonged bleeding from even minor hits or scrapes, and also leaves these children vulnerable to certain cancers and dangerous infections.

However, one of the 10 kids in the study developed acute T-cell leukemia, apparently as a result of the viral vector that was used to insert the healthy gene. The boy is currently on chemotherapy, the study authors noted.

"This is a very good first step, but it's a little scary and we need to move to safer vectors," said Dr. Mary Ellen Conley, director of the Program in Genetic Immunodeficiencies at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.

"The study shows proof-of-principle that gene therapy with stem cells in a genetic disorder like this has strong potential," added Paul Sanberg, a stem cell specialist who is director of the University of South Florida Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair in Tampa.

Neither Conley nor Sanberg were involved in the study, which is scheduled to be presented Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology in Orlando, Fla.

According to Conley, children (mostly boys) with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) are born with an inherited genetic defect on the X chromosome that affects the number and size of platelets and makes the children remarkably susceptible to easy bleeding and infections, including different types of cancer.

Bone marrow transplants are the main treatment for the disorder which, if they succeed, basically cure the patient.

"They grow up, go to college and they cause problems," said Conley. "But they're not an easy group of patients to transplant."

Even if a good match is found, transplant recipients can go on to have more problems with infections, such as graft-versus-host disease, in which the body basically rejects the foreign elements.

"One of the long-lasting complications is the kids couldn't do this, they couldn't do that, they see themselves as different," Conley said. "Transplants are getting better but we need better therapy, there's no question."

In this study, the researchers inserted a healthy gene capable of producing WAS protein into hematopoietic stem cells (the "granddaddy" cells that give rise to different blood cells), then transferred these stem cells back into the patient using a viral vector. A viral vector is a virus that has been modified to deliver foreign genetic material into a cell.

In fact, the experiment was largely successful, with cells now able to produce WAS protein, resulting in increased platelet counts and improvement of some immune-system cells.

"This is a first step that says you can correct the disease but I think most people would look at it and say the risk of leukemia is something, and that, let's see if we can avoid that," said Conley, whose team at St. Jude is working on a therapy involving a different type of vector. "It's a good start, but I think we have better things coming down the road."

In other news from the conference, another group of German researchers have determined that people who donate peripheral blood stem cells or bone marrow to help save a life don't face any heightened risk of cancer.

Previously there had been some concern that drugs needed to get the stem cells out of the bone marrow and into the bloodstream where they could be accessed might pose a risk of leukemia.

The study was based on questionnaires returned from more than 12,500 donors, which also showed the donors tended to be in good health and were willing to donate again.

Another study found that the drug rituximab (Rituxan), used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and forms of leukemia and lymphoma, could greatly reduce graft-versus-host disease in stem cell transplant recipients.

The National Marrow Donor Program has more on Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story acknowledged early on and prominently that one of the study participants developed leukemia, which may have been related to the new treatment. The story probably should have mentioned that other harms might become apparent as these patients are followed further or as more patients are studied. However, we think the study went far enough to earn a satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• Study addresses key U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requirement, keeping SHP465 on track for potential 2017 U.S. launch
• Key secondary endpoint also met, showing higher proportion of patients were rated improved (p<0.001)
• Data add to overall robust clinical development program for SHP465

Shire plc (LSE: SHP,NASDAQ: SHPG) today announces positive topline results from a four-week Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, multi-center, placebo-controlled, dose-optimization, safety and efficacy study, SHP465-305, in children and adolescents aged 6-17 years with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). SHP465 (triple-bead mixed amphetamine salts - MAS) is an investigational oral stimulant medication being evaluated in the U.S. as a potential treatment for ADHD, a therapeutic area with significant need for additional treatment options.

The primary efficacy analysis of study 305 demonstrated that SHP465, administered as a daily morning dose, was superior to placebo on the change from baseline in ADHD-RS-IV (ADHD rating scale) total score, with a Least Squares (LS) mean difference from placebo at Week 4 of -9.9 (95% CI: -13.0 to -6.8, p<0.001), suggesting a significant improvement in ADHD symptoms. SHP465 was also superior to placebo in the key secondary efficacy analysis on the clinical global impression improvement scale (CGI-I), with an LS mean difference from placebo at Week 4 of -0.8 (95% CI: -1.1 to -0.5, p<0.001), indicating a significantly higher proportion of patients were rated improved on the CGI-I rating scale. The CGI-I is a standardized assessment tool that allows clinicians to rate the severity of ADHD illness, change over time and efficacy of medication.

Treatment-emergent adverse events ≥ 5% for SHP 465-305 were decreased appetite, headache, insomnia, irritability, nausea, weight decrease and dizziness. Adverse events were generally mild to moderate in severity and similar to those observed in previous SHP465 studies and with other amphetamine compounds.

The completion of SHP465-305 addresses an FDA requirement to evaluate the safety and efficacy of SHP465 in children and adolescents prior to filing a Class 2 resubmission of the medicine for FDA approval.

"We are pleased with the positive results of the SHP465-305 study," said Philip J. Vickers, Ph.D., Head of Research & Development, Shire. "These results represent an important step toward a new treatment option for patients with ADHD. Shire looks forward to including these data as part of the FDA resubmission and is eager to continue advancing this clinical program."

Dr. Matthew Brams, M.D., Clinical Assistant Professor at Baylor College of Medicine and principal investigator for study 305, added: "The study of SHP465 in children and adolescents is an essential next step to progressing the clinical program. I'm excited about these positive data from SHP465-305 because of the benefit that this potential new treatment option may provide for patients with ADHD."

Including study 305 and previous studies, Shire now has a robust database of 15 clinical studies evaluating SHP465 in more than 1,100 subjects. Once the pharmacokinetic study and an additional safety and efficacy Phase 3 trial in adults currently under way are complete later this year, Shire plans to add these study results to its existing SHP465 data set to submit a Class 2 resubmission for FDA approval of the medicine for treatment of ADHD. SHP465 remains on track for potential U.S. launch in the second half of 2017.

In previous adolescent and adult clinical studies, SHP465 demonstrated a statistically significant difference versus placebo at 16 hours post dosing, with onset of action starting 4 hours post dosing, as measured by the Permanent Product Measure of Performance (PERMP). PERMP was not measured in the SHP465-305 study.

There are patents supporting Shire's overall ADHD franchise in the U.S. that extend to 2029. With a launch planned for the second half of 2017, Shire expects that SHP465, following potential FDA approval, will have three years of Hatch-Waxman exclusivity and at least three patents listed in the FDA Orange Book expiring as late as May 2029.

Shire enables people with life-altering conditions to lead better lives.

Our strategy is to focus on developing and marketing innovative specialty medicines to meet significant unmet patient needs.

We focus on providing treatments in Rare Diseases, Neuroscience, Gastrointestinal and Internal Medicine and we are developing treatments for symptomatic conditions treated by specialist physicians in other targeted therapeutic areas, such as Ophthalmics.

Statements included herein that are not historical facts, including without limitation statements concerning our announced business combination with Baxalta and the timing and financial and strategic benefits thereof, our 20x20 ambition that targets $20 billion in combined product sales by 2020, as well as other targets for future financial results, capital structure, performance and sustainability of the combined company, the combined company's future strategy, plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, the anticipated timing of clinical trials and approvals for, and the commercial potential of, inline or pipeline products are forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties and are subject to change at any time. In the event such risks or uncertainties materialize, Shire's results could be materially adversely affected. The risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the following:
• the proposed combination with Baxalta may not be completed due to a failure to satisfy certain closing conditions, including any shareholder or regulatory approvals or the receipt of applicable tax opinions;
• disruption from the proposed transaction with Baxalta may make it more difficult to conduct business as usual or maintain relationships with patients, physicians, employees or suppliers;
• the combined company may not achieve some or all of the anticipated benefits of Baxalta's spin-off from Baxter International, Inc. ("Baxter") and the proposed transaction may have an adverse impact on Baxalta's existing arrangements with Baxter, including those related to transition, manufacturing and supply services and tax matters;
• the failure to achieve the strategic objectives with respect to the proposed combination with Baxalta may adversely affect the combined company's financial condition and results of operations;
• products and product candidates may not achieve commercial success;
• product sales from ADDERALL XR and INTUNIV are subject to generic competition;
• the failure to obtain and maintain reimbursement, or an adequate level of reimbursement, by third-party payers in a timely manner for the combined company's products may affect future revenues, financial condition and results of operations, particularly if there is pressure on pricing of products to treat rare diseases;
• supply chain or manufacturing disruptions may result in declines in revenue for affected products and commercial traction from competitors; regulatory actions associated with product approvals or changes to manufacturing sites, ingredients or manufacturing processes could lead to significant delays, an increase in operating costs, lost product sales, an interruption of research activities or the delay of new product launches;
• the successful development of products in various stages of research and development is highly uncertain and requires significant expenditures and time, and there is no guarantee that these products will receive regulatory approval;
• the actions of certain customers could affect the combined company's ability to sell or market products profitably, and fluctuations in buying or distribution patterns by such customers can adversely affect the combined company's revenues, financial condition or results of operations;
• investigations or enforcement action by regulatory authorities or law enforcement agencies relating to the combined company's activities in the highly regulated markets in which it operates may result in significant legal costs and the payment of substantial compensation or fines;
• adverse outcomes in legal matters and other disputes, including the combined company's ability to enforce and defend patents and other intellectual property rights required for its business, could have a material adverse effect on the combined company's revenues, financial condition or results of operations;
• Shire is undergoing a corporate reorganization and was the subject of an unsuccessful acquisition proposal and the consequent uncertainty could adversely affect the combined company's ability to attract and/or retain the highly skilled personnel needed to meet its strategic objectives;
• failure to achieve the strategic objectives with respect to Shire's acquisition of NPS Pharmaceuticals Inc. or Dyax Corp. ("Dyax") may adversely affect the combined company's financial condition and results of operations;
• the combined company will be dependent on information technology and its systems and infrastructure face certain risks, including from service disruptions, the loss of sensitive or confidential information, cyber-attacks and other security breaches or data leakages that could have a material adverse effect on the combined company's revenues, financial condition or results of operations;
• the combined company may be unable to retain and hire key personnel and/or maintain its relationships with customers, suppliers and other business partners;
• difficulties in integrating Dyax or Baxalta into Shire may lead to the combined company not being able to realize the expected operating efficiencies, cost savings, revenue enhancements, synergies or other benefits at the time anticipated or at all; and other risks and uncertainties detailed from time to time in Shire's, Dyax's or Baxalta's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), including those risks outlined in "ITEM 1A: Risk Factors" in Shire's and Baxalta's Annual Reports on Form 10-K for the year ended .

All forward-looking statements attributable to us or any person acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements that speak only as of the date hereof. Except to the extent otherwise required by applicable law, we do not undertake any obligation to republish revised forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.

For further information please contact:
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The adverse effects are clearly listed and equated with those of other amphetamine drugs. The adverse effects that occurred in more than 5 percent of the subjects included decreased appetite, headache, insomnia, irritability, nausea, weight decrease and dizziness and were similar to those observed with other amphetamine compounds.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pilot study published in the Journal of the American Osteopathic Association finds targeted pressure device significantly increased sleep for those with moderate to severe symptoms

Authors from Lake Erie Research Institute in Pennsylvania report an adjustable foot wrap caused to treat restless legs syndrome (RLS) is 1.4 times more effective than the standard pharmaceutical treatment. The pilot study published today in The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association.

The eight-week clinical trial involved 30 otherwise healthy adults with moderate to severe restless leg syndrome. Researchers studied Clinical Global Impression responses as well as the mean change in the International Restless Leg Syndrome Study Group Study Scale (IRLSSGS). A meta-analysis was then used to compare the RLS device with three historic studies of the medication ropinirole and a placebo.

Clinical Global Impression responses indicated significantly greater improvement with the RLS device (90 percent) compared with ropinirole (63 percent), the current standard dopamine therapy for RLS. Additionally, change in IRLSSGS score was significantly greater for the RLS device (17.22) compared to historic reports for ropinirole versus the placebo (12 versus 8.9 respectively). Patients using the RLS device also reported an 82 percent decrease in sleep loss.

The RLS device was designed to put adjustable targeted pressure on two muscles in the foot known to relax symptoms of RLS, the abductor hallucis and the flexor hallucis brevis. Researchers indicate that the pressure produced by the device may also stimulate a dopamine release, similar to massage therapy or acupressure.

"By putting pressure on specific muscles in the feet, we are able to create a response in the brain that relaxes the muscles activated during RLS," said Phyllis Kuhn, MS, PhD, and the study's lead researcher. "It's a near perfect example of the body regulating itself without drugs, many of which have the potential for significant adverse side effects."

Restless leg syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic disorder causing unpleasant sensations and an urge to move the legs when at rest. The sleep loss associated with RLS can cause extreme fatigue, anxiety and depression. According to the National Institute of Health, RLS may affect as many as 10 percent of the U.S. population, with more than nine million experiencing moderate to severe symptoms.

Until recently, potent drugs including opioids, depressants and dopamine agonists have been used to ease symptoms, but each of these is accompanied by negative side effects such as dizziness, nausea, vomiting and the added risk of addiction.

"Restless legs syndrome really erodes quality of life because it causes extreme fatigue for many patients. As an osteopathic physician, it's a challenge to balance the need to restore sleep while preventing additional harm from medication. These results show promise in otherwise healthy individuals for a nonpharmaceutical option that appears to have rather minor, temporary adverse effects for some users," said Rob Danoff, DO, an osteopathic family physician and program at Aria Health Care in Philadelphia.

Adverse effects were reported by seven patients in the study. The effects included pain (1), pins and needles sensation (2), irritability (3), spasm (1) and warm feet (1).

Open access to the full review is available until September 1, 2016: http://jaoa. .

Disclosures: Dr Kuhn worked without compensation through Lake Erie Research Institute (LERI) during the 5 years of the study of the device and is now receiving compensation for that work. She reports no financial interest in its sales. None of the other study authors reported any conflict of interest or financial disclosure relevant to the topic of this study. More details are available in the published article.

About The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association

The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association (JAOA) is the official scientific publication of the American Osteopathic Association. Edited by Robert Orenstein, DO, it is the premier scholarly peer-reviewed publication of the osteopathic medical profession. The JAOA's mission is to advance medicine through the publication of peer-reviewed osteopathic research.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release reports the number of participants who had problems including “pain (1), pins and needles sensation (2), irritability (3), spasm (1) and warm feet (1).”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Boomers are going bionic, and they want joint replacements to let them do it all

For a generation that pounded its joints doing aerobics, running marathons, and carving up the ski slopes, it’s time to roll out the spare parts.

Take Elliott Francis, 64, who had his second hip replacement surgery in February. Growing up, he was “a jumper and a rebounder,” he said, scooping basketballs off the rim during Roxbury pickup games and later playing in high school and college.

“We thought we’d be young forever,” said Francis, who co-anchors a radio news program in Washington, D.C. “The big wake-up call is when our bodies wear down.”

Baby boomers, determined to keep moving no matter what wear and tear and arthritis have wrought, are fueling a surge in joint replacements. Taking advantage of improved artificial joints and surgical methods, aging Americans are getting so many new hips, knees, shoulders, and ankles that orthopedic surgeons are having trouble meeting the demand.

Hip replacements in the United States more than doubled between 2000 and 2014 — from 160,282 to 371,605 a year — according to the most recent data from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project, which tracks hospital discharges. Knee replacements increased at an even faster clip in the same period, from 274,467 to 680,886.

The procedures can cost up to $50,000 for knees and $40,000 for hips, though the prices vary widely among Medicare and private insurers, which typically bear the bulk of the cost. The average age of patients listed in the American Joint Replacement Registry is about 66.

With millions more boomers still in their late 50s and early 60s, the trend will only continue.

“They’re aging, they’ve had some injuries, and they want to continue to be active into their 60s, 70s, and 80s. And they need a good joint to do that,” said Dr. David Mattingly, surgeon in chief at New England Baptist Hospital in Boston, one of the nation’s top orthopedics centers.

The surgical surge has created an expanding brigade of bionic baby boomers whose artificial parts are accompanied by sky-high expectations — something doctors struggle to manage. Despite steady improvement in technology and outcomes, replacement joints don’t create superhumans. Still, many patients are lifelong fitness buffs who begin plotting their return to the gym, the golf course, or the cross-country skiing trails the moment they are discharged from the hospital.

Winthrop retiree John Carver, 76, is already back at the fitness center after having replacement surgery on his right knee in February. “My goal is to get back to an hour — 30 minutes on the elliptical and some back exercises,” he said. A Marine veteran who ran the New York City Marathon the year he turned 40, Carver has scheduled a similar procedure on his left knee in May, early enough “to be ready for golf season.”

For those who are still working at physically demanding jobs, there are other considerations.

“I’m up and down the scaffolding all day,” said David Smith, 62, of Arlington, a construction superintendent in Boston who had a hip replacement in January. “My first focus was to just get on my feet so I can work another 10 years. So I said, ‘OK, let’s get this done.’ ”

Smith, who played hockey in college and as an adult and spent years lifting heavy equipment on building sites, plans to return to his job this spring. But he has already resumed golfing — on a March trip to visit his son and his family in Atlanta. And, he promised, “I will get on the skates again.”

Like Smith, many boomers endured months or years of pain before surgery, pain caused by “bone-on-bone” friction when cartilage deterioration eroded their bone cushioning. Some took multiple cortisone shots, hoping to avoid surgeries. But having had the procedures, many say they wish they’d done it sooner.

West Newbury’s town clerk, Mike McCarron,, 62, played high school and college football and once climbed Mount Washington in the winter. McCarron underwent two knee replacements simultaneously in 2011. “I had a coupon,” he joked. Now he runs on the treadmill at his Merrimack Valley gym and hikes in the Maine wilderness.

Susan Nadworny, 61, of Melrose, owned an aerobics studio in Boston’s North End during the 1980s and 1990s. There, she spent three or four hours a day leading high-impact exercise classes. Nadworny, who now works as a public policy advocate for people with disabilities, had knee replacement surgery last April. Nearly a year later, she pedals an indoor exercise bicycle and spends an hour a day walking dogs in the woods.

The vast majority of joint-surgery patients report much less pain and greater mobility afterward, with success rates topping 95 percent, according to the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, a physicians organization. In patient-reported surveys, some still complain of pain and tissue inflammation after their procedures. Smaller numbers suffer serious complications, ranging from blood clotting to hospital-acquired infections.

New England Baptist expects to perform a record 7,000 knee and hip replacements at its Mission Hill campus this year, a nearly sixfold increase from the 1,200 annually it did in the mid-1980s. “Most of the busy guys do 15 to 20 a week,” Mattingly said.

Last year, the average salary for joint-replacement specialists topped $575,000, reported the Dallas consulting firm Merritt Hawkins & Associates, compared with just over $230,000 for family doctors.

Because of improvements in materials and the way they’re treated and sterilized, implants — which include polyethylene and titanium alloys — don’t wear down as fast as they once did. Implants now have a 90 percent chance of lasting two decades, much longer than in the past, Mattingly said.

While physical activity obviously plays a role in joint deterioration, genetics may be the biggest factor in determining who needs a replacement and when, he said. Knee replacements were first offered in the 1960s, and hip replacements began in the 1940s, so many boomers are facing the same surgeries their fathers and mothers underwent.

But boomers may have a tougher time coming to terms with the reality that a new body part doesn’t mean they can resume all of the high-impact activities that were a major part of their lives.

“Nobody will return to playing football,” Mattingly said. “The person who struggles is the one who’s done long-distance running for years and just doesn’t want to give it up.”

Technology could eventually change that. Joint implants have become more customized to suit individual patients, but a Billerica company is pushing the personalization trend further. ConforMIS Inc. uses 3-D printing and imaging software to more precisely tailor replacement joints. It sells between 17,000 and 20,000 personalized knee implants a year — still a small share of the market — and last year won US regulatory approval for its first hip implants.

“The baby boomer explosion is a big deal in health care,” said ConforMIS chief executive Mark Augusti. “Technology has to be part of the solution. Baby boomers expect to be more active as they get older and have higher expectations about quality of life in their later years.”

Stephanie Donvan, 60, of Arlington, who received a ConforMIS knee replacement in May, recalled feeling like she was “carrying a dead tree trunk” before the surgery.

Now, she said, “I’m out walking my Lab about five miles a day, every day. I can run in the snow and ride my bike. I have complete range of motion . . . We want to keep going till we’re in our 80s or 90s. We don’t want to give up all the things we’re doing.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned at least some potential harms:
In patient-reported surveys, some still complain of pain and tissue inflammation after their procedures. Smaller numbers suffer serious complications, ranging from blood clotting to hospital-acquired infections.
Still, it could have devoted more attention to risks, including the lax regulation of implantable devices.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lauren Pestikas sits as she receives an infusion of the drug ketamine during a 45-minute session at an outpatient clinic in Chicago on July 25, 2018. Pestikas struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before starting ketamine treatments earlier in the year. (AP Photo/Teresa Crawford)

CHICAGO (AP) — It was launched decades ago as an anesthetic for animals and people, became a potent battlefield pain reliever in Vietnam and morphed into the trippy club drug Special K.

Now the chameleon drug ketamine is finding new life as an unapproved treatment for depression and suicidal behavior. Clinics have opened around the United States promising instant relief with their “unique” doses of ketamine in IVs, sprays or pills. And desperate patients are shelling out thousands of dollars for treatment often not covered by health insurance, with scant evidence on long-term benefits and risks.

Chicago preschool teacher Lauren Pestikas long struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before trying ketamine earlier this year.

The price tag so far is about $3,000, but “it’s worth every dime and penny,” said the 36-year-old.

Pestikas said she feels much better for a few weeks after each treatment, but the effects wear off and she scrambles to find a way to pay for another one.

For now, ketamine has not received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treating depression, though doctors can use it for that purpose.

Ketamine has been around since the 1960s and is widely used as an anesthesia drug during surgery because it doesn’t suppress breathing. Compared to opioids such as morphine, ketamine isn’t as addictive and doesn’t cause breathing problems. And some studies have shown that ketamine can ease symptoms within hours for the toughest cases.

Its potential effects on depression were discovered in animal experiments in the late 1980s and early 1990s showing that glutamate, a brain chemical messenger, might play a role in depression, and that drugs including ketamine that target the glutamate pathway might work as antidepressants.

Conventional antidepressants like Prozac target serotonin, a different chemical messenger, and typically take weeks to months to kick in — a lag that can cause severely depressed patients to sink deeper into despair.

Ketamine’s potential for almost immediate if temporary relief is what makes it so exciting, said Dr. Jennifer Vande Voort, a Mayo Clinic psychiatrist who has used ketamine to treat depression patients since February.

“We don’t have a lot of things that provide that kind of effect. What I worry about is that it gets so hyped up,” she said.

The strongest studies suggest it’s most useful and generally safe in providing short-term help for patients who have not benefited from antidepressants. That amounts to about one-third of the roughly 300 million people with depression worldwide.

“It truly has revolutionized the field,” changing scientists’ views on how depression affects the brain and showing that rapid relief is possible, said Yale University psychiatrist Dr. Gerard Sanacora, who has done research for or consulted with companies seeking to develop ketamine-based drugs.

But to become standard depression treatment, he said, much more needs to be known.

Last year, Sanacora co-authored an American Psychiatric Association task force review of ketamine treatment for mood disorders that noted the benefits but said “major gaps” remain in knowledge about long-term effectiveness and safety. Most studies have been small, done in research settings and not in the real world.

When delivered through an IV, ketamine can cause a rapid increase in heart rate and blood pressure that could be dangerous for some patients. Ketamine also can cause hallucinations that some patients find scary.

“There are some very real concerns,” Sanacora said. “We do know this drug can be abused, so we have to be very careful about how this is developed.”

Dr. Rahul Khare, an emergency medicine specialist in Chicago, first learned about ketamine’s other potential benefits a decade ago from a depressed and anxious patient he was preparing to sedate to fix a repeat dislocated shoulder.

“He said, ‘Doc, give me what I got last time. For about three weeks after I got it I felt so much better,’” Khare recalled.

Khare became intrigued and earlier this year began offering ketamine for severe depression at an outpatient clinic he opened a few years ago. He also joined the American Society for Ketamine Physicians, formed a year ago representing about 140 U.S. doctors, nurses, psychologists and others using ketamine for depression or other nonapproved uses.

There are about 150 U.S. ketamine clinics, compared with about 20 three years ago, said society co-founder Dr. Megan Oxley.

Khare said the burgeoning field “is like a new frontier” where doctors gather at meetings and compare notes. He has treated about 50 patients with depression including Pestikas. They’re typically desperate for relief after failing to respond to other antidepressants. Some have lost jobs and relationships because of severe depression, and most find that ketamine allows them to function, Khare said.

Typical treatment at his clinic involves six 45-minute sessions over about two weeks, costing $550 each. Some insurers will pay about half of that, covering Khare’s office visit cost. Patients can receive “booster” treatments. They must sign a four-page consent form that says benefits may not be long-lasting, lists potential side effects, and in bold letters states that the treatment is not government-approved.

At a recent session, Pestikas’s seventh, she leaned back on a reclining white examining-room chair as a nurse hooked her up to a heart and blood pressure monitor. She grimaced as a needle was slipped into the top of her left palm. Khare reached up with a syringe to inject a small dose of ketamine into an IV bag hanging above the chair, then dimmed the lights, pulled the window curtains and asked if she had questions and was feeling OK.

Pestikas listened to music on her iPhone and watched psychedelic videos. She said it was like “a controlled acid trip” with pleasant hallucinations. The trip ends soon after the IV is removed, but Pestikas said she feels calm and relaxed the rest of the day, and that the mood boost can last weeks.

Studies suggest that a single IV dose of ketamine far smaller than used for sedation or partying can help many patients gain relief within about four hours and lasting nearly a week or so.

Exactly how ketamine works is unclear, but one idea is that by elevating glutamate levels, ketamine helps nerve cells re-establish connections that were disabled by depression, said ketamine expert Dr. Carlos Zarate, chief of experimental therapies at the National Institute of Mental Health.

A small Stanford University study published in August suggested that ketamine may help relieve depression by activating the brain’s opioid receptors.

Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Allergan are among drug companies developing ketamine-like drugs for depression. Janssen leads the effort with its nasal spray esketamine. The company filed a new drug application in September.

Meanwhile, dozens of studies are underway seeking to answer some of the unknowns about ketamine including whether repeat IV treatments work better for depression and if there’s a way to zero in on which patients are most likely to benefit.

Until there are answers, Zarate of the mental health institute said ketamine should be a last-resort treatment for depression after other methods have failed.

The Associated Press Health & Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story said ketamine can cause rapid increases in heart rate and blood pressure “that could be dangerous” as well as hallucinations. It quoted one expert who said the drug “can be abused, so we have to be very careful about how this is developed.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lung ultrasound has been shown to be highly effective and safe for diagnosing pneumonia in children and a potential substitute for chest X-ray, according to a study conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Results are currently published in the medical journal Chest.

To watch study author discuss this research, click this link: https:/

Pneumonia is the leading cause of death in children worldwide, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Symptoms include fever, cough, and rapid breathing. Chest X-ray is considered the test of choice for diagnosing pneumonia in children, but the WHO estimates three-quarters of the world's population does not have access to radiography.

Investigators conducted a randomized controlled trial in the pediatric Emergency Department at The Mount Sinai Hospital comparing lung ultrasound to chest X-ray in 191 children from birth to 21 years of age. The patients were randomly assigned into an investigational arm (received a lung ultrasound and if the physician needed additional verification, a chest X-ray) and a control arm (received a chest X-ray followed by a lung ultrasound). Researchers found a 38.8 percent reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm compared to no reduction in the control arm, with no missed pneumonia cases and no increase in any other adverse events.

The research team was led by James Tsung, MD, MPH, Associate Professor in the Department of Emergency Medicine and Department of Pediatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and former clinical fellow Brittany Pardue Jones, MD, who's currently Assistant Professor in the Department of Pediatrics at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.

"Ultrasound is portable, cost-saving and safer for children than an X-ray because it does not expose them to radiation," says Dr. Tsung. "Our study could have a profound impact in the developing world where access to radiography is limited."

Furthermore, the reduction in chest X-rays in the investigational arm resulted in an overall cost savings of $9,200, and length of stay in the Emergency Department was decreased by 26 minutes.

"In the era of precision medicine, lung ultrasound may also be an ideal imaging option in children who are at higher risk for radiation-induced cancers or have received multiple radiographic or CT imaging studies," says Dr. Tsung.

As more and more handheld ultrasound machines come to market, these results suggest that lung ultrasound has the potential to become the preferred choice for the diagnosis of pneumonia in children. Further research is needed to investigate the impact of lung ultrasound on antibiotic use and stewardship.

The Mount Sinai Health System is an integrated health system committed to providing distinguished care, conducting transformative research, and advancing biomedical education. Structured around seven hospital campuses and a single medical school, the Health System has an extensive ambulatory network and a range of inpatient and outpatient services--from community-based facilities to tertiary and quaternary care.

The System includes approximately 6,100 primary and specialty care physicians; 12 joint-venture ambulatory surgery centers; more than 140 ambulatory practices throughout the five boroughs of New York City, Westchester, Long Island, and Florida; and 31 affiliated community health centers. Physicians are affiliated with the renowned Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, which is ranked among the highest in the nation in National Institutes of Health funding per investigator. The Mount Sinai Hospital is ranked as one of the nation's top 10 hospitals in Geriatrics, Cardiology/Heart Surgery, and Gastroenterology, and is in the top 25 in five other specialties in the 2014-2015 "Best Hospitals" issue of U.S. News & World Report. Mount Sinai's Kravis Children's Hospital also is ranked in seven out of ten pediatric specialties by U.S. News & World Report. The New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai is ranked 11th nationally for Ophthalmology, while Mount Sinai Beth Israel is ranked regionally.

For more information, visit http://www. , or find Mount Sinai on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release points out that there was no increase in adverse events reported during the study, nor were there any cases where pneumonia was not appropriately diagnosed. There is the potential for some harms that aren’t addressed, namely missed diagnosis and the identification of small pneumonias that don’t need to be treated (overdiagnosis).
“In the era of precision medicine, lung ultrasound may also be an ideal imaging option in children who are at higher risk for radiation-induced cancers or have received multiple radiographic or CT imaging studies,” according to the lead study author. This benefit in terms of harms reduction might have been stressed even more. Ultrasound screening could be safer in the long run for children than X-ray since repeated exposure to radiation presents a cumulative risk for cancer. Radiation oncology experts and the FDA have long called for reduced reliance on routine X-ray and computerized tomography (CT) screening in children unless the benefits outweigh the risks. More than 100 professional organizations including pediatricians, radiation physicists and oncologists have signed on to the “Image Gently” campaign which urges the use of ultrasound instead of radiation when feasible.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ViewRay, Inc. (Nasdaq: VRAY), maker of the world's first and only clinical MRI-guided radiation therapy system, announced today outcomes data presented during the recent 2017 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO). This data highlighted compelling early results using the company's MRIdian system for the treatment of inoperable, locally advanced pancreatic cancer.

Unlike any other system on the market today, MRIdian allows clinicians to see the tumor and nearby soft-tissue anatomy throughout radiation treatments using real-time diagnostic MR-visualization. As a result, MRIdian's on-table adaptive radiation therapy allows doctors to respond to subtle anatomical changes observed on a day-to-day basis and reshape the dose to better match the current contours of the tumor. By more accurately targeting the tumor, and reducing treatment radiation dose to surrounding organs such as the duodenum, small bowel, stomach and liver, a higher and potentially more effective radiation dose may be delivered without increasing the risks of side effects and complications for the patient.

As featured in the ASTRO Scientific Session poster titled "High Dose Adaptive MRI Guided Radiation Therapy Improves Overall Survival of Inoperable Pancreatic Cancer," key data points and findings from the presentation include the following:
• The study detailed a retrospective review of 42 locally-advanced pancreatic cancer patients treated with MRIdian at four institutions (University of California Los Angeles, University of Wisconsin, VU University Medical Center, Washington University).
• The authors examined survival and toxicity rates for two unique cohorts of patients. One sample received a higher biologically effective dose (maxBED10 >90), primarily enabled by MRIdian MR-guided on-table adaptive radiotherapy. The other sample received a lower, more conventional biologically effective dose (maxBED10 <90), using non-adaptive therapy.
• The cohort receiving a higher dose demonstrated a near doubling of median overall survival (Kaplan-Meier estimated median overall survival of 27.8 months compared to 14.8 months).
• Patients treated with higher radiation doses reported no grade 3 or higher toxicities (0 percent). In comparison, those patients receiving lower doses via non-adaptive treatments experienced 15.8 percent grade 3 or higher toxicities.

"High-definition MR now enables oncologists to detect the slightest anatomical changes that occur from one day to the next and in real-time while the patient is being treated. Coupled with new adaptive radiation therapy software tools, we create new customized plans in minutes, all while the patient is on the treatment table," said Percy Lee, M.D., senior author and Associate Professor and Vice Chair of Education for the Department of Radiation Oncology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. "The data presented at the 2017 ASTRO Annual Meeting suggests that higher radiation doses with adaptive MR guided radiation therapy may improve survival in pancreatic cancer while maintaining a very favorable toxicity profile. These outcomes warrant further investigations."

The early results highlighted above, along with other data obtained using MRIdian will be tested in a multi-center, prospective, single-arm clinical trial for inoperable, locally advanced or borderline resectable pancreatic cancer. The trial will be conducted by ViewRay's Clinical Cooperative Think Tank (C2T2), a group of MRIdian medical institutions focused on evidence gathering to support MR-guided radiation therapy.

For more information regarding this clinical trial, please visit http://go. .

Presentations discussing the multi-institutional poster in ViewRay's ASTRO booth are available on the company's website at http://www. .

ViewRay®, Inc. (Nasdaq: VRAY), designs, manufactures and markets the MRIdian® radiation therapy system. MRIdian is built upon a proprietary high-definition MR imaging system designed from the ground up to address the unique challenges and clinical workflow for advanced radiation oncology. Unlike MR systems used in diagnostic radiology, MRIdian's high-definition MR was purposely built to deliver high-precision radiation without unnecessary beam distortion, and consequently, help to mitigate skin toxicity and other safety concerns that may otherwise arise when high magnetic fields interact with radiation beams. ViewRay and MRIdian are registered trademarks of ViewRay, Inc.

This press release contains forward-looking statements. Statements in this press release that are not purely historical are forward-looking statements. Such statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause future results to differ materially from those referenced. Forward looking statements with respect to predicted improved survival described in the poster presentation and video, are based on current expectations from the presented retroactive study and involve inherent risks and uncertainties about the potential health and medical benefits of MR-guided Radiation Therapy for the treatment of patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Further studies, including the planned prospective multi-institutional study referenced in this press release, as well as patient data covering longer periods of time post-treatment, could lead to different or contrary results from those expressed during ASTRO or in the poster presentation. Given these uncertainties, the reader is advised not to place any undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Additional risk factors include, among others, the ability to raise the additional funding needed to continue to pursue ViewRay's business and product development plans, the inherent uncertainties associated with developing new products or technologies, competition in the industry in which ViewRay operates and overall market conditions. These forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this press release, and ViewRay assumes no obligation to update the forward-looking statements, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Investors should consult all of the information set forth herein and should also refer to the risk factor disclosure set forth in the reports and other documents ViewRay files with the SEC available at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release provides specific results regarding experiences of both groups with regard to toxicity from radiotherapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 15, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A prescription medication originally developed to treat epilepsy may help obese adults shed weight when combined with routine nutritional counseling, researchers say.

Patients who took 400 milligrams of the anti-seizure drug zonisamide daily for a year lost nearly 7.5 pounds more on average than those assigned to dietaryand lifestyle changes alone, the new study found. But they also suffered more side effects than patients not taking the medication.

"The question was to see if more weight loss could be achieved if we provided decent quality lifestyle intervention, mostly dietary counseling, along with this medication," said study lead author Dr. Kishore Gadde, director of the Obesity Clinical Trials Program at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C.

"And the answer was yes," Gadde said.

The research, funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health, appears online Oct. 15 in the journal Archives of Internal Medicine.

For obese men and women who can't control their weight through diet and lifestyle changes, nonsurgical options are limited, the study authors noted. Just a few prescription medications are approved in the United States for long-term treatment of obesity, including orlistat (brand name Xenical) and lorcaserin hydrochloride (Belviq).

Gadde and colleagues set out to follow up on a 16-week investigation they conducted in 2003 that had indicated that zonisamide (Zonegran) at a dosage of 400 milligrams a day might offer an alternative.

Between 2006 and 2011 the study team randomly assigned more than 200 obese men and women to one of three groups. One group took 200 milligrams of zonisamide daily, another got 400 mg of zonisamide daily and one received a dummy pill. The participants' average age was 43, and their average body-mass index (BMI) was nearly 38. BMI is a calculation of body fat based on height and weight, and a BMI of more than 30 is considered obese. None had diabetes.

All study participants followed their treatment plan for one year. During this time, they all also received monthly individualized nutritional counseling, which Gadde described as "not intensive," to help them reduce their overall caloric intake.

Those on the higher-dose zonisamide protocol fared the best in terms of overall weight loss, while the lower-dose regimen was not much more effective than the placebo.

Although nearly 55 percent of those on the higher-dose medication shed 5 percent or more of their pre-study weight, that figure was 34 percent among the lower-dose group and 31 percent among the non-medication participants.

But patients in both drug groups faced a higher risk for side effects, including diarrhea, headache, fatigue, nausea/vomiting, concentration and memory difficulties, anxiety, and depression-related symptoms.

The authors said such side effects were typically "mild." They concluded that the higher-dose zonisamide showed promise as a weight-loss aid, but advised clinicians to carefully weigh the pros and cons on a patient-by-patient basis.

"There's no medicine that is a panacea for obesity," cautioned Gadde. "The important thing to keep in mind is that although we diagnose obesity on the basis of a mathematical formula -- a BMI of 30 and up -- the basis for obesity may differ from one individual to another."

Psychological factors or lifestyle factors may play a role, he said. "But for about a third [of patients], biological issues are at play, such as not easily experiencing satiety signals from the gut to the brain, which senses what your energy intake has been," he said. "And for those people, medication can help."

Lona Sandon, a registered dietitian and assistant professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, agreed.

Caution is vital when using any drug that has been approved for one condition for another, Sandon said.

"But for many people, this kind of drug might absolutely be of great help, by doing something that helps the regulation of these appetite hormones and the regulatory pathway," she said.

For more on obesity, visit the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Nice job mentioning side effects in the third sentence, followed by a paragraph later in the story that spells them out: “But patients in both drug groups faced a higher risk for side effects, including diarrhea, headache, fatigue, nausea/vomiting, concentration and memory difficulties, anxiety, and depression-related symptoms.”  While we wish the story had quantified how much higher the “higher risk” really was, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt for the things it did satisfactorily.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Although Vicks VapoRub is often used to fight colds and congestion, there has never been proof of how well it works. Now, new research reported in the journal Pediatrics finds, the combination of camphor, menthol and eucalyptus oils actually does ease cold symptoms and help children suffering from upper-respiratory infections sleep.

In the study, funded by an unrestricted research grant from Procter & Gamble, makers of Vicks, researchers took 138 children between the ages of 2 and 11, with symptoms like cough, congestion, runny nose and restless sleep that lasted seven days or more. Only children with moderate cough and severe stuffy nose were eligible, and those were divided into three groups.

Some were treated with Vicks, some with a placebo consisting of petroleum jelly and others got no treatment at all. Parents were surveyed the day before treatment about the severity of their child's symptoms. That night, 30 minutes before bedtime, Vicks or petroleum jelly was rubbed onto the child's chest and neck. The next day parents were questioned about their child's symptoms overnight.

Children in all three groups got better, but those treated with the VapoRub saw the greatest improvement, and parents in this group also had improved sleep, the study found.

"The American Academy of Pediatrics says the currently available oral cough and cold medications are not effective for children and have the potential for side effects, " said Dr. Ian Paul, principal investigator and associate professor of pediatrics and public health sciences, Penn State College of Medicine. "This was based in part on some of the studies that we have conducted at Penn State. The current study shows that Vaporub is more effective than placebo."

Paul is on Procter & Gamble's advisory board but holds no stock in the company and will not profit financially.

Where's the line between research and marketing?

Twenty of the 44 children in the vapor rub group suffered mild side effects including skin irritation and burning sensation of the eyes and nose. There were no side effects in the two other groups.

Dr. Jennifer Shu, a practicing pediatrician and CNNHealth's Living Well expert, uses Vicks for her family. "I have found that when used properly it can be a good option for parents who want to relieve some cold symptoms in their children. Parents get frustrated with the FDA recommendations not to use cold medicines in kids under the age of 4 because they are left with few options. Vicks is used topically on the skin, it's not ingested and is not included in these FDA guidelines."

Shu says when used properly, Vicks appears to be safe. But as with any product, parents need to read the instructions carefully and keep medicines out of the reach of children. Vicks VapoRub is not recommend for children under the age of 2.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The story reports that almost half of the children who were treated with VapoRub reported side effects including skin irritation or a burning sensation, while none of the children in the other groups reported any side effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
BOOSTER SHOTS: Oddities, musings and news from the 

health world Experts issue new guidelines for preventing migraines with drugs

It would seem that migraineurs would be eager to stop these headaches before they start. In a summary of the guidelines written for patients and their families, this is how migraines are described:

Preventive treatment involves taking a seizure drug and a beta-blocker every day to reduce the frequency, severity and duration of migraines. Neurologists estimate that about 38% of people who suffer from migraines stand to benefit with such a regimen, and studies suggest that as many as half of migraines can be prevented with drugs, according to Dr. Stephen D. Silberstein, a neurologist at the Jefferson Headache Center at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. Silberstein was the lead author of new migraine treatment guidelines presented Monday at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Neurology in New Orleans.

Actually, odds are you wouldn’t. Neurologists say that only about one-third of those who could benefit by migraine-preventing medication actually use it.

If you had a history of suffering from migraines and could prevent the debilitating headaches by swallowing a few pills, you’d do it – wouldn’t you?

Many migraines can be prevented by taking medication every day. New guidelines… (Photo illustration by Gary…)

“Migraine is a condition that involves recurring headaches. Each headache may last from four hours to two days. It can cause throbbing pain in the head. Other symptoms may include nausea (upset stomach), vomiting and extreme sensitivity to light or sound. Most people with migraine have attacks that happen repeatedly.”

People whose migraines are infrequent or mild may not be able to prevent them with drugs, the guidelines say. But for those who can, the best seizure drugs are divalproex sodium (Depakote), sodium valproate (Depakote, Depakene, Stavzor) and topiramate (Topamax or Topiragen). Beta-blockers are usually taken to treat high blood pressure, heart arrhythmias and other cardiovascular conditions, though metoprolol (Lopressor or Toprol), propranolol (Inderal) and timolol (Blocadren) can also help with migraines.

The authors also noted that frovatriptan (Frova), which is used to treat migraine symptoms, can also help prevent menstrual migraines.

These medications “are effective for migraine prevention and should be offered to patients with migraine to reduce migraine attack frequency and severity,” Silberstein and colleagues wrote in the new guidelines, which were based on a review of 284 publications.

In addition, an herbal remedy derived from a family of plants called Petasites or butterbur was found to be effective, according to the review.

The review identified a handful of drugs that “are probably effective and should be considered for migraine prevention.” These include the antidepressants amitriptyline (Elavil, Endep or Vanatrip) and venlafaxine (Effexor); the beta blockers atenolol (Senormin or Tenormin) and nadolol (Corgard); and for menstrual migraines, naratriptan (Amerge) and zolmitriptan (Zomig).

“People need to keep in mind that all drugs, includingover-the-counter drugsand complementary treatments, can have side effects or interact with other medications, which should be monitored,” Silberstein said in a statement.

Five of the six co-authors of the new guidelines, including Silberstein, disclosed that they receive research funding, speaking fees and other payments from drug companies.

The guidelines will be published in Tuesday’s edition of the journal Neurology. They were developed in conjunction with the American Headache Society. You can read the new guidelines here, or check out the patient-friendly summary here.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although the story was not specific enough on this point, it reminded readers that all drugs “can have side effects or interact with other medications.”  It didn’t mention how serious they might be or how often they might occur. We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt however since the list of drugs is long and the incidence and severity of the side effects is complicated
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - For pregnant women with depression, a couple months of acupuncture might help reduce the severity of their symptoms, a small study hints.

The study, which followed 150 pregnant women with major depression, tested “depression-specific” acupuncture against massage and acupuncture sessions that, according to traditional Chinese medicine, does not specifically target depression.

Researchers found that after eight weeks, women who received depression-specific acupuncture were more likely to have a treatment response — meaning the severity of their symptoms fell by at least half and they no longer met all of the criteria for diagnosing major depression.

Overall, 63 percent responded to the therapy, versus 37 percent of the “control” acupuncture group and half of the massage group, according to findings published in the medical journal Obstetrics & Gynecology.

But while the findings are promising, questions still remain — including whether acupuncture as practiced in the real world can reliably help women with depression.

“The acupuncture protocol we have tested appears effective,” lead researcher Dr. Rachel Manber, of Stanford University in California, told Reuters Health in an email.

“However,” she added, “unlike a pill, which always has the same ingredients, acupuncture, like psychotherapy, varies from one provider to the other.”

So while the specific regimen used in this study appeared effective, Manber said, “I do not think we can say that our study proves that acupuncture is effective for depression during pregnancy.”

It’s estimated that 3 to 5 percent of pregnant women are diagnosed with depression, Manber and her colleagues note in their report. Antidepressant medications are one treatment option, but there are safety concerns.

One recent study, for example, found that pregnant women who started taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in the second or third trimester had a higher risk of preterm delivery than other women. SSRIs include drugs like sertraline (Zoloft), paroxetine

Because of the potential for harm from medications, many pregnant women with depression may prefer psychotherapy or other non-drug options.

Acupuncture has been used for more than 2,000 years in Chinese medicine to treat a wide variety of ailments. According to traditional medicine, specific acupuncture points on the skin are connected to internal pathways that conduct energy, or qi (“chee”), and stimulating these points with a fine needle promotes the healthy flow of qi.

Modern research has most often focused on the effects of acupuncture on painful conditions, like chronic back pain and migraines. Researchers speculate that it may help ease pain by altering signals among nerve cells or affecting the release of various chemicals of the central nervous system.

It is unclear, Manber said, why acupuncture might help lessen the severity of depression.

For their study, she and her colleagues randomly assigned 52 women to receive depression-specific acupuncture twice a week for four weeks, then weekly for another four weeks. Another 49 women received control acupuncture and 49 received massage. All completed a standard measure of depression severity at the outset and again after four and eight weeks of treatment.

After eight weeks, patients in the depression-specific acupuncture group had a higher rate of response to treatment. They were not, however, more likely to see a complete remission in their depression; about 35 percent had a remission, versus 29.5 percent in the other two groups combined - a statistically insignificant difference.

Fourteen women who received depression-specific acupuncture reported pain during the needling, as did seven in the control-acupuncture group.

Overall, Manber’s team notes, the response to acupuncture in this study was comparable to what has been seen in studies of psychotherapy for depression during pregnancy.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Pembrolizumab, an antibody drug already used to treat other forms of cancer, can be effective in the treatment of the most common form of mesothelioma, according to a new study led by investigators from the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. The study, published this month in The Lancet Oncology, is the first to show a positive impact from checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy drugs on this disease.

Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a rare and aggressive cancer that represents about 90 percent of all malignant mesothelioma cases. It's primarily caused by the inhalation of asbestos, a fiber commonly found in some forms of insulation, vinyl floor tiles, and other material. Tumors form in the pleura, a thin membrane of cells that line the lungs and chest wall. Most patients survive less than a year. This poor prognosis is partially due to the fact that most patients are not diagnosed until they are already at a late stage of the disease. The standard first-line therapy treatment involves chemotherapy, and currently there is no approved second-line therapy.

"There have been a lot of studies looking at different drugs, but researchers have not seen positive results," said the study's lead author Evan Alley, MD, PhD, chief of Hematology and Medical Oncology at Penn Presbyterian Hospital. "But we've found this new class of drugs, checkpoint inhibitors, seems to be more effective than what's been available in the past."

Checkpoint inhibitors are a class of drugs designed to free the body's immune system to fight back against cancer. Pembrolizumab, in particular, has been used to treat melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, and in some cases, head and neck cancers.

Alley and his team presented data from KEYNOTE-028, an ongoing trial involving 13 different research sites in six different countries all looking at the effect of pembrolizumab on patients with advanced malignancies, including malignant pleural mesothelioma. The study evaluated 25 patients with pleural mesothelioma, all of whom were over the age of 18 and had either already been treated with chemotherapy or were unable to receive it. Patients who had already received another checkpoint inhibitor were not included in the study.

Beginning with the first enrollees two years ago, doctors gave each patient a dose of pembrolizumab every two weeks. The tumor reduced in size in 14 of those patients. On average, patients went about six months without their disease progressing, and overall survival was about 18 months. Fourteen patients passed away during the study, while four were still undergoing treatment as of the study's writing.

"Most patients who receive a second-line therapy have a life expectancy of about six or seven months, so to have four patients still ongoing at two years is very encouraging," Alley said.

The most common side-effects reported were fatigue, nausea, loss of appetite, and dry mouth.

"One great sign in this study is that none of the patients had to stop treatment because of side-effects," Alley said. "Some had temporary stoppages, but they were able to continue. The drug appears to be well-tolerated."

There are multiple studies going on right now to confirm these findings, which the authors note is a necessary step before the drug can become a standard second-line therapy. "This study provides evidence that some patients can have long-term disease control with this drug, which we haven't seen before," Alley said. "We need to better understand what we can do next to make immunotherapy more effective for more patients."

Alley said there are already plans for trials that will test combination therapies, which will utilize pembrolizumab in conjunction with other treatments. Those studies are expected to launch later this year, including two at Penn.

The study was funded by Merck, which manufactures pembrolizumab. Alley has no personal financial relationship with Merck.

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania (founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that “the most common side-effects reported were fatigue, nausea, loss of appetite, and dry mouth,” but we have no idea of magnitude of those effects or whether more serious, less common effects may have occurred.
The study reported that 64% of the patients had a treatment related adverse effect, but this wasn’t mentioned in the news release. Side effects directly relate to quality of life and could be a deal-breaker for many patients. 
We’ve outlined some of the common challenges in writing about harms from immunotherapy drugs in this guide for journalists.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An app called Natural Cycles has become the first to be classified as a medical device for use as contraception.



Natural Cycles uses a woman's body temperature and menstrual cycle data to tell her when she is fertile. On fertile days, users must abstain from sex or use other protection such as condoms to prevent pregnancy. The app was approved as a class IIb medical device by Tüv Süd, a notified body in Sweden where it is based.

But sexual health organisations are warning that being classed as a medical device does not guarantee that the app will effectively prevent pregnancy. Sexual health charity the FPA, Fertility UK, and the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Health of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists are jointly calling for more large-scale independent trials to ensure that evidence for such apps is on a par with other rigorously tested methods of contraception.

Natural Cycles is one of numerous apps that help women practise a method of contraception called natural family planning, also known as the fertility awareness method.



Natural family planning involves monitoring your body for signs of ovulation, like an increase in your temperature, or a change in cervical mucus.

"The thing about the female egg is that it only lives for about 24 hours. So if you could reliably know when you've ovulated as a woman, and then you give that egg two or three days to die, any time after that in the cycle you will not get pregnant because there's no egg to fertilise," Dr Susan Walker, a senior lecturer in sexual health at Anglia Ruskin University, told BuzzFeed News.



Taking your temperature is what sets Natural Cycles and other apps like it apart from standard period-tracking apps. Without temperature information an app can can guess at your ovulation day based on your average cycle length, but can't be sure when you actually have ovulated, and so you can't use it as a reliable form of birth control.

You don't actually need an app to practise natural family planning – although it does cut down on paperwork. Even so, the FPA advises that natural family planning is most effective if you’re taught how to do it by a specialist teacher, and you monitor all three fertility indicators – temperature, menstrual cycle length, and cervical secretions.

But natural family planning is not for everyone. For starters, it can only protect against pregnancy, not STIs.

And if you're considering ditching the Pill because remembering to take it each day is too much effort, you probably won't like having to remember to take your temperature every morning.

"You really have to commit to it, whether you're doing it the traditional way or you're using an app. You have to take your temperature every morning and record that, because without all that data it's not really any use to you," Bekki Burbidge, head of communications at the FPA, told BuzzFeed News. "It's not a method that's going to suit everybody."

But for women like Natural Cycles co-founder Dr Elina Berglund, who want an alternative to hormonal contraception, it's an option worth pursuing. Along with her husband and co-founder Dr Raoul Scherwitzl, Berglund created the algorithm used in the app for personal use, before deciding it was something she should share with the rest of the world.

"When it comes to contraception it's all about choice. It's not like one solution will fit all women," said Berglund.

"Our typical user is in a stable relationship a few years before wanting to have kids. At first she starts to use the app to prevent pregnancy, and when she's ready [to get pregnant] she switches to plan, and usually she gets pregnant quite quickly, because the app already knows her body and cycle."



To use the app, you need a monthly or yearly subscription, and a thermometer that you have to use to take your temperature each morning before you get out of bed.



The app then tells you if you're likely to be fertile or not that day. And if the app gives you a "red day" – meaning you could be fertile – you have to abstain from sex, or use another method of protection such as condoms.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The biggest harm to using this contraceptive method is getting pregnant. The article reminds readers that another risk to using this method of birth control is it does not protect against sexually transmitted diseases, as condoms do. Otherwise, there is only the inconvenience of daily logging of one’s temperature and entering menstrual cycle data.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A British study offers compelling -- though not clinching -- evidence that the humble aspirin tablet can prevent death from a variety of cancers, if you take the medicine long enough in middle age. Even a baby aspirin might be enough.

Don't start popping aspirin every morning to fight tumors without talking to your doctor, though.

Yes, scientists have already published strong evidence suggesting aspirin can cut bowel cancer and deaths. The painkiller's anti-inflammatory properties and effects in damping down precancerous polyps may be involved.

And the latest study, published in The Lancet, suggests aspirin could provide protection against a wide variety of tumors. They range from pancreatic cancer to the type of lung cancer that strikes nonsmokers.

For some of these cancers, the reduction in death was remarkable. Twenty years after people had started taking aspirin regularly (and kept it up for at least five years), their deaths from esophageal cancer were reduced by 60 percent compared to study subjects who got a placebo.

Deaths from adenomatous lung cancer were cut 30 percent, those from colorectal cancer 40 percent, and those from prostate cancer 10 percent.

Still, none of the big guns in cancer and prevention -- the National Cancer Institute, the American Cancer Society, or the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force -- are ready to advise healthy people to start taking aspirin to prevent cancer.

But the latest batch of evidence deserves a closer look. It encompasses eight earlier studies that compared cancer deaths among more than 25,000 people randomly assigned to get aspirin (of different doses) or placebo. And the researchers were able to gather more information about cancer deaths for up to 20 years after those studies ended about nearly 13,000 people.

For cancer prevention experts, the British study is provocative and significant. "This is definitely the first time that research has shown that long-term aspirin use can reduce the risk of deaths due to cancer," Dr. Asad Umar of the National Cancer Institute's division of cancer prevention tells Shots.

In fact, Umar says, no drug has been shown before now to prevent cancer deaths. "This is definitely hypothesis-generating for future studies," Umar says.

Massachusetts General Hospital's Dr. Andrew Chan, who studies the effect of aspirin on gastrointestinal cancers, says the new study will feed a growing sense among experts "that there is likely some potential anticancer effect of aspirin."

Dr. Peter Rothwell, an Oxford University neurologist who led the study, tells Shots that aspirin's effect on cancer is "quite a lot bigger" than its benefit in preventing heart attacks and strokes -- the reason millions of Americans already swallow a baby aspirin every day.

"So I think in the fullness of time, preventing cancer will be seen to be the main reason for taking aspirin in healthy individuals," Rothwell says.

He started taking a daily dose of aspirin a couple of years ago as the results of his study emerged. "It was looking as though there was something going on, and I thought it was a sufficiently large benefit to be worth doing something about," says the 46-year-old researcher.

Rothwell says the "sensible time" to start taking aspirin "would be before the risk of cancer starts to rise, at about 45." He says prophylactic aspirin is "worth thinking about" for people with a family history of early cancers.

But aspirin carries risks. The biggest is stomach bleeding, although it also raises the risk of brain hemorrhage. Daily aspirin doubles a person's gastrointestinal bleeding risk to about 2 in every 1,000 people a year. But Rothwell says this bleeding hazard is "drowned out" by the cancer benefit.

Prof. Peter Elwood of the University of Cardiff, who wasn't involved in the new study, agrees. "There's a small risk of any of us having a gastric bleed," Ellwood said at a Lancet press conference Monday. "But when you inspect the data…you find that the mortality from the bleed is not increased. In other words, aspirin seems to be increasing the less-serious bleeds," he said.

To be sure, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force's currently recommends against taking aspirin to prevent colorectal cancer, the type of cancer for which there is the largest body of scientific work. The benefits of daily low-dose aspirin can exceed the risks for many middle-aged and older people when it comes to preventing heart attacks and strokes, the task force says.

So for those already taking prophylactic aspirin for this reason, the possible anticancer effects are just icing on the cake. Other healthy people interested in taking aspirin to prevent cancer should consult their doctors, experts say, and possibly await further evidence.

A final word about dose: The new study didn't find any additional anticancer benefit for aspirin doses above 75 milligrams a day -- the British dose for a "baby" aspirin. In the United States, a baby aspirin weighs in at 81 milligrams. However, experts say more information is needed on the optimum dose for cancer prevention.

"There's a little controversy about whether a baby aspirin dose is enough," says Harvard's Chan. "We think that probably a standard adult aspirin dose of 325 milligrams is more likely to be effective."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This is one of the few stories to put a number to the potential harms. “But aspirin carries risks. The biggest is stomach bleeding, although it also raises the risk of brain hemorrhage. Daily aspirin doubles a person’s gastrointestinal bleeding risk to about 2 in every 1,000 people a year. But Rothwell says this bleeding hazard is “drowned out” by the cancer benefit.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — RESEARCH TRIANGLE PARK, NC— Major depressive disorder affects more than 32 million Americans, and their first stop for treatment is often their primary care provider. A recent evidence review of several alternatives to medication found that using cognitive behavioral therapy as the first treatment for depression can be equally effective as using a second generation antidepressant.

The research from the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center was published today in the British Medical Journal. The authors focused specifically on comparing second generation antidepressants, such as Wellbutrin, Lexapro and Prozac with cognitive behavioral therapy, which includes several in-person or phone sessions with a therapist to examine how actions and thoughts can impact depression. Second-generation antidepressants refers to newer antidepressants introduced primarily in the 1980s and 1990s.

"Major depressive disorder is a disabling and prevalent form of depression, experienced by more than 16 percent of U.S. adults during their lifetime," said Arlene Bierman, M.D., Director, Center for Evidence and Practice Improvement, at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which funded the study. "Most patients will be prescribed antidepressants. However, the evidence shows that cognitive behavioral therapy can be just as effective, providing important information for patients and their physicians to consider when choosing among available treatment options."

After conducting a full review of the scientific literature available, the researchers examined 11 randomized controlled trials with 1,511 patients that compared a second generation antidepressant with cognitive behavioral therapy. They found that symptom improvement and rate of remission were similar between the two options, whether used alone or in combination with each other.

"Primary care clinicians and their patients may not automatically consider alternatives when discussing treatment," said Halle Amick, research associate at the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center and lead author. "Our findings indicate that both options should be considered effective initial treatment strategies."

Side effects from antidepressants can include constipation, diarrhea and dizziness. Patients also sometimes express concerns about becoming addicted to medications and therefore prefer psychotherapy. However, psychotherapy can be time-consuming and may be substantially more expensive, depending on the patient's insurance benefits.

"Given comparable effectiveness, doctors need to discuss advantages and disadvantages of both treatment options with their patients. Such shared and informed decision making might enhance treatment adherence which is one of the main challenges of treating major depressive disorder," said Gerald Gartlehner, M.D., associate director of the RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center, who was the principal investigator of the evidence review, which was also published today by AHRQ.

A journal article describing all the review findings will be published in the Annals of Internal Medicine in January.

"Bringing psychotherapy into discussions of treatment may also enhance coordination of care between primary care and mental health care providers in addition to addressing the issue of patient-centered care," Amick said. "If primary care providers discuss psychotherapy with their patients as a valid treatment option, it may empower patients to voice their preferences and truly participate in medical decision-making and encourage them to adopt and adhere to effective treatment of their depression."

RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center is a collaboration between RTI and the five health professions schools and the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research at UNC. It is funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release mentions harms from both CBT and antidepressants. While promoting the advantages of CBT over medications, the release discusses some harms from antidepressants (“constipation, diarrhea and dizziness”) but didn’t touch on the more serious harms associated with SSRIs, particularly when going through withdrawal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Nick Collado, a 26-year-old insomniac and the founder of Lulla Pies, argued that the melatonin they contain, while synthetic, is more “natural” than the Ambien he used to take. “I realized there’s got to be more people like me who don’t want to take prescription drugs anymore, who want to take an alternative,” Mr. Collado said.

But Dr. David S. Seres, the director of medical nutrition at Columbia Medical Center, cautioned that consumers should consult their doctors before trying such products.

“The promoters of these are appealing to people who think it’s better to do things outside of the medical establishment,” he said, adding that “the desire to help people is an extremely strong motivator, but so is money.” He pointed to a section of the National Institutes of Health’s Web site that lists several drugs, including sedatives like clonazepam and birth control pills, whose efficacy might be altered by melatonin.

“A hangover effect has been reported” with large doses, said Anna Rouse Dulaney, a toxicologist with the Carolinas Poison Center. But she added, “I don’t want to go on the record saying this drug ‘can’ cause respiratory issues, that should be a ‘may.’ ”

Lazy Cakes appear harmless, even amusing, with swirly purple packaging; Kush Cakes have a tie-dye-printed wrapper. But they are not to be underestimated.

Of melatonin, Dr. Seres warned, “If you take it while you’re driving a car, you will find yourself in a ditch.”

Maybe. Dr. Alfred J. Lewy, a professor of psychiatry at Oregon Health and Science University who has studied melatonin, a neurohormone, estimated that only a third of the population is susceptible to its effects in a supplement.

And yet Tracy Evans, who owns a bar where musicians perform in Erie, Pa., that has sold hundreds of Lazy Cakes, said she instructs employees to tell partygoers, “I highly recommend you wait to where you’re going to be at the end of the night before eating.”

Why? “It knocks you out — in a good way, not a bad way,” said Ms. Evans, 34. “For me, it’s not to chill. For me, it’s to get a good night’s sleep.”

Yet the products, intended for adults only, are being marketed as a novel way to relax in a stressed-out, wired world. Labels on Lazy Cakes and Mary J’s brownies that were bought online urge users to “Take ½ brownie, two times a day.” With tiny type, the labels warn against operating heavy machinery or driving.

But some medical professionals are concerned that the chocolate taste might encourage indiscriminate gobbling.

“It’s a colossally bad idea to put melatonin in food,” Dr. Czeisler said. “It should not be permitted by the F.D.A.”

Technically, it is not. Stephanie Yao, a spokeswoman at the F.D.A., wrote in an e-mail that any item that uses melatonin “as an additive may be subject to regulatory action.”

That is why the makers of these new baked goods label them “Not for food use.” They want them to be considered dietary supplements, which do not need the F.D.A.’s premarket approval and are not required to be proved safe or effective.

“It sounds to me like they are trying to claim that the entire brownie is like a tablet, which is, of course, preposterous,” Dr. Czeisler said.

Tim Barham, the vice president of HBB, the maker of Lazy Cakes, said, “We look at the brownie as a supplement.”

News reports have classified Lazy Cakes as dietary supplements, but last month, Douglas Karas, an F.D.A. spokesman, said in an e-mail that the agency “has not made a determination on Lazy Cakes’ status as either a food or a dietary supplement.”

In January last year, the F.D.A. sent a warning letter to Peter Bianchi, the creator of Drank, a purple drink with 2 milligrams of melatonin in each can that went on the market in 2008, spawning several competitors.

The letter cited safety concerns about melatonin in food, specifically research indicating that melatonin reduced glucose tolerance for people with Type 1 diabetes and that some men using it had reported enlarged breasts. It also warned that women who are pregnant or trying to conceive should avoid melatonin “based on possible hormonal effects.” (Drank’s bottle now say it is a dietary supplement.)

Dr. Lewy dismissed the idea that harm might lurk in a melatonin-laced brownie. “It really doesn’t have any documented side effects except for making you sleepy at bedtime, which is good,” he said. That said, he would not advise eating Lazy Cakes, partly because he was not sure that their other purportedly sleep-inducing ingredients like valerian root work and partly because food delays rather than hastens the absorption of melatonin.

Also, Dr. Lewy said, “I don’t need the calories.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that dessert makers “are marketing their products as a harmless way to promote relaxation.”
While harms are not quantified, it’s clear from the story’s discussions about regulatory questions why that’s impossible to do right now. The harms mentioned are largely hypothetical in that there isn’t good evidence documenting these problems.
But the story does a good job in painting, with broad strokes, what might go wrong if one uses these products.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At issue are controversial spiral CT scans, where a rotating scanner views the lungs at various angles to spot growths when they are about half the size that a standard chest X-ray can detect. Some previous studies have suggested that the earlier detection helps, while other research concluded it may do more harm than good by spotting too many benign growths.

The massive National Lung Screening Trial enrolled 53,000 current or former smokers to try to settle the debate. It found 20 percent fewer deaths from lung cancer among those screened with spiral CTs than among those given chest X-rays, the NCI said Thursday, a difference significant enough that it ended the study early.

The actual number of deaths averted was fairly modest - 354 died in the spiral CT group over the eight-year study period compared with 442 deaths among those who got chest X-rays.

The NCI said it is not clear that all smokers should get the scans, which are not risk-free.

The best advice for avoiding lung cancer remains to quit smoking, said NCI Director Dr. Harold Varmus.

Still, "a validated approach that can reduce lung cancer mortality by even 20 percent has the potential to spare very significant numbers of people from the ravages of this disease," he said.

About 200,000 new lung cancers are diagnosed in the U.S. each year, and the disease kills about 159,000 people annually. It is most often diagnosed at advanced stages, and the average five-year survival rate is just 15 percent.

Many smokers already had sought out spiral CTs, even though the American Cancer Society hasn't recommended the test - citing a lack of clear evidence that they work - and most insurance doesn't cover the $300 to $400 cost.

The scans aren't risk-free: They frequently mistake scar tissue from an old infection or some other benign lump for cancer, leading to unnecessary biopsies or surgery that in turn can cause a collapsed lung, infection or other problems.

The NCI still is compiling rates of false alarms and other risks from the study.

Nor is it clear if the study results are applicable to all smokers. The trial enrolled people ages 55 to 74 who were or had been very heavy smokers and gave them one scan a year for three years.

While the spiral CTs emit less radiation than standard CT scans used to diagnose disease, researchers also will analyze whether the radiation exposures from three scans changes a smoker's lifetime risk of other radiation-related cancers. Letters being mailed to study participants advise them to discuss with their doctors whether they should have additional scans or not.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The story points out that such scans can produce false positive results, lead to further tests and treatments that don’t always benefit patients and have their own risks, and that CT scans expose people to radiation that may raise the risk of other types of cancer.  It explains that the NCI is “still compiling the rates of false alarms and other risks” but estimates could have been drawn from past research.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When doctors who treat pregnant women recently met to debate the best time to induce labor, they came up with a surprising answer: 39 weeks — three weeks earlier than currently recommended.

Their organization, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), has not changed its guidelines on late-term pregnancies. The guidelines say that doctors may consider elective induction at 41 weeks and should proceed with it at 42 weeks. But the question has some doctors reconsidering their assumptions about induction and has sparked criticism by women who contend there is already too much interference with uncomplicated pregnancies.

The question was presented in May at the yearly ACOG meeting in Washington: “Why not induce everyone at 39 weeks?” Two doctors had been asked to debate: Errol Norwitz, chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at Tufts University School of Medicine, and Charles Lockwood, dean of the Morsani College of Medicine at the University of South Florida.

[Here’s what’s being done to lower the maternal death rate]

“My original assumption when asked to participate in this debate,” Lockwood said, “was that Dr. Norwitz would take the ‘pro’ side since he has written about the risk of stillbirth after 38 weeks, and I would take the ‘con’ side since older literature suggested that C-section rates would likely be higher in the elective induction of labor at 39 weeks.”

Norwitz was a vigorous proponent. “There is no benefit to the fetus waiting beyond 39 weeks in well-dated pregnancies,” he told the doctors. And as Lockwood reviewed research, he found that he was more and more in agreement with that point of view.

“But Errol and I decided we would not tell each other which side we were taking in order to conduct independent assessments of the literature and report on our conclusions,” Lockwood said. “Beyond adding an element of suspense, this strategy allowed us to come to unbiased conclusions.”

After Lockwood found that recent studies suggest that elective inductions at 39 weeks decrease Caesarean delivery rates and might reduce the rate of infant and maternal complications, what was supposed to be a debate proceeded as a discussion in support of induction.

Before either doctor spoke, the audience in a crowded ballroom was polled: 63 percent opposed having most women deliver at 39 weeks, 20 percent supported it and 17 percent were unsure.

Norwitz argued against simply letting nature take its course.

“Nature is a terrible obstetrician,” he said, referring to the “continuum” of pregnancy and birth: the large number of zygotes that never implant, the 75 percent lost before 20 weeks, and stillbirth.

And, he said, the risk of stillbirth and neurological injuries rises after 39 weeks. “Stillbirth is a hugely underappreciated problem,” he said. “There are anywhere between 25,000 to 30,000 stillbirths a year in the United States.”

Lockwood and Norwitz’s support for induction at 39 weeks not only surprised many of the doctors at the session, it also upset those who believe less intervention is the safest route for mother and baby.

Labor may be induced by breaking the amniotic sac or by using hormones called prostaglandins or medication such as oxytocin, which can set off contractions. Labor can begin immediately or take a day or two; if it becomes too lengthy, Caesareans are performed.

Cristen Pascucci, an advocate for giving women more control over childbirth decisions, thinks the doctors’ remarks suggest that all babies need to be “rescued by birth,” creating an anti-woman mentality. “It’s as if women and their babies are fundamentally in opposition to each other and the female body is dangerous by design,” said Pascucci, a vice president of the advocacy group Improving Birth.

Pascucci, who is based in Lexington, Ky., travels the country speaking and consultingon issues related to birth rights. She said the induction recommendation “reinforces a century-old, pre-feminist American obstetric view that birth is pathological and the doctor’s job is to extract the fetus from the incubator — like in the ’50s, when every baby was pulled out of its shackled, unconscious mother by episiotomy.”

Consumer groups such as hers, she said, have been calling on ACOG to evolve toward care that is more centered on women. “It’s disheartening to see how hard that’s going to be for some physicians to do.”

Lockwood and Norwitz are aware that there is strong opposition to induction at 39 weeks. “I think a lot of this gets very emotional,” Norwitz said.

Although both doctors support induction at 39 weeks for all healthy pregnancies, Lockwood said that obstetricians shouldn’t routinely adopt the practice just yet. As with any change in standard medical care, extensive research is needed before it can be safely and widely adopted. Even so, Norwitz thinks that “it’s a very healthy discussion to have.”

Due dates are calculated 40 weeks from the first day of a woman’s normal menstrual period and, according to ACOG, full term is defined as a pregnancy that lasts between 39 weeks and 40 weeks and six days.

As he prepared for the debate, Lockwood created a micro-simulation model to predict the outcome of various care decisions, and results suggested lower rates of stillbirth, Caesarean delivery and maternal and neonatal complications for elective induction at 39 weeks. That prompted him to take the debate stage as a proponent of early induction.

Still, he was surprised by an audience poll at the end of the discussion: 70 percent now supported the idea that women deliver at 39 weeks, 21 percent remained unsure and only 9 percent were against the idea.

[I didn’t understand the pressure to have a C-section until I was about to deliver]

Traditional medical thinking assumes that early induction could lead to higher infection rates and the need for a Caesarean. But Norwitz said the evidence doesn’t support that. Rather, he said, the latest literature suggests that the drugs available to soften the cervix in preparation for contractions help to decrease the Caesarean risk, adding a small caveat: For a small number of first-time mothers with “unfavorable, long and hard cervixes” — as opposed to cervixes that are soft and receptive to induction — the risk of Caesarean is increased.

Rebecca Dekker, who has a doctorate in nursing and founded the website Evidence Based Birth, which aims to make research on childbirth more accessible to families and professionals, watched a live stream of the session and described the presentations as misleading and the research as flawed. She called it “concerning and rash” for doctors at the meeting to make “broad conclusions” that “could potentially affect at least 3 million women a year in the United States alone.”

Norwitz said that the presentations were evidence-based. “This is my interpretation of the published literature,” he said. “This is not a personal opinion based on belief or ideology.”

Lockwood said he finds push-back inevitable and part of the broader scientific process.

Dekker said there were flaws in the research showing that women who received elective induction had lower rates of Caesarean delivery. For the women who waited for labor to start on its own, about half ended up being induced for medical complications. “They still analyzed the data as if the women had spontaneous labor, so it sways the results of the studies,” she said.

Dekker isn’t disputing that there are about 25,000 stillbirths per year or that this is a concern. However, she said a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report shows about half of stillbirths occur between 20 and 27 weeks of pregnancy, and the other half at later points.

“It’s obvious that a blanket policy of 39-week inductions would not affect all of the stillbirths that happen before 39 weeks,” Dekker said, adding that the CDC report concludes, “Despite intensive investigations, for a substantial number of fetal deaths a specific cause of death cannot be determined.”

And, Dekker said, the public has the misconception that inductions are simple, noninvasive procedures. Pitocin, the most commonly used drug for induction, is classified as a high-alert medication that can increase the risk of patient harm if an error occurs. The drug can cause contractions that are too frequent, increasing the risk of decreased blood flow and oxygen to the baby, she said. Also, the drug can cause the placenta to detach from the uterine wall too early, and it can cause the uterine wall to tear.

For Dekker, the major benefit of spontaneous labor is avoiding the risks of a medical induction.

There are clear philosophical differences. One early morning in his hospital’s labor and delivery unit, Norwitz said, he spoke with a midwife colleague who compared labor to walking through a forest. “We midwives stand behind the patient, and if she gets off the path, we coax her back onto it,” she told him. “Obstetricians are in front of her, hacking through the forest.”

Esther Hausman, a certified nurse midwife in Concord, Mass., argues for restraint. “Since we don’t know exactly what triggers labor, why mess with it?”

Hausman suggested learning from countries such as Denmark or Sweden, where midwifery is the first line of care and where fetal and maternal mortality rates are lower than in the United States. In a 2014 CDC report, the U.S. infant mortality rate (6.1 per 1,000 births) put it in 26th place among a selection of developed countries. Finland and Japan had the lowest rates (2.3 per 1,000 births.)

Dekker said that the ACOG debate should have instead compared the medical model of care to midwife-led care. Midwives are less likely than doctors to induce a woman electively, she said, and studies have found they intervene less than doctors and have more-satisfied patients.

Beverly Siegal, a retired obstetrician-gynecologist in Newton, Mass., attended the debate and was among those who changed their thinking on induction.

“What changed [my opinion] at the end of the presentation was the really convincing argument that there is nothing gained for the baby to stay in beyond 39 weeks,” Siegal said. “I would personally recommend that any woman with a favorable cervix at 39 weeks be encouraged to get induced.”

Of course, Lockwood said, women should be heard.

“Finally, needless to say, it is expectant mothers that should have the final say as to whether to let nature take its course or undertake this potentially salutary but clearly artificial intervention,” he said.

“But obviously our messages — how you talk — does make a difference,” Norwitz said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story quotes several opponents of earlier induced labor, who refer to risks including “decreased blood flow and oxygen to the baby,” detached placenta and uterine wall tearing.
While these harms are outlined in only vague and general terms, without specific numbers or citations, this at least acknowledges harms, so we’ll rate as Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gut Check is a periodic look at health claims made by studies and by newsmakers. We ask: Should you believe this?

The Claim: If you drink coffee you’ll live forever! Well, almost: nurses and other health professionals who drink coffee (regular or decaf) had a lower risk of premature death than coffee abstainers.

The Backstory: . . . is enough to make STAT cross-eyed. Decades of studies have examined links between coffee drinking and health outcomes. Overall, the conclusions have been pro-coffee. Lots of research has linked coffee drinking to a lower risk of dying early, including this, this, and this. Other studies have found associations with lower risk of specific conditions, like this on cardiovascular disease (by many of the same authors as the new study), this on stroke, this on heart failure, and this on diabetes. Most research has found the greatest benefits with daily consumption of around three or four cups — usually 6 to 8 ounces, and without distinguishing regular from decaf. Fewer studies link coffee to a higher likelihood of dying prematurely, but this classic found a link between 6-plus cups a day and dying of cardiovascular disease, while this 2013 paper, on 43,727 people followed for a median of 17 years, concluded that adults under 55 who averaged more than 4 cups a week had a 56 percent (men) or 130 percent (women) higher risk of dying over the study period than non-coffee drinkers.

First Take: The new research, published in Circulation on Monday and funded by the National Institutes of Health, mined three large, ongoing epidemiological studies (74,890 women in the Nurses’ Health Study, 93,054 women in the Nurses’ Health Study 2, and 40,557 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study), following them for at least 20 years. Overall, the heaviest coffee-drinkers (more than five cups a day, regular or decaf) had a tiny 2 percent additional risk of dying compared with coffee abstainers. Those drinking 1.1 to 3 cups, and 3.1 to 5 cups, had slightly (9 percent and 7 percent) lower risks of dying.

Then the researchers, led by Dr. Frank Hu of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, did something clever: they ran the analysis on nonsmokers only. That eliminated the stereotypical coffee-swilling, cigarette-sucking types. Result: people drinking 1.1 to 3 cups a day had an 8 percent lower mortality risk, while the 3.1-5-cup crowd had a 15 percent lower mortality risk, mostly due to lower risk of deaths from cardiovascular disease, neurological diseases, type 2 diabetes, and suicide. Even the 5-plus’s had 12 percent lower mortality.

A co-author of the 2013 study linking heavy coffee drinking to higher mortality called the new one “very good,” especially since it controlled for the deadly effects of smoking, which the earlier one did not. It “supports the safety and efficacy of even high doses of coffee in non-smokers,” said Dr. Carl Lavie, a cardiologist at Ochsner Health System. But given the 2013 research suggesting “toxicity of high coffee doses” in some people, he said, “to me the most reasonable approach would be to keep coffee intake to two to three cups most days.”

Second Take: STAT knows better than to get between coffee lovers and their cup o’ joe, so if you want to take this study as permission to keep beating a path to your Keurig, we’re not going to slow you down.

This is another observational study, where researchers look for associations between people’s freely-chosen diet and other lifestyle decisions and subsequent health outcomes. Correlations do not establish causation: a link between Behavior A and Health Outcome B might or might not mean that A caused B. It might mean instead that a third factor — another behavior, socioeconomic status, even personality or genetics — might go hand in hand with Behavior A and be the true cause of Outcome B. Maybe people who drink coffee have some genetic, psychological, or behavioral trait (drinking fewer sugary beverages? eating less junk food?) that causes the observed benefit.

But surely the population in this study is so huge and socioeconomically similar (all health professionals) that correlation is more likely to reflect causation?

More likely, yes, but don’t count on it. This same Nurses Health Study, for instance, infamously found a correlation between post-menopausal hormone therapy and lower risk of cardiovascular disease and death, here and here. That turned out to be wrong. The definitive, randomized Women’s Health Initiative study showed that hormone therapy raised the risk of cardiovascular disease, contradicting the NHS and shocking nearly everyone.

Takeaway: Observational studies that associate coffee drinking with health benefits are strongly suggestive but not definitive. If you do want to infer causation from this latest study, know that drinking coffee reduced the absolute mortality risk from 6.8 deaths a year per 1,000 people to, at best, 5.8. That is, each year, coffee would be keeping 1 person in 1,000 from dying.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This STAT story explained the slightly increased risk of death in those participants in the current study who drank very high amounts of coffee,
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 15, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- The quit-smoking drug Chantix may also help problem drinkers cut their alcohol consumption, a small new study suggests.

Exactly how this drug curbs drinking is not fully understood, but its use may increase blood pressure, heart rate and feelings of sadness and nausea, thereby blunting the pleasurable effects of alcohol, the researchers said.

"Chantix might reduce alcohol consumption by reducing overall enjoyment of the alcohol drinking experience," said study author Emma Childs, a research associate at the University of Chicago.

"Chantix increased the unpleasant effects of alcohol, for example feeling drowsy and irritable, [and] participants also reported that they didn't like the alcohol effects as much," Childs said.

Approved to help smokers quit in 2006, Chantix (varenicline) has its share of potential side effects. In July 2009, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration mandated that Chantix carry a "black box" warning about the potential risks of depression and suicidal thoughts. Recently, the drug was linked to a small but significant risk of heart attack and stroke among people with pre-existing heart disease. Chantix costs roughly $3 per pill.

The results of the new study were released online in Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research prior to publication in the May print issue.

The study included 15 healthy participants who took part in six sessions. They received a 2-mg dose of Chantix and an inactive placebo, followed three hours later by a beverage containing either a placebo, a low dose of alcohol, or a high dose of alcohol.

Before and after the sessions, the researchers asked the participants about their mood, tested visual ability and measured physiological responses such as blood pressure and heart rate.

The participants found the Chantix-booze combination increased the unpleasant effects of alcohol and reduced the rewarding aspects of drinking.

Whether the drug might someday be approved to help problem drinkers cut back remains to be seen, said the researchers, who acknowledged that the study's small size is a limitation.

"We are not currently performing any studies with Chantix, although other groups are actively pursuing this line of research with a view to developing Chantix as an aid to people wanting to quit or cut down their drinking," Childs said.

Dr. Ihsan Salloum, professor of psychiatry and director of the alcohol and drug abuse treatment program at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, termed the study encouraging.

Noting that new ways of treating alcoholism are much needed, Salloum said that Chantix may have a niche among smokers with alcohol-dependence issues. "We need a lot more options in terms of medicines to help curb drinking," he said. "We have many options for depression and need more for alcoholism, considering it is one of the most common diseases around the world."

More research is needed, he noted, but "this medication may be helpful for people with a drinking problem who are also smokers."

The study was funded by the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse and the U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

Learn more about alcoholism and how it is treated at the U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does report that Chantix carries a “black box” warning and that there are concerns about depression, suicidal thoughts, and the risk of heart attacks and strokes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers report that nearly half of the cases of prostate cancer among the roughly 5,000 men in the study could be attributed to the five gene regions and a family history, with some men having one or two of the gene variants and others having all five and a family history.

Prostate cancer becomes more common as men age — autopsies of elderly men find that most had prostate cancer, whether they knew it or not. But the men in this study had an average age of about 65, when the disease is less common and more likely to kill.

William B. Isaacs, a professor of urology and oncology at Johns Hopkins University and an author of the new report, said that if research validates what has been found, men may want to get the new genetic test when they are young, 35, say. Those at high risk because of their genetics might then choose to start prostate-cancer screening earlier than the usual age of about 50, using a blood test that looks for proteins secreted by prostate tumors.

“I think that makes sense,” said Dr. Howard Sandler, a professor of radiation oncology at the University of Michigan and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

But others worry that more frequent testing could exacerbate what is already a major problem: most prostate cancers grow so slowly that they would have been harmless if left alone. But since doctors cannot tell which are dangerous, they treat nearly all that they find. And treatment has serious side effects, including, often, impotence and incontinence. Nonetheless, researchers say, the test is a harbinger of things to come.

“It’s the boutique medicine of the future,” said Dr. Peter C. Albertsen, a surgery professor and prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut. “We can know what diseases we will have to face in the rest of our lives.”

That worries him, as it does Dr. Edward P. Gelmann, deputy director of the Comprehensive Cancer Center at Columbia University. “Technology today enables us to find out a huge amount of information,” Dr. Gelmann said. “But how does the public deal with this information? How does it help them make decisions? And if they make a decision, does that lead to a day, a week, a month, of life saved?”

The study, by scientists at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, the Harvard School of Public Health, and Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, will appear in the Feb. 28 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine. It was released online on Wednesday, a journal spokeswoman said, because “it is a very active area of research with a lot of competition.”

Researchers long knew that the disease often runs in families. Though scientists spent years looking for genes, they found none that were reproducibly associated with a marked effect.

With new technology to scan the entire length of a person’s DNA, researchers tried a new approach. They began looking for small variations in tiny DNA regions that were associated with prostate cancer. That resulted in the discovery, by several groups of investigators in Iceland and the United States, of the gene variants, small alterations in gene sequences. Unlike traditional genetic links to disease, the variants are not mutations that destroy a gene’s function. In fact, no one knows what their effect is.

The next step was to ask whether those variants really could predict who had prostate cancer. So Dr. Jianfeng Xu, a professor of epidemiology and cancer biology at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and his colleagues studied a Swedish population of 2,893 men with prostate cancer and 1,781 men who did not have it. That led to their finding that each of the five variants independently predicted prostate cancer risk.

“Each confers a moderate risk,” Dr. Xu said, adding that the effect of having just one of the variants — a 10 or 20 percent increase in a man’s chance of having prostate cancer — was not enough to justify using a single variant for screening. But, he added, because each conferred an independent risk, the risks added up so that the more men had, the greater their risk. Then they found that family history of the cancer added an independent risk. “That was very, very surprising to us,” Dr. Xu said.

The next step, Dr. Isaacs said, is to look in other populations. “We think that can happen almost instantaneously,” he said, explaining how scientists have blood samples and family histories of thousands of men who were tested for prostate cancer.

But some said that if the test leads to more screening, it is not necessarily a good thing. There is already too much prostate-cancer screening, they say, resulting in too much treatment. “To me, it is a nightmare,” Dr. Albertsen said. “We are just feeding off of this cancer phobia.”

What is needed, and what the new test does not provide, is a way to decide which cancers are dangerous and which are not, Dr. Isaacs said. Still, he said the new test could help patients if it was used with caution. “We may be premature with this idea — everyone has a different way of thinking about this — but it should not take five years to know if we are on the right track. All this can happen very rapidly.”

“We have worked with enough families that have a positive family history to know that people are anxious to know their risk of prostate cancer,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did include mention of the harms that are associated with treatment of prostate cancer, namely impotence and incontinence, and that the treatment of prostate cancer may not be at all necessary because not all prostate cancers are life threatening.  As this is a very counter-intuitive thought (that not all cancers are deadly) it might have been emphasized more.
 It is critical that people be aware that while a large clinical trial (the PIVOT study) is underway, it is not yet known whether aggressive treatment of early prostate cancer is effective or whether it may cause more harm than good.  So while the effectiveness of prostate cancer screening remains controversial,it’s important to note that aggressive treatment of early prostate cancer remains controversial too.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The red berries of a weed found in the southern United States contain an compound that can disarm a deadly superbug, according to research published Friday.

Researchers from Emory University and the University of Iowa found that extracts from the Brazilian peppertree, which traditional healers in the Amazon have used for hundreds of years to treat skin and soft-tissue infections, have the power to stop methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections in mice. The study was published in Nature's Scientific Reports.

Cassandra Quave, an Emory University scientist who studies how indigenous people use plants in healing practices, said researchers pulled apart the chemical ingredients of the berries and tested them in mice infected with these superbug strains. The mice got injections containing the bacteria with or without the plant extracts. Those that didn't receive the extracts developed skin lesions. But in the other mice, the extracts -- a mixture of 27 chemicals -- prevented skin lesions from forming.

Instead of destroying the bacteria, the ingredients in the fruit weakened the bacteria by preventing them from producing the toxins it uses as weapons to damage tissue. The extracts from the fruit repress a gene that allows the bacterial cells to communicate with one another.

“It weakens the bacteria so the mouse’s own defenses work better” to clear the infection, she said. The plant extracts didn't harm the skin tissues or the normal, healthy bacteria found on skin.

The discovery may hold the potential for new ways to treat and prevent antimicrobial-resistant infections, an enormous global problem that was the focus of a rare high-level United Nations summit last fall.

MRSA has become a serious threat to human health; in 2011, it was responsible for more than 80,000 invasive infections and more than 11,000 deaths in the United States, according to federal statistics.

Antimicrobial resistance refers to infections that have evolved the ability to withstand drugs that ought to stop them. The medicines include antibiotics, which act on bacteria, as well as drugs to fight fungal, viral or parasitic infections. Fighting bacteria with drugs designed to kill them helps fuel the problem of antibiotic resistance if stronger bacteria can survive and evolve to become “superbugs.”

“But instead of always setting a bomb off to kill an infection, there are situations where using an anti-virulence method may be just as effective, while also helping to restore balance to the health of the patient,” said Quave.

Plants have been used repeatedly in traditional medicine over the centuries, and knowledge about their use is passed down from generation to generation, which points to their efficacy, she said.

“People don’t save that knowledge over centuries” if something doesn’t work, she said. “We’re trying to answer the question: Does this work against bacteria, and how does it work, and is it safe to use?”

The Brazilian peppertree, a shrubby tree native to South America, is an invasive species throughout the southern United States, particularly in Florida, where it’s sometimes called the Florida holly or broad-leaf peppertree, and is considered a noxious weed. The woody plant has long been a staple in Brazilian traditional medicine. Its leaves and bark are used to treat wounds, ulcers, burns and skin infections, Quave said.

Less is known about the plant’s fruit, which was used traditionally as topical poultices for infected wounds and ulcers.

From an ecological standpoint, Quave said, it makes sense that invasive weeds have a chemical advantage that may help protect them from diseases so they can spread more easily in a new environment.

But she said the average person shouldn’t try to use the weed to make their own medicine. “Not everything that is natural is safe,” she said.

Her lab at Emory is doing additional research to confirm the safest and most effective way of using the plant extract. Researchers would still need to conduct pre-clinical trials to test its medicinal benefits.

The superbug that doctors have been dreading just reached the U.S.

Scientists find new antibiotic in the human nose

More than 350 organizations write Trump to endorse current vaccines' safety
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that “the plant extracts didn’t harm the skin tissues or the normal, healthy bacteria found on skin.” It also wisely cautioned “the average person shouldn’t try to use the weed to make their own medicine.”
We’ll award a satisfactory grade but note that the disclaimer could have been stronger, saying that the injections were prepared under laboratory conditions and could not be prepared by just crushing the berries. We also don’t know how the extract might affect humans.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Once, "relaxation beverages" consisted of alcohol, chamomile tea and warm milk. Now, the field includes a slew of new drinks promising a better night's sleep using such ingredients as melatonin, valerian root and - think turkey - tryptophan.

They have apt names such as Unwind, iChill and Dream Water, and offer such flavors as Berry-Berry Tired, Snoozeberry and Lullaby Lemon. They're the inverse of energy drinks. Consumers can wake up with Red Bull and then wind down with Slow Cow.

But can consumers trust these fruity concoctions to give them their z's?

According to Steven M. Scharf, director of the Sleep Disorders Center at the University of Maryland in Baltimore, the answer is a resounding maybe.

"The issue is this: Some of them probably have some biologic effect, but they haven't been as well studied as you'd like," Scharf says. "Nobody's ever compared valerian root to [the prescription sleep aid] Ambien."

The chief ingredient in many of these beverages is melatonin, a hormone that induces sleepiness and helps coordinate the body's biological clock. It's typically released by the pineal gland around 10 p.m.; secretion stops around 4 or 5 a.m., helping to trigger the body to wake up, Scharf says.

The body produces about three-fourths of a milligram of melatonin a day. The manufacturer of the sleep aid Snooz'n says its 2.5-ounce "shots" contain five milligrams of melatonin; Unwind, a "relaxation blend," has three milligrams per 12-ounce can.

Oral doses of melatonin haven't worked much better at inducing sleep than a placebo in most studies, Scharf says, and a single, concentrated shot of the stuff doesn't exactly mimic the body's time-release system. However, a study published in January in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society found that a pre-bedtime cocktail of magnesium, zinc and a five-milligram dose of melatonin significantly improved sleep among a group of 43 elderly Italian insomniacs.

Jason Healy, the head of InterMark Brands, which markets Snooz'n, says he drinks his product on nights when he is stressed-out or when he is traveling internationally. The back of the Snooz'n bottle says the beverage will "combat stress, energy drinks and sleeplessness" and takes about 30 minutes to take effect. When it launches nationally in March, Snooz'n will be available in grocery and convenience stores and pharmacies, like most of these drinks.

"We attack [insomnia] from two angles," Healy says. "You've got to turn off all the stimulants and also get into a natural sleep cycle."

Melatonin is used for the latter, while ingredients such as valerian root and chamomile take care of the former, Healy says. Both of those herbs are associated with soporific effects, according to the Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Valerian root has properties that resemble the benzodiazepine class of medications (such as Valium and Xanax), but Scharf says he has no idea how they compare with standard sleeping pills because of the lack of comparative studies.

Containers of relaxation drinks look similar to those of energy drinks. Many mimic the diminutive shape of the 5-Hour Energy shot or the bright graphics and tall, narrow can of Rockstar or Monster. Flavors range from a pleasant, fruit-flavored soda to just shy of cough syrup.

Many relaxation beverages contain safety labels that warn consumers that they should neither drive or operate machinery after drinking them, nor mix them with alcohol. Some say they aren't intended for people younger than 18 or for pregnant or nursing women - a warning that the Food and Drug Administration has also made about melatonin.

In January 2010, the FDA sent a warning letter to the Innovative Beverage Group, which makes the relaxation beverage Drank, saying the melatonin it uses is an "unapproved food additive" and not "generally recognized as safe."

Drank is still being sold with melatonin in it. In a statement, Drank inventor Peter Bianchi says "the safety of Drank's consumers remains a top priority" and the company is working to modify the product's packaging and marketing "to reflect its classification as a dietary supplement."

The FDA regulates conventional beverages' ingredients and labeling claims more strictly than those of dietary supplements. Drank is still classified as a beverage.

The relaxation drink market is tiny compared with the energy drink market, says Garima Goel Lal, a senior analyst at the consumer research firm Mintel.

A Mintel survey found that 48 percent of all "functional beverage" users said they were looking for beverages to release stress.

A functional beverage - the term is used for sport, energy and relaxation drinks - is a nonalcoholic drink that claims to have health benefits. The number of nonalcoholic beverages making relaxation claims continues to rise; 40 new ones came on the market in 2010, according to Mintel. The field is too young to identify the leaders and the losers, Goel Lal says.

"They're trying to find a niche," she says.

Katherine Zeratsky, a registered dietitian at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., has blogged about relaxation drinks. She says that people with certain health conditions, such as high blood pressure, should consult their physician before downing a can of Unwind or any of the other sleep beverages.

"A person can just go to the convenience store and purchase this," Zeratsky says. "There's this perception that it's safe and, depending on the person, it might not be a good choice."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story raises the general issue of safety, suggests that pregnant/nursing women and children should not take these drinks, and warns against mixing these drinks with alcohol. It also suggests that people with certain health conditions check with their doctor before taking any of these drinks. We think that’s thorough enough.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Is coffee associated with the risk of death from all causes? There have been two meta-analyses published within the last year or so. The first reviewed 20 studies, including almost a million people, and the second included 17 studies containing more than a million people. Both found that drinking coffee was associated with a significantly reduced chance of death. I can’t think of any other product that has this much positive epidemiologic evidence going for it.

I grant you that pretty much none of the research I’m citing above contains randomized controlled trials. It’s important to remember that we usually conduct those trials to see if what we are observing in epidemiologic studies holds up. Most of us aren’t drinking coffee because we think it will protect us, though. Most of us are worrying that it might be hurting us. There’s almost no evidence for that at all.

If any other modifiable risk factor had these kind of positive associations across the board, the media would be all over it. We’d be pushing it on everyone. Whole interventions would be built up around it. For far too long, though, coffee has been considered a vice, not something that might be healthy.

That may change soon. The newest scientific report for the U.S.D.A. nutritional guidelines, which I’ve discussed before, says that coffee is not only O.K. — it agrees that it might be good for you. This was the first time the dietary guideline advisory committee reviewed the effects of coffee on health.

There’s always a danger in going too far in the other direction. I’m not suggesting that we start serving coffee to little kids. Caffeine still has a number of effects parents might want to avoid for their children. Some people don’t like the way caffeine can make them jittery. Guidelines also suggest that pregnant women not drink more than two cups a day.

I’m also not suggesting that people start drinking coffee by the gallon. Too much of anything can be bad. Finally, while the coffee may be healthy, that’s not necessarily true of the added sugar and fat that many people put into coffee-based beverages.

But it’s way past time that we stopped viewing coffee as something we all need to cut back on. It’s a completely reasonable addition to a healthy diet, with more potential benefits seen in research than almost any other beverage we’re consuming. It’s time we started treating it as such.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story warns that adding sugar and fat to coffee may negate any potential health benefits. The story also mentions “jitteriness” and the fact pregnant women should limit consumption, but doesn’t describe the potential harms of excess caffeine in pregnancy that have been well described in the literature. And there are a number of studies suggesting that caffeine seems to trigger symptoms in people with anxiety disorders. More generally, what about the research on the ill effects of coffee on insomnia, or urinary incontinence. or dependence?  What about withdrawal headaches and the problems of “stopping” coffee drinking?  We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here as we usually do on borderline calls, but the exploration of harms was not nearly as thorough as the coverage of benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fading, close-up vision is one of the more vexing and ubiquitous consequences of growing older. For Cheri Ekstadt of Lakeville, Minnesota, it’s meant buying nine pairs of reading glasses, which she places wherever she might come across something with fine print.

“I usually have three upstairs and three downstairs and some in my purse,” says Ekstadt, 50.

Without the glasses, she can’t read anything.

“Looking at the computer— whether it be for work, for Facebook— any labels when I’m out shopping, reading the newspaper, I can’t do that,” she says.

Like millions of other Americans over age 35, Ekstadt has presbyopia, aging eyes. Some notice it more than others, but it happens to everyone when the lenses in the eyes lose their flexibility.

“It’s just a part of getting older,” says Dr. Ralph Chu, an ophthalmologist in private practice in Bloomington, Minnesota.

But that may be changing. In a little over a year, the FDA approved two new devices to help with age-related vision loss. The most recent to receive approval, the “Raindrop”, is made mostly from water and works by reshaping the cornea helping the eye to focus better on close-up objects.

Both of the new implants, Raindrop and KAMRA, go into only one eye. The other eye will be for seeing distance, explains Dr. D. Rex Hamilton, director of the Laser Refractive Center at the Stein Eye Institute at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a clinical professor of ophthalmology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA.

“So the other eye needs to have good distance vision without glasses,” Hamilton says, adding that sometimes people have laser surgery to improve the distance vision in the eye that won’t be getting an implant to improve vision close-up.

Also, Hamilton notes, the implants aren’t a “be all end all. They may work quite well for a period of time but a person's lenses will continue to change with age and, ultimately, the patient may need cataract surgery.

A cataract procedure replaces the lens, improving both near and far vision, and lasts for the rest of the patient’s life. About half of Americans have cataracts or cataract surgery by age 80, according to the National Eye Institute.

Still, for those who don’t want to wait till their lenses cloud over, “this is a life-changing procedure,” Chu says. “This is more than just about convenience. It’s functioning in your day-to-day life.”

Ekstadt has the privilege of being the first person in the nation to get the Raindrop outside of a clinical trial.

The procedure to implant the device into Ekstadt’s cornea takes less than 5 minutes: The doctor uses a laser to create a tiny pocket in her cornea and two minutes later the Raindrop is inserted and the procedure is finished.

Just 15 minutes after the surgery Ekstadt can already see better and can make out a line in the eye chart that she couldn’t decipher before.

And now she’s able to read without the aid of glasses.

That doesn’t mean she won’t need more attention from her doctor, says Hamilton. “There’s a healing process after the inlay is put in that requires eye drops be put in on a daily basis for around three months," says Hamilton. "You need to be monitored by your surgeon during that period of time.”

One downside: the implants aren’t covered by insurance or Medicare, says Hamilton, adding “the cost is around $4,000 to $5,000.”

There are other risks with the procedure, but they are rare, according to clinical trials.

“Any time you do surgery there is a risk of infection—about one in 2,000,” Hamilton says. “And an infection in the cornea can cause scarring that can affect your vision.”

Hamilton suggests that people wanting to have an implant find an experienced eye surgeon, one who does both cataract surgery and refractive surgery, which includes LASIK.

Lauren Dunn is a medical producer for NBC News; Linda Carroll is a contributor for NBCNews.com
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does include an important sentence about how all surgery has risks. Here is that sentence.
“Any time you do surgery there is a risk of infection—about one in 2,000,” Hamilton says. “And an infection in the cornea can cause scarring that can affect your vision.”
But we wish the story had included the entire context for a patient considering one of two implants mentioned: What were the measured rates of side effects in the research? The story mentions that because the implants only correct vision for near objects in one eye, the other eye sometimes has to be operated on to give it perfect distance vision. We also wanted to know more about the impact of having two eyes with grossly different visual function.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Swedish scientists report that they've successfully implanted "biosynthetic" corneas in 10 patients, potentially paving the way for more accessible treatment for those with cornea-related vision problems.

"The patients' own cells and nerves grew back, and there was an overall improvement in vision," said study co-author May Griffith.

Currently, some cornea patients get transplanted corneas from donors who have died. "Human donor corneas work very well," Griffith said. "However, there is a shortage of good quality corneas that can be used for transplantation."

The shortage means trouble for many of those whose corneas -- the clear surface at the front of the eye -- have been injured or damaged by illness. An estimated 5 million people in the world have an eye disease called trachoma that affects the cornea, and another 1.5 million to 2 million are thought to have developed cornea-related blindness through other diseases or trauma.

For more than a century, doctors have considered transplantation of corneal tissue from deceased donors to be the best treatment, the study authors wrote. Artificial corneas are another option, but they're difficult to implant into the eye and can cause side effects, the researchers said.

In the new study, researchers tested corneal implants that are "biosynthetic," meaning they're created with the help of living tissues. In this case, the corneas are produced with the help of human collagen -- a kind of protein -- that's grown in yeast. The mock corneas were then placed into the eyes of 10 patients after the diseased corneas were removed.

"We were pleasantly surprised that in six patients, vision improved from about 20/400 to 20/100, meaning that these patients could see objects four times farther away than before the operation," said Griffith, director of the Integrative Regenerative Medicine Center at Linkoping University in Sweden.

The researchers went one step further and gave contact lenses to the patients. With the lenses in place, they all had improved vision, Griffith said.

Why didn't they all get better vision immediately without the contact lenses? "We believe that sutures used in this study resulted in roughness on the surface," Griffith said. "The contact lenses compensated for the surface roughness, resulting in improved vision. We will use less disruptive sutures in our next clinical study, and this should correct this problem."

As for side effects, Griffith said the patients didn't report any pain or discomfort, and there were no signs that their bodies tried to reject the corneas, a risk that people face when they get transplanted organs.

As for cost, Griffith said the biosynthetic corneas "in theory" should be cheaper than donated corneas. Griffith said a German study recently found that donated corneas cost about $2,500.

The next step in research, Griffith said, is to create a "new generation" of cornea implants and test them on a wider variety of patients.

The study appears in the Aug. 25 issue of Science Translational Medicine.

Dr. Mark J. Mannis, chair of the Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science at the University of California, Davis Eye Center, said the findings in the study appear to be valid. "This is true cutting-edge work and brings an exciting new option to the repertoire of corneal transplant surgeons," he said.

For more about corneal transplants, try the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that there were no adverse side effects. It should have been clear that the patients were followed for two years.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Updated | Almost sixty years since the FDA approved the pill for birth control in women, a male version may finally be on the horizon. Researchers have developed a prototype male pill that appears to be safe in a month-long trial.

More attractive to many men than a long-acting injection or topical gel—both of which are in development—the prototype pill offers a “major step forward” in male contraception, Stephanie Page, a professor at the University of Washington in Seattle and senior investigator on the study, said in a statement.

Read more: Male birth control pill could be made from heart-stopping poison in ancient African arrows

The once-daily prototype pill suppressed certain hormones to the low levels you'd expect to see with effective longer-term contraceptives, results from an ENDO 2018, the Endocrine Society’s annual meeting in Chicago, abstract show.

The prototype pill—dimethandrolone undecanoate (DMAU)—is somewhat similar to the combined female pill, which contains estrogen and a steroid hormone. Rather than estrogen, DMAU uses a male hormone like testosterone.

Currently available forms of testosterone can exit the body too quickly for use in a once-daily pill. The “undecanoate” in DMAU, however, is a long-chain fatty acid that can slow the drug’s journey out of the body, Page said.

Read more: Side effects are not what's holding back the male contraceptive pill

Eighty-three men took various doses of DMAU or a placebo for a month. Researchers analyzed the men’s hormones and cholesterol with blood tests at the start and end of the study. They found testosterone and two hormones needed for the production of sperm were notably suppressed in men who took the highest dose of DMAU.

While some subjects on all doses experienced mild weight gain and decreases in so-called "good" HDL cholesterol, DMAU appeared safe. All participants passed safety tests including liver and kidney health checks.

“Despite having low levels of circulating testosterone, very few subjects reported symptoms consistent with testosterone deficiency or excess,” Page said. There were no significant changes in mood or sexual function, but a minority of participants did experience decreased libido during the study.

Page has high hopes for the results, calling them “unprecedented in the development of a prototype male pill.” Longer-term studies are the next step toward a once-daily male contraceptive pill, she said.

The study was funded by the National Institutes for Health.

This article has been updated to include more information on DMAU.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes the range of side effects found among study participants, though some of the characterizations appear to lack context. For example, the story mentions that some subjects experienced “mild weight gain.” Based on information in the study abstract, the mean weight gain was 1.5 to 3.9 kilograms. Given that 3.9 kilograms is 8.5 pounds, that’s not inconsiderable. i.e., many men may balk at the idea of gaining more than eight pounds in a month. It’s also not clear what sort of weight we’re talking about. Muscle? Fat? Water retention? This may be particularly relevant (and worth articulating clearly) for a medical intervention aimed specifically at sexually active adults.
By the same token, the story notes that “a minority of participants did experience decreased libido during the study.” According to the study abstract, eight of the study participants who received the drug experienced decreased libido. Given that only 83 people completed the study, and that some of those study participants received a placebo, that means that more than 10 percent of men who received the drug experienced decreased libido.
Again, this seems particularly relevant for a drug aimed solely at people who are planning to have sex. In short, the story did not overlook any of the potential harms discussed in the abstract, but could have done a better job of placing those potential harms in relevant context. How appealing is a birth control pill for men if it makes more than 10 percent of them less interested in sex in the first place?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PROVIDENCE, R.I. [Brown University] -- New results from a clinical trial involving more than 900 military veterans at high risk for keratinocyte carcinoma skin cancer provides evidence that using the generic skin cream fluorouacil 5 percent for two to four weeks may reduce the risk of a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) needing surgery by 75 percent within a year.

The finding that less than one month's use of fluorouacil 5% (5-FU) appeared to prevent cancer for up to a year is encouraging, said lead author Dr. Martin A. Weinstock, a professor of dermatology in the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University and chief of dermatology at the Providence Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

The dose is the same as dermatologists currently employ to treat actinic keratosis. In a 2015 study, Weinstock and co-authors showed the up to four-week regimen of 5-FU had a multi-year preventive benefit in reducing the number of actinic keratosis (AK) and the need for treatment. Earlier this year, they also showed that the medicine prevents new AKs from emerging for two to three years.

Meanwhile, current means for preventing new carcinomas in high-risk patients -- sunscreen or oral medications -- cease to work as soon as they are no longer used. But in the new study, 5-FU appeared to provide prolonged protection after discontinuation and could be combined with sunscreen, Weinstock said.

In the absence of such a long-lasting prevention option, he said, the typical approach to caring for patients with a history of prior carcinomas is to monitor for the next cancer and then remove it surgically -- an effective but imposing strategy often called "wait and cut."

"People don't appreciate having stuff cut on their face a lot," said Weinstock, who led the trial funded by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and conducted at a dozen V.A. hospitals around the country. "They do it if there is a cancer there, but we want to take a proactive approach where we can give them something to reduce their risk of getting new cancers."

The new results are published in JAMA Dermatology.

Between 2009 and 2013, the Veterans Affairs Keratinocyte Carcinoma Chemoprevention Trial randomly assigned 932 veterans who each had at least two prior basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) or SCCs to either receive the 5-FU cream or a cream just like it but without the active ingredient as an experimental control. All of the veterans were instructed to apply their cream twice a day to their face and ears for up to four weeks. They also received a 30 SPF sunscreen and received education about skin cancer, sunscreen and sun safety.

The two groups were both almost exclusively white and male, and they averaged 71 years of age. The experimental and control groups were very similar along all other measured characteristics, including their self- reported degree of prior sun exposure and sunburn. Veterans typically have spent a large amount of time in the sun during their years of service.

Both groups went to their V.A. center twice a year for two to four years for follow-up exams with a dermatologist. Neither the veterans nor the examining dermatologists knew who received 5-FU and who received the placebo.

After the first year, 20 of the 464 veterans in the control group developed a squamous cell carcinoma that required surgery, but only five of the 468 veterans who got 5-FU did, a statistically significant 75 percent reduction in the risk, according to the study. For the subsequent three years, there was no longer a significant difference between the two groups in the number of patients who required surgical treatment for an SCC.

For BCCs, there was an 11 percent reduced risk after the first year among the group that received 5-FU, but that difference was not statistically significant. In the second year, BCC cases requiring surgery rose in the 5-FU group, but in years three and four, and by the end of the study, there was no significant overall difference in risk of developing a BCC requiring surgical treatment. After four years, 298 of all study the participants had developed at least one BCC, and 108 had developed at least one SCC.

The study did show a significant decrease in the risk of needing Mohs surgery to treat a BCC in the first year. Mohs surgery is more effective but also more elaborate and expensive than a conventional procedure, Weinstock said. In the study's first year, 36 BCCs were treated with Mohs surgery in 27 participants in the control group, but only 17 BCCs were treated with the procedure among 14 patients in the 5-FU group.

"This suggests that using the 5-FU can reduce the resources needed to treat these carcinomas," Weinstock said.

The cream does have common side effects including reddened, more sensitive and often crusty skin, effects that resolve when the application of the cream stops, Weinstock acknowledged. After the study's first six months, 21 percent of the 5-FU group rated the side effects as "severe," and 40 percent rated them as "moderate."

But after six months and again at the end of the four-year trial, 87 percent of participants in the 5-FU group said they'd be willing to repeat the treatment if it proved effective in reducing skin cancer.

In his clinical work, Weinstock said that for particularly high-risk patients, he has recommended 5-FU treatment. Based on the study results, it could be that patients need to renew their regimen with the cream every year.

"The most remarkable thing about this study is that now we have something to use that doesn't lose its effectiveness when you stop using it," Weinstock said. "But this is the first study of its type. I'm hopeful there will be other studies that show other sorts of regimens that last longer and do a better job over time as science progresses. This is an important first step."

He and colleagues are planning further studies, including one to determine the cost-effectiveness of 5-FU treatment.

In addition to Weinstock, the new study has many authors from the VAKCC trial including at each of the study's 12 sites: Boston; Bay Pines, Fla.; Chicago, Ill.; Palo Alto, Calif.; Atlanta; Loma Linda Calif.; Minneapolis; Nashville; Denver; Durham, N.C.; Philadelphia; and Miami.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release describes harms in the following paragraph:
The cream does have common side effects including reddened, more sensitive and often crusty skin, effects that resolve when the application of the cream stops, Weinstock acknowledged. After the study’s first six months, 21 percent of the 5-FU group rated the side effects as “severe,” and 40 percent rated them as “moderate.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Hochman presented the results yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart Association in Chicago. The study was also published online yesterday by The New England Journal of Medicine and will appear in the Dec. 7 issue.

Her report is the latest warning from researchers who suspect that stents are being overused and may even be causing heart attacks and deaths. Manufacturers sell $6 billion in stents a year, and hospitals charge $10,000 to $15,000 per patient to implant them.

The devices, which came into widespread use in the 1990s, are made of either bare metal or metal coated with a drug meant to help keep the artery from closing again. Recent studies have found that drug-coated stents can increase the risk of blood clots, even years after they are implanted.

Use of the drug-coated stents has fallen since last spring, but they still account for more than 80 percent of stents implanted in the United States.

Stents have been increasingly used in people with clogged arteries who are not having heart attacks, but some studies suggest that those patients would be better off taking drugs to reduce cholesterol, inflammation and clotting. The reasoning is that artery disease tends to be systemic and extensive, but stents can treat it only in tiny spots.

A million Americans a year have heart attacks, and half of them die, according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. A common symptom is severe pain in the chest, left arm, jaw or back, but about a third of patients do not have chest pain. Symptoms may also include feeling faint, sweaty, short of breath or nauseated and having a sensation that the heart is pounding.

Clots are often the cause of heart attacks, and health authorities urge people with symptoms to go to the hospital immediately so that doctors can use balloons and stents, or clot-dissolving drugs, to try to prevent heart damage. But some patients do not realize what is happening, or do not want to believe it.

About a million angioplasties a year are performed in the United States, including those in heart attack victims and those in people with blocked arteries who have not had heart attacks. The study did not address the use of angioplasty and stents in people who have not had heart attacks.

Dr. Hochman emphasized that angioplasty was still the best treatment for many heart attack patients who go to the hospital early, within 12 hours of when the attack began. The people who generally do best are those who arrive at the hospital and have angioplasty within 90 minutes of the heart attack.

Opening a clogged artery in the early stages of a heart attack — “early angioplasty” — can restore blood flow and reduce damage to the heart muscle. It can sometimes save the muscle after 12 hours, but then doctors decide case by case whether it is worthwhile. About a third of heart attack patients show up after 12 hours.

After a few days have passed, though, there is little or no chance of preventing heart damage. But many doctors open the artery anyway, thinking it may still have long-term benefits and prolong the patients’ lives. In that situation, the procedure is called late angioplasty. It can be helpful in people who are still suffering from chest pain or have certain other complications from the heart attack.

But what about people who see a doctor more than a day later and are medically stable and free of chest pain? The new study tried to determine if late angioplasty could help them. Although angioplasty is not open surgery, it is an invasive procedure with risks, and the researchers wanted to know if there was any reason to put these patients through it when they seemed to be on the road to recovery. The study showed there was no need for the procedure.

The findings may come as a rude surprise to many cardiologists, who have come to believe that opening a blocked artery, even days or weeks after a heart attack, is bound to be good for patients.

Even Dr. Hochman was surprised by the results. She said she and her colleagues expected to find that angioplasty would reduce the risks of heart failure, subsequent heart attacks and death. But their theory failed the test.

“This is why we have clinical trials,” she said. She added that cardiologists were such strong believers in angioplasty that some major medical centers in the United States and Europe had refused to participate in her study, saying it would be unethical to let some patients go without the procedure for a study.

The 2,166 patients in the study had all suffered heart attacks 3 to 28 days before, caused by a completely blocked coronary artery. The median time since the heart attack was eight days. They were in stable condition and free of chest pain, and were picked at random to receive either heart medicines only or balloon treatment and stents with heart medicines. Most got plain metal stents, but about 8 percent got drug-coated ones. The researchers tracked their health for an average of three years.

There were no differences between the groups. They had the same rates of heart attack, death and heart failure. If anything, those who had angioplasty seemed to fare a bit worse than those who did not, but the differences were not statistically significant and might have been because of chance, Dr. Hochman said.

An expert not involved in the research, Dr. Steven E. Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic and president of the American College of Cardiology, said the study was independent and well conducted.

“Having an artery open ought to be good for you,” Dr. Nissen said. “Why not open it late? Like a lot of things in medicine, however, when you actually test it in an organized way, in a randomized, controlled trial, you find out it doesn’t work.”

He added, “It will change what I do.”

In an editorial accompanying the study in the journal, two other cardiologists say that late angioplasty may still be worthwhile for some patients. The ones who might benefit, they say, are a small minority — perhaps 10 to 15 percent — who cannot take the class of heart medicines known as beta blockers, which have been proved to increase survival after a heart attack.

A spokesman for Boston Scientific, the leading stent maker in the United States, said Dr. Hochman’s study would not have much impact because the findings applied to only a small subgroup of patients. But the company’s stock price dropped sharply yesterday morning when news of Dr. Hochman’s study first hit the news. It recovered by the end of the day, however, as analysts said the findings were likely to have little effect on stent use. By late afternoon, the rally had wiped out all the morning losses. Boston Scientific ended trading at $15.94, up 8 cents.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The harms associated with the use of drug coated stents were presented in this story.  The reader needed to infer that a harm associated with stents was the propensity of the artery to "close again".  Ideally, a story should mention both the frequency and severity of adverse effects.  But since the focus of this story was on a study showing that the rates of heart attack and death were comparable for different approaches  ("either heart medicines only or balloon treatment and stents with heart medicines"), we consider this as satisfactory. 
 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A large waistline more than doubles the risk that people in their 40s will develop precancerous cells in the colon, according to Korean researchers.

The chances of finding abnormal cells during a screening test were just as good in younger men with too much belly fat as in slimmer men over 50.

As a result, the researchers recommend lowering the age of colon cancer screening from 50 years to 45 in men with weight problems.

But US experts say it’s too soon to change the current recommendations.

“The idea that you’re tailoring screening to age and some combination of risk factors is entirely reasonable,” said Robert Smith, the director of cancer screening at the American Cancer Society. “But attempts to draw those conclusions now is a bit premature, because most colorectal polyps don’t become cancers.”

The Korean researchers, at Konkuk University in Seoul, examined more than 1,700 men and women, aged 40 to 59, who had no signs of colon cancer and no family history for the disease.

As part of their employer-provided health benefits, each participant in the study underwent screening colonoscopy at Konkuk University, which also sponsored the research.

One in 40 of those younger than 50 years had late-stage polyps, but no one actually had colon cancer. By contrast, two of those over 50 did, and late-stage polyps were almost twice as common in this age group.

To find a late-stage polyp, which may or may not turn into cancer, the researchers calculated they would have to test 23 of the people who were in their 50s.

That number was the same in younger people who had large waistlines, and even lower in those with metabolic syndrome, a combination of risk factors including belly fat, high blood pressure and high blood sugar.

“It may be reasonable to offer colonoscopic screening to these individuals,” Dr. Sung Noh Hong and colleagues write in the journal Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.

One gastroenterologist said the results were “important” but should not change practice.

“This paper substantiates what we suspected, that people who are obese have higher risk of colon cancer,” Dr. John Allen, a colon cancer expert and a community practice counselor with the American Gastroenterological Association, told Reuters Health.

Allen, of Minnesota Gastroenterology PA, said this risk factor might be taken into consideration when deciding when to screen, but that so far more studies were needed before recommending colonoscopy at younger ages.

During colonoscopy, the doctor inserts a slim, flexible tube into the rectum. A camera at the tip shows the inside of the gut, so that unusual cell clumps can be found and removed.

At this point, colon cancer screening is only recommended by the American Cancer Society and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force in people under 50 if a first-degree relative developed cancer at a young age.

In younger people, it is unclear that the benefits of screening offset the risks. During widely used colonoscopy, for instance, bleeding or perforation of the colon may happen in rare cases.

“You want to make sure that the advantages are going to outweigh the harms,” said the American Cancer Society’s Smith.

Colonoscopy, used in millions of Americans every year, is just one of many methods to detect abnormalities. There are cheaper methods such as testing stool for blood, Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, of the University of Missouri in Columbia, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre, a member of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally appointed expert panel, said the chances that a polyp turns into cancer is currently a matter of debate. As a result, he said, it is hard to know whether removing polyps in younger people would in turn lower their risk of getting cancer.

“If we back screening down to age 45, does that affect mortality?” he said. “From a task force perspective, this article alone would not prompt us to look at the screening guidelines.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions potential harms of colonoscopy, such as bleeding and perforation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The cancer drug that former president Jimmy Carter says made his melanoma seemingly disappear has helped about 40 percent of similar patients survive for as long as three years, oncologists said Wednesday.

The drug, called Keytruda, takes a new approach to treating cancer by stopping tumor cells from cloaking themselves against the normal, healthy immune system response.

New data about to be released to a meeting of cancer specialists shows that 40 percent of the patients who have been taking the drug are still alive three years later. That compares to about 5 percent of patients given the standard therapy, interleukin, the American Society for Clinical Oncology (ASCO) says.

That means 60 percent of patients are not living that long — but it’s still far more than the usual 11-month survival with advanced melanoma.

“It is definitely a huge benefit over what we have seen in the past,” said ASCO president Dr. Julie Vose, a specialist in blood cancers at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.

Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer. It will be diagnosed in more than 76,000 Americans this year, according to the American Cancer Society, and it will kill 10,000.

Rates are rising, in part because tanning became fashionable. Melanoma is easy to cure when caught early, but it is often hard to tell if a mole or freckle has turned cancerous. Carter, for example, was only diagnosed once the tumors had spread to his brain, last fall.

That’s Stage IV cancer and it’s almost always deadly at that stage. But Carter has remained well enough to continue teaching his weekly Sunday school classes and said this past Sunday he’d just traveled to London.

He says there’s no trace of his cancer now.

“In the past, patients with this type of melanoma — he has metastases to the brain — you don’t even see responses to therapy,” Vose told NBC News. “This is something really different than what we have seen in the past.”

Other people are having similar experiences.

For the trial, Caroline Robert of Gustave Roussy and Paris-Sud University in France and colleagues treated 655 patients with advanced melanoma.

"These are patients whose disease cannot be surgically removed, cannot be cured by surgery and usually the majority of these patients have disease that involved vital organs," said Dr. Stephen Hodi, a melanoma specialist at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute who worked on the study.

Seventy-five percent of them had already been given other cancer treatments, including Yervoy, known generically as ipilimumab.

On average, the patients lived two years and 40 percent of them are still alive three years later. About 15 percent of these patients have what’s called a complete remission, meaning there is no trace of their tumors. That doesn’t mean a cure — it’s too soon to say that — but it does mean months or years of cancer-free life that they otherwise could not have hoped for.

And 61 of the patients, or 9 percent, have stopped taking the drug after their tumors went away. Virtually all of them are still in remission.

“This is huge in the melanoma community,” said Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.

“It's difficult to know at what point you call it a cure. For the patient, though, it means they are cancer-free and for some of those patients, it is likely that their cancer never will come back,” Turnham told NBC News.

“When this study was started the average life expectancy of someone with advanced melanoma was 11 months and now we're seeing that a large percentage of people are living at least three years.”

Keytruda — known generically as pembrolizumab — targets the activity of genes called PD-1 (anti-programmed-death-receptor-1) and PD-L1. The interaction between the two genes lets some tumors escape detection and destruction by immune system cells.

PD-1 stops immune cells from attacking normal healthy cells by mistake. Tumor cells make PD-L1 turn on PD-1 when immune cells approach. Keytruda, an engineered immune protein called a monoclonal antibody, disrupts this signal and lets the immune cells attack the tumor cell.

The drug works far better in patients whose tumors express more PD-1, meaning they have a lot of PD-1 activity, so the drug will optimally be used jointly with a test for PD-1. There are side-effects, including fatigue, itchiness and rash. It was bad enough for 8 percent of patients that they stopped taking it.

The Food and Drug Administration gave Keytruda accelerated approval for melanoma in 2014. It's got breakthrough therapy designation for Hodgkin's lymphoma and colon cancer and got accelerated approval for lung cancer.

“In a matter of a few years, these therapies have truly transformed the outlook for patients with melanoma and many other hard-to-treat cancers,” said Dr. Don Dizon, an oncologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and a spokesman for ASCO.

Keytruda's being tested in other cancer types now.

Earlier Wednesday, the FDA gave accelerated approval to a drug that works in a similar way.

It approved Tecentriq, known generically as atezolizumab, for use in patients with advanced bladder cancer.

Like Keytruda, Tecentriq is a monoclonal antibody. It goes straight to PD-L1, so its target is slightly different.

FDA’s approval was made on the basis of a trial that showed 12 percent of patients with advanced bladder cancer who had high levels of PD-L1 activity saw their tumors disappear, compared to 5.5 percent of patients on other treatments. Another 14 percent had a partial response, meaning their tumors shrank a little, compared to 9.4 percent on standard treatment.

The drugs must be infused and they are pricey. Keytruda costs about $12,500 a month, or $150,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Side effects are described — fatigue, itchiness, and rashes — and even notes the dropout rate of 8%.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A new study calls into question the value of removing blood clots from a patient's heart arteries during angioplasty, a procedure to open blocked arteries.

Although manually removing clots has become common medical practice, this study of more than 10,000 heart attack patients found no benefit in terms of reducing death, heart attack or heart failure in the six months after the procedure. Removing clots appears to have increased the risk of stroke in the month after clots were removed, the Canadian researchers report.

"There has been some controversy about removing blood clots during the treatment of heart attacks," said lead researcher Dr. Sanjit Jolly, an associate professor of cardiology at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.

A study in 2008 suggested that removing clots during an angioplasty might save lives, he said. "Guidelines changed based on this study," Jolly noted. Another trial in 2013, however, suggested that removing clots was not beneficial, he added.

In this latest trial, researchers found that routinely removing clots was not beneficial, Jolly said.

Jolly isn't sure why removing clots causes additional problems. It is possible that parts of the clot break off and travel elsewhere in the heart or brain, he said.

"This is an unexpected finding, and we want to confirm this in other studies," Jolly said.

Jolly said there are mechanical methods of removing clots, which were not tested in this study. Whether these methods would have produced better results isn't clear. "The jury is out on that. It needs to be tested in large trials," he said.

However, preliminary results from small trials of mechanical clot removal have not been promising, Jolly noted.

Jolly said the lesson from his team's trial is that clot removal should be used only as a rescue treatment when an angioplasty fails to clear an artery.

"As a routine therapy, clot removal is not beneficial and could have some significant downsides," he said.

The results of the study were published online March 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with a planned presentation of the findings at the American College of Cardiology's annual meeting in San Diego.

For the study, Jolly and colleagues randomly assigned 10,732 patients undergoing an angioplasty after a heart attack to have clots manually removed or to not have them removed.

Among all the patients, 6.9 percent who had clots removed, and 7 percent of those who didn't, died, had another heart attack or developed heart failure in the 180 days after the procedure.

In the 30 days after the procedure, 0.7 percent of the patients who had clots removed suffered a stroke, as did 0.3 percent of those who only had angioplasty, Jolly's team found.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said, "This is a very important and eagerly awaited clinical trial."

A number of studies have suggested a benefit from manually removing clots during an angioplasty, but this trial found no clinical benefits for doing so, he said.

"These findings will likely have important implications for clinical practice," Fonarow said.

Visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine for more on angioplasty.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story clearly states that there is no apparent benefit for clot removal and that there is some increased occurrence of strokes with the procedure. The absolute percentage of subjects who had a stroke in each group is also provided, so readers get a very clear picture of how often this occurs and the difference between the groups.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 21 (HealthDay News) -- A skin patch for the treatment of migraines, and the intense waves of nausea that often accompany these debilitating headaches, has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

Called Zecuity, the patch contains sumatriptan, one of the most widely prescribed medications for migraines.

According to Dr. Fawad Khan, a neurologist with Ochsner Neuroscience Institute in New Orleans, few drugs are approved for the treatment of acute, symptomatic migraine. To complicate matters, many migraine sufferers can also experience severe bouts of nausea and vomiting.

Another expert described the problem this way.

"I've had some patients where the nausea and vomiting was so bad they couldn't even swallow a pill," said Nancy Waltman, a nurse practitioner with the University of Nebraska Medical Center College of Nursing, Lincoln Division.

A nasal spray is available, as is an injection, but many patients aren't comfortable with these options, Khan and Waltman noted.

Khan said the Zecuity patch is "simple, efficient and can deliver the exact amount of dosage with minimal variability."

The patch is attached to the upper arm or thigh, and when the patient pushes a button the drug is delivered through the skin. Zecuity, which is battery-operated, delivers 6.5 milligrams of sumatriptan over the course of about five hours and can relieve nausea, as well as reduce sensitivity to light and sound.

NuPathe Inc., which makes Zecuity, hopes to have the patch on the market later this year.

Research involving 800 patients ultimately led to the approval of Zecuity. One study found that 18 percent of patients using the patch were headache-free after two hours, compared with 9 percent of those using an inactive placebo. About half achieved a reduction in their headache after two hours, compared with 29 percent of those using the placebo.

And 84 percent of patients using the patch were relieved of their nausea, compared with 63 percent of those in the placebo group, according to a company news release.

The most frequent side effects were pain at the site of application along with tingling, itching, warmth and discomfort.

Patients with heart disease or who are using antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors should also be careful when taking sumatriptans, said Waltman, who added that she thought the patches "are wonderful."

One concern, though, is cost, Waltman cautioned.

It's not clear how much the patches will cost, but the class of medications known as triptans can be expensive, as much as $300 a month (although sumatriptan now has a generic version), Waltman said.

In general, though, "the more options that are available to migraine headache patients, the better," Waltman said. "Migraine patients tend to be underdiagnosed and undertreated and inappropriately treated."

NuPathe CEO Armando Anido told Bloomberg News, "We anticipate the product will be available for sale in the fourth quarter of this year."

The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more about migraines.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: According to the story, “The most frequent side effects were pain at the site of application along with tingling, itching, warmth and discomfort.” We’ll call this adequate for a satisfactory, but it would have been helpful to know how often these adverse effects occurred, especially since the FDA had previously delayed approval of the product based in part on safety concerns. In addition, there was no mention of other adverse effects that have been associated with triptan use, such as atypical pain and pressure sensations (e.g. tightness in the chest and throat constriction). The story did mention that triptans can be harmful for patients with heart disease or who are taking SSRI antidepressants.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A less common form of obesity surgery may spur more weight loss than its far more popular cousin, gastric bypass — but at the price of greater long-term risks, researchers reported Tuesday.

The study, published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, followed 60 severely obese patients who were randomly assigned to either gastric bypass surgery or a more extensive procedure known as duodenal switch.

Two years after surgery, duodenal switch patients had lost more weight: about 50 pounds more, on average.

People shed a substantial amount of weight with either type of surgery. Gastric bypass patients cut an average of 111 pounds, while duodenal switch patients dropped about 162.

But those extra pounds came with nearly double the complication rate.

Of the 29 duodenal switch patients, 62 percent had problems like abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea and intestinal obstruction. And several suffered long-term malnutrition — something not seen in the gastric bypass group.

Duodenal switch is not a popular procedure. In a 2008 study, it accounted for just 1 percent of weight-loss, or bariatric, surgeries done in the U.S., and 5 percent in Europe.

The technique is often reserved for “superobese” patients with a body mass index (BMI) of 50 or higher — though some surgeons perform it with less severely obese patients too, explained Dr. Torgeir T. Sovik of Oslo University in Norway, the lead researcher on the new study.

“As duodenal switch can be associated with more adverse events, this procedure should only be performed in carefully selected patients by a dedicated bariatric team,” Sovik told Reuters Health in an email. “And a closer follow-up after surgery is required after such procedures.”

But an expert not involved in the study went further.

“This is an operation that should probably go away,” said Dr. Edward H. Livingston, a professor and surgeon at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

The average weight loss seen with either gastric bypass or duodenal switch will improve or reverse obesity-related ills like diabetes, sleep apnea and knee arthritis, according to Livingston, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

So for those medical conditions, it probably wouldn’t matter if a person lost 100 pounds or 150 pounds over two years.

BMI is a measure of weight relative to height. A BMI between 18.5 and 24.9 is considered normal weight, and above 30 is obese.

The patients in the current study were a fairly healthy group despite having a BMI of 50 or more.

After two years, those who’d had a duodenal switch showed a greater improvement in their cholesterol levels. But those levels were near-normal (in both groups) to begin with, Livingston noted.

That begs the question, he said, of whether the extra weight loss “actually accomplished anything.”

In the U.S., where about 220,000 people underwent weight-loss surgery in 2009, gastric bypass is the most common form chosen.

During gastric bypass, the upper portion of the stomach is stapled off to create a smaller pouch that restricts the amount of food a person can eat at one time. The surgeon also creates a bypass around the rest of the stomach and a portion of the small intestine, which limits the body’s absorption of food.

Duodenal switch is more extensive. The surgeon removes part of the stomach, and the remaining “sleeve”-like stomach is attached to the final section of the small intestine; that puts even greater limits on the body’s absorption of calories and nutrients.

Both surgeries carry the long-term risk of nutritional deficiencies, and people need to take supplements and carefully monitor their diets for a lifetime afterward.

But the risks of nutrient deficiencies are greater with duodenal switch, and include some not seen with gastric bypass, Livingston pointed out.

Some people, for instance, may have severe calcium and vitamin D loss leading to weak and fragile bones. Other problems include severe protein deficiency and night blindness caused by vitamin A deficiency (which is also reversible with extra vitamin A treatment).

In this study, three of the 29 duodenal switch patients developed protein malnutrition, two developed night blindness, and one had a severe iron deficiency that needed to be treated with iron infusions.

Livingston said his advice to people considering weight-loss surgery is to avoid duodenal switch. “It’s just not a good operation,” he asserted.

But he also questioned the value of weight-loss surgery, in general, for severely obese people who do not have medical conditions that stand to improve or resolve after surgery.

In general, experts say that surgery could be an option for anyone with a BMI of 40 or higher; that translates, roughly, to a man who is at least 100 pounds overweight or a woman who is 80 pounds overweight.

Livingston said he thinks more caution is in order when a very obese person is otherwise healthy.

Along with the risks of surgery, he said, there is still uncertainty about whether it actually lengthens people’s lives. Some studies have suggested it might, but not all.

In a study recently published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, Livingston and his colleagues found no survival advantage among severely obese patients who’d undergone weight-loss surgery versus those who hadn’t.

The study involved 850 U.S. veterans who underwent some form of weight-loss surgery, at an average age of about 50, and more than 41,000 vets who had only non-surgical care. There was no evidence that surgery improved longevity over the next seven years.

“We really don’t even know if there’s a survival benefit,” Livingston said.

That, he added, makes the risks of duodenal switch seem even less worthwhile.

But according to Sovik, duodenal switch might be appropriate for some superobese patients.

In the U.S., he said, about one in three weight-loss surgery candidates have a BMI of 50 or higher. And studies suggest that a sizable percentage of those people will still have a BMI higher than 40 after gastric bypass.

In this study, one-quarter of gastric bypass patients still had a BMI that high two years after surgery — versus none of the duodenal switch patients.

More extensive monitoring after duodenal switch, Sovik noted, can help detect and manage side effects.

He pointed out, though, that larger, longer-term studies are still needed to show whether the extra weight loss with duodenal switch ultimately improves severely obese patients’ health and extends their lives.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story shines in its details about the delicate weighing of risk vs. benefits for weight-loss surgery in general, and then for the duodenal vs. gastric bypass method in particular. Some readers might find it confusing that the story includes two separate publications about weight-loss surgery. The story leads with the small study comparing duodenal with gastric bypass, published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, but then delves into a larger Veterans Administration study from the Journal of the American Medical Association that looked at the longer-term results of all surgeries for obesity. We salute Reuters for providing the context and the controversy within medical practice, and quoting a principal investigator on the VA study, Edward Livingstone, who wrote an editorial that appeared in the Annals beside the duodenal paper.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Small doses of aspirin can lower the risk of heart attack in people who never had heart disease, a new look at the medical evidence shows.

But the blood-thinning drug doesn’t appear to cut the chances of dying from the disease, at least not enough that researchers can say for certain. And experts warn people to consult their doctor before taking the medication, which increases the risk of bleeding ulcers.

“I like to say you have to make the recommendation about aspirin one patient at a time,” Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, who was not linked to the study, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre worked on the 2009 aspirin recommendations from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), a federally supported expert panel.

The task force advises that men age 45 to 79 take aspirin to stave off heart attacks, as long as the benefit outweighs the risk of bleeding. For women age 55 to 79, aspirin is recommended to prevent strokes, with the same caveat.

The new work, by Alfred Bartolucci of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and colleagues, was supported by aspirin-maker Bayer AG.

The research team pooled the results of the nine trials that have tested the drug in the prevention of heart disease so far, including three that weren’t part of the 2009 USPSTF review.

About 100,000 men and women age 45 and up took part in the studies. Some were healthy and some had diabetes, but none had chest pain or other symptoms of an ailing heart.

The researchers found a 19-percent reduction in non-fatal heart attacks among participants who took aspirin compared to those who did not.

They don’t mention how many people actually suffered such a heart attack, but an earlier analysis of six of the trials showed that out of every 1,000 people, 18 individuals taking aspirin had heart attacks every year, compared to 23 individuals taking placebo pills.

On the other hand, that analysis also found aspirin increased the rate of bleeding from 0.7 to 1 per 1,000 people per year, making the authors conclude the drug was of “uncertain net value.”

Heart disease is the leading killer worldwide and accounts for more than a third of deaths in the U.S., according to the American Heart Association. Every year, heart attacks alone kill some 400,000 Americans.

In the current study, published in the American Journal of Cardiology, the researchers also report small decreases in stroke and death risks with aspirin, although those changes might have been due to chance.

“It refines our knowledge of how beneficial aspirin is,” Dr. Graham Nichol, an expert in emergency care at the University of Washington in Seattle, said about the study. “I don’t think this paper is inconsistent with previous work.”

Nichols, who was not involved in the study, said aspirin is clearly beneficial for people who’ve already had heart disease, and that it also seems to help those at high risk.

“There is not universal agreement on what is high risk,” he told Reuters Health. “In my mind, if you have diabetes or multiple risk factors for heart disease — such as smoking or obesity — it is reasonable to take aspirin.”

In addition, working to eliminate those risk factors by other means will not only slash the risk of heart disease, but also a host of other health problems.

LeFevre added that while the new study did add extra evidence compared with earlier work, it failed to analyze the effects on men and women separately.

That muddies the picture because men may see a benefit in the form of fewer heart attacks, whereas aspirin appears to lower the risk of stroke in women.

“We can’t tell from the existing study if that is going to hold up or not,” he said.

One recent study has suggested that despite the increase in bleeding ulcers from aspirin, the reduction in heart attacks might make the cheap drug cost-effective for men over 45.

The question then becomes finding out what your risk of heart attack is in the first place, which your doctor can help with.

“The number of events that you prevent depends on your baseline risk,” LeFevre concluded. “A blanket recommendation that everybody should take an aspirin is not a good idea.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story stated “aspirin increased the rate of bleeding from 0.7 to 1 per 1,000 people per year, making the authors conclude the drug was of “uncertain net value.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (January 26, 2017): Patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, known as GERD, who undergo laparoscopic anti-reflux operations compared with traditional "open" operations suffer fewer postoperative complications, experience faster recovery, and incur lower health care costs, according to study results published online as an "article in press" on the Journal of the American College of Surgeons website, ahead of print publication.



GERD affects nearly 20 percent of American adults, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.* Heartburn, a burning sensation in the chest, is a common symptom of GERD.



"Patients with GERD have an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter, which allows gastric acid to go back up into the esophagus," said lead study author Francisco Schlottmann, MD, a surgeon at the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. "Anti-reflux surgery should be considered in patients who do not achieve complete control of their symptoms [regurgitation or cough] with medications; who do not want to take medications for the rest of their lives; or who experience complications of medical therapy."



For the study, researchers analyzed data in the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) database of more than 75,000 adults who underwent either laparoscopic or open fundoplication for GERD between 2000 and 2013. NIS represents 1,000 U.S. hospitals and contains data on more than seven million hospitalizations each year. During the study period, 58.4 percent of patients underwent laparoscopic procedures and 41.6 percent had open anti-reflux operations performed through a long abdominal incision.



The study showed that the rate of laparoscopic procedures increased from 24.8 percent in 2000 to 84.3 percent in 2013. "Surprisingly, in 2003, 12 years after the first laparoscopic anti-reflux operation was reported, only 25 percent of all the anti-reflux operations were performed laparoscopically in the U.S.," Dr. Schlottmann said. "Subsequently, the rate increased, but 15 percent of all anti-reflux operations were still being performed through an open approach in 2013. We believe this percentage is very high, and we hope that in the next year this percentage will decrease."



Along with discovering that the use of laparoscopy for the surgical treatment of GERD has increased significantly in the last decade, the researchers also found that, on average, the minimally invasive approach reduced length of hospital stay by approximately two days, and open operations were more than $9,000 more expensive than minimally invasive procedures.



The researchers also found that laparoscopic procedures were better for patients in terms of fewer complications. Laparoscopic anti-reflux operations were less likely to result in postoperative blood clots, wound complications, surgical site infection, esophageal perforation (which can be life threatening), bleeding, cardiac failure, and death.



"Our study highlights the fact that laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery is as effective as the open approach, and in 2017, with all its advantages, should be the standard of care," said senior study author Marco G. Patti, MD, FACS, a surgeon and Director of the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.



"We found that laparoscopic surgery is associated with significantly lower costs. In addition, indirect costs of the open approach, including an impaired ability to work, time off from work, and intangible costs of postoperative pain and healing, are difficult to measure but also favor the laparoscopic approach," said Dr. Patti.



"GERD is a common digestive disorder that can usually be treated with dietary changes and medications such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). However, chronic and not-controlled GERD can cause serious complications. Repeated exposure to stomach acid can damage the lining of the esophagus and lead to a precancerous condition called Barrett's esophagus," said Dr. Schlottmann.



Study results also revealed that urban academic or teaching hospitals performed laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery at a higher rate than open procedures, 54.4 percent versus 45.6 percent. "We think that it is important to make this information more available to the public. In order to achieve good outcomes, anti-reflux surgery should be performed laparoscopically in specialized centers," said Dr. Patti.



Paula D Strassle, MSPH Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC also participated in this study.



Citation: Comparative Analysis of Perioperative Outcomes and Costs Between Laparoscopic and Open Antireflux Surgery. Journal of the American College of Surgeons. DOI: http://dx.

*National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Digestive Diseases Statistics for the United States. https:/ . Published November 2014. Accessed January 20, 2017.

About the American College of Surgeons

The American College of Surgeons is a scientific and educational organization of surgeons that was founded in 1913 to raise the standards of surgical practice and improve the quality of care for surgical patients. The College is dedicated to the ethical and competent practice of surgery. Its achievements have significantly influenced the course of scientific surgery in America and have established it as an important advocate for all surgical patients. The College has more than 80,000 members and is the largest organization of surgeons in the world. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release names complications associated with both types of surgery for GERD, while stating that patients undergoing laparoscopic procedures encountered fewer of them: “postoperative blood clots, wound complications, surgical site infection, esophageal perforation (which can be life threatening), bleeding, cardiac failure, and death.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Acupuncture No Better Than Placebo for Hot Flashes

The search for a benign, effective alternative treatment for hot flashes -- which has included the use of soy products, Chinese herbs and hypnosis -- has hit another roadblock.

A new study of acupuncture by Mayo Clinic researchers has found that sham treatments were no better than real acupuncture in relieving the daily drenching sweats that some women find disabling during menopause.

The new research, presented last month at the North American Research Conference on Complementary and Alternative Medicine in Edmonton, Alberta, is scheduled to be published in the journal Menopause early next year, according to lead researcher Ann Vincent, an assistant professor of medicine at the Rochester, Minn., clinic.

Vincent said she and her colleagues were disappointed by the results of the study, which was funded by Mayo and prompted in part by the findings from the Women's Health Initiative (WHI), a federally funded study of more than 36,000 women ages 50 to 79.

"We were hoping for something better," she said.

Beginning in 2002, WHI researchers reported that estrogen was beneficial in reducing hot flashes, but that the hormone, routinely prescribed to middle-aged women for years, also raised the risk of cancer, heart disease, stroke, dementia and other ailments.

As a result, federal health officials have recommended that women bothered by menopausal symptoms such as unpredictable sweats, sleep disturbances and vaginal dryness take the lowest dose of estrogen for the shortest possible time. Hot flashes, one of the most common symptoms of menopause, affect an estimated 75 percent of women, most of them in their forties and fifties.

It is unclear what causes hot flashes, which range in severity from barely noticeable to embarrassingly obvious and can leave some sufferers red-faced and wrung out. In most cases they are transitory, lasting only a few months or years, but in some cases they can last a decade or more. Hot flashes typically begin in the year or so before menopause and tend to abate in the years afterward.

Experts in women's health say they are one of the most common ailments for which women use alternative medicine and that interest in non-hormonal treatments has increased as a result of the WHI findings.

The study of acupuncture as a remedy for hot flashes was sparked by reports from women who had undergone the ancient Chinese therapy for other problems and reported that their hot flashes seemed to moderate.

Acupuncture involves the use of hair-thin disposable metallic needles inserted into various parts of the body; treatments are supposed to be painless and are designed to correct energy imbalances.

The 2,000-year-old treatment is widely used around the world, according to the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM), part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

A 1997 NIH consensus statement on acupuncture found that its success has been mixed, but some studies have found that it might be effective in blunting postoperative pain and in reducing the vomiting and nausea that often follows chemotherapy.

To prove it is effective in reducing hot flashes, the Mayo team needed to demonstrate that it was superior to sham, or placebo, treatment. That requirement has hobbled other alternative treatments, including the herb red clover and vitamin E supplements. That's because hot flashes have a high placebo-response rate: Symptoms often improve, at least temporarily, with a dummy treatment. Researchers believe this may result from the perception of patients that they are being treated with something that is likely to be effective.

Vincent's group recruited 103 women between the ages of 45 and 59 who reported that they had at least five hot flashes per day and were not using any other treatments for them. Half were randomly assigned to receive a series of 10 standardized acupuncture treatments -- needles were placed at the same spots in the arms, legs and lower belly; the other half received sham treatments in which needles were placed superficially near the same locations but away from so-called pressure points.

Researchers knew who was receiving sham treatment, but the women, who completed questionnaires detailing the extent of their hot flashes, did not.

By the end of six weeks, there was no difference between the groups: 61 percent of the sham group was experiencing hot flashes, while 62 percent who got actual acupuncture reported them.

That doesn't surprise Adriane Fugh-Berman, associate professor in the complementary medicine program at Georgetown University School of Medicine.

"Hot flashes are one of the most placebo-responsive conditions," she said. Some herbs and supplements seem to work, she added, but improvement has proven to be temporary. ?
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that women in the study reported no adverse effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Eric Rowe turned 50, the question was not whether the Washington lawyer would be screened for colon cancer, but how. His wife had undergone a colonoscopy, the gold-standard exam that costs about $1,500, but Rowe's internist recommended an alternative that was less invasive and expensive: a virtual colonoscopy, which uses three-dimensional images from a CT scan to detect benign polyps or cancers.

"It sounded good to me," said Rowe, pleased that he could schedule the $800 procedure for 7:45 a.m. at a downtown medical building. Unlike standard colonoscopy, generally performed under anesthesia, in which a long, flexible scope is inserted into the rectum and snaked through the large intestine to find and snip out polyps, the new procedure doesn't require a ride home or a day off. Rowe planned to be at his desk an hour or so later.

Invented 16 years ago by a radiologist who got the idea while playing video games on a flight simulator during advanced training at Johns Hopkins, virtual colonoscopy has become an increasingly popular alternative to standard, or optical, colonoscopy, which is typically performed by a gastroenterologist. Initially regarded as a high-tech novelty, the new procedure has in recent months received key endorsements as a first-line screening test from influential medical groups, notably the American Cancer Society, after several large studies found it to be effective at finding large polyps.

Like other mass screening tests including mammography, the overarching question is whether the benefits of virtual colonoscopy outweigh the risks.

Its supporters, many of them radiologists who read CT scans, tout virtual colonoscopy as a more palatable alternative that has the potential to boost low rates of screening. One of the most common and deadliest malignancies, colon cancer can be prevented -- or even cured -- if detected early. Currently about half of Americans over 50 are screened for the disease; some shun traditional colonoscopy, which is the only way to remove polyps, because of its invasive nature.

"This is a really good test that's going to find way more cancer than optical colonoscopy," said Mark Klein of Washington Radiology Associates, who has performed more than 1,200 virtual colonoscopies since 2002, Rowe's among them. "Is it perfect? No. But no test is."

The prospects for significant expansion of the procedure, which is covered by a growing number of insurance companies, have collided with a large and unexpected roadblock. In February, officials at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced a preliminary decision not to cover the procedure as a mass screening test for Medicare recipients.

CMS officials, who are scheduled to issue their final ruling May 12, cited reservations expressed by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of health experts, and concluded that there is insufficient evidence that virtual colonoscopy would benefit Medicare recipients. CMS cited concerns about radiation exposure and the number of patients who would require follow-up colonoscopies to remove polyps, as well as the inability of CT scans to reliably detect small or flat growths.

Medicare's decision has sparked a furious lobbying campaign. More than 40 members of Congress have signed letters urging federal officials to reconsider, and the dispute has split doctors in the same specialty: the American Gastroenterological Association favors Medicare coverage, while the American College of Gastroenterology does not.

In many ways, the debate mirrors some of the complexities inherent in overhauling health care, a top priority of the Obama administration. At issue is whether virtual colonoscopy will enhance quality or whether it is, in the words of one physician blogger, "a proxy for high-tech excesses."

"CMS made the right decision," said John Petrini, a Santa Barbara, Calif., gastroenterologist who heads the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. Why, he asks, should patients undergo two tests when one is sufficient?

Klein disagrees. "They got it completely wrong," he said. "Some people will die from that decision, completely unnecessarily," because they won't get a standard colonoscopy.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the potential harms of the procedure, including radiation exposure (250 times that of a chest x-ray), missing small or flat polyps, and incidental findings that might lead to unnecessary treatments. The story could have also emphasized that about 20% will require a follow-up colonoscopy because of suspicious findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new pilot study led by McLean Hospital's Ipsit Vahia, MD, medical director of Geriatric Psychiatry Outpatient Services at McLean Hospital, suggests that the use of tablet computers is both a safe and a potentially effective approach to managing agitation among patients with dementia.

"Tablet use as a nonpharmacologic intervention for agitation in older adults, including those with severe dementia, appears to be feasible, safe, and of potential utility," said Vahia. "Our preliminary results are a first step in developing much-needed empirical data for clinicians and caregivers on how to use technology such as tablets as tools to enhance care and also for app developers working to serve the technologic needs of this population."

"Use of Tablet Devices in the Management of Agitation Among Inpatients with Dementia: An Open Label Study" was recently published in the online version of The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. This research builds upon previous studies demonstrating that art, music, and other similar therapies can effectively reduce symptoms of dementia without medication. By using tablet devices to employ these therapies, however, patients and providers also benefit from a computer's inherent flexibility.

"The biggest advantage is versatility," said Vahia. "We know that art therapy can work, music therapy can work. The tablet, however, gives you the option of switching from one app to another easily, modifying the therapy seamlessly to suit the individual. You don't need to invest in new equipment or infrastructure."

Researchers loaded a menu of 70 apps onto the tablets for the study. The apps were freely available on iTunes and varied greatly in their cognitive complexity--from an app that displayed puppy photos to one that featured Sudoku puzzles.

The researchers found that tablet use was safe for every patient, regardless of the severity of their dementia, and that with proper supervision and training, the engagement rate with the devices was nearly 100 percent. The study also found that the tablets demonstrated significant effectiveness in reducing symptoms of agitation, particularly--but not exclusively--among patients with milder forms of dementia.

Vahia cited several examples of the tablet's potential to improve a patient's condition. One particular patient, who only spoke Romanian, was very withdrawn and irritable, and medications were ineffective in controlling his symptoms.

"We started showing him Romanian video clips on YouTube, and his behavior changed dramatically and instantaneously," said Vahia. "His mood improved. He became more interactive. He and his medical support team also started using a translation app so that staff could ask him simple questions in Romanian, facilitating increased interaction. These significant improvements are a clear testament of the tablet's potential as a clinical tool."

Based on such promising outcomes, the Geriatric Psychiatry Outpatient Services clinical team is expanding the use of tablet devices as a means to control agitation in dementia patients at McLean. This will allow researchers to develop more robust data and expand the scope of the study, including a focus on specific clinical factors that may impact how patients with dementia engage with and respond to apps.

McLean Hospital is the largest psychiatric affiliate of Harvard Medical School and a member of Partners HealthCare. In addition to providing a full continuum of psychiatric clinical care, McLean maintains the largest neuroscience and psychiatry research program of any private psychiatric hospital in the United States. McLean's robust research program is backed by more than $40 million in funding from a variety of sources, including foundations, private contributors, National Institutes of Health, United States Department of Defense, and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. For more information about McLean, visit mcleanhospital.org or follow the hospital on Facebook or Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release addressed harms by saying “researchers found that tablet use was safe for every patient, regardless of the severity of their dementia, and that with proper supervision and training, the engagement rate with the devices was nearly 100 percent.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — MONTREAL June 8, 2015 – Weekly sessions of non-invasive repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation provided sufficient long-term pain relief in 61 percent of patients with central post-stroke pain, and delivered long-term relief for patients who continued for one year, according to a study presented at the International Neuromodulation Society 12th World Congress by Masahito Kobayashi, MD, PhD, of the Department of Neurosurgery, Saitama Medical University – Department of Neurology, Institute of Brain and Blood Vessels, Mihara Memorial Hospital in Saitama, Japan.

Of 18 patients in the open-label series, 11 patients achieved satisfactory-to-excellent pain relief. Pain relief was sustained in six patients who continued treatment for one year. All patients received repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to their primary motor cortex once a week for at least 12 weeks.

Satisfactory relief was considered a 40 - 69 percent reduction in pain scores (6 patients) and excellent relief, pain reduction of 70 percent or more (5 patients). Overall, 8 patients who had severe stroke-caused dysesthesias, such as uncomfortable numbness or prickling, experienced less relief than patients without severe dysesthesias, suggesting possible neural circuit damage was inhibiting response to treatment.

The study participants had all been treated medically after a blood clot or bleed in one side of the brain (unilateral ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke). Several weeks into their recovery, they had begun to experience severe hand or leg pain as a consequence of brain damage from the stroke. Such central post-stroke pain can be extremely disabling and difficult to treat, impacting general functioning, mood, and overall quality of life.

Since the 1990s, Japan has been an active center of research into the study of electrical motor cortex stimulation (EMCS) to treat post-stroke pain using surgically implanted devices. The study reported at the INS 12th World Congress builds on observations that electrical motor cortex stimulation’s effectiveness in relieving central post-stroke pain can be predicted by rTMS, suggesting the techniques share similar pain-relief mechanisms.

However, Kobayashi and colleagues point out in their peer-reviewed online publication of this study, “Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Once a Week Induces Sustainable Long-Term Relief of Central Poststroke Pain” (Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface: April 23, 2015)[1] that there has still been controversy about the efficacy of rTMS in post-stroke pain. Kobayashi said in comparison to EMCS, his impression is rTMS efficacy seemed almost the same, without requiring surgery.

In 2014, a review[2] suggested that there is probable efficacy (a level A recommendation) for short-term rTMS treatment of neuropathic pain, including central post-stroke pain, but did not speak to long-term efficacy.

Since pain relief from rTMS increases a few days after treatment, weekly treatment sessions were selected to try to sustain pain relief at treatment intervals that could be maintained on an outpatient basis.

Kobayashi believes neurologists would especially have an interest in this method, which is also attractive due to its low side-effect profile. None of the 18 patients reported any serious side effects from weekly sessions of 10 trains of 10-second 5Hz rTMS, at 90 percent of the active motor threshold. Two patients reported transient, slight scalp discomfort after rTMS.

In addition to the potential of rTMS in pain relief, there has been growing research into noninvasive stimulation to augment progress in physical rehabilitation soon after stroke. It is believed that the stimulation aids in plasticity, the ability of the brain to gradually form new neural connections to take on functions previously performed by damaged areas.

A first phase of the study assessed whether rTMS had a treatment effect on pain. In it, the research team randomly assigned six patients to receive either sham or active rTMS one week and the other treatment the next, measuring pain scores before and after each session.

Once that phase had shown that rTMS did reduce the patients’ pain, an open-label treatment phase began. In this second phase, the 18 patients underwent 12 weekly rTMS sessions. The patients’ pain scores were measured just before each weekly session.

Data were collected for eight years, ending in 2014. Kobayashi said that some patients really hoped to continue rTMS after the study because their pain worsened after rTMS treatment sessions were over, and almost all the patients said that after the study ended, their pain increased to the level before rTMS.

He added that the remaining question to answer is whether the level of the patients’ severe uncontrollable pain would continue to decrease if rTMS continued for several years.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Quoting from the release: “None of the 18 patients reported any serious side effects from weekly sessions of 10 trains of 10-second 5Hz rTMS, at 90 percent of the active motor threshold. Two patients reported transient, slight scalp discomfort after rTMS.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The investigators found that the less salt people ate, the more likely they were to die of heart disease — 50 people in the lowest third of salt consumption (2.5 grams of sodium per day) died during the study as compared with 24 in the medium group (3.9 grams of sodium per day) and 10 in the highest salt consumption group (6.0 grams of sodium per day). And while those eating the most salt had, on average, a slight increase in systolic blood pressure — a 1.71-millimeter increase in pressure for each 2.5-gram increase in sodium per day — they were no more likely to develop hypertension.

“If the goal is to prevent hypertension” with lower sodium consumption, said the lead author, Dr. Jan A. Staessen, a professor of medicine at the University of Leuven, in Belgium, “this study shows it does not work.”

But among the study’s other problems, Dr. Briss said, its subjects who seemed to consume the smallest amount of sodium also provided less urine than those consuming more, an indication that they might not have collected all of their urine in an 24-hour period.

Dr. Frank Sacks of the Harvard School of Public Health agreed and also said the study was flawed.

“It’s a problematic study,” Dr. Sacks said. “We shouldn’t be guiding any kind of public health decisions on it.”

Dr. Michael Alderman, a blood pressure researcher at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and editor of the American Journal of Hypertension, said medical literature on salt and health effects was inconsistent. But, Dr. Alderman said, the new study is not the only one to find adverse effects of low-sodium diets. His own study, with people who had high blood pressure, found that those who ate the least salt were most likely to die.

Dr. Alderman said that he once was an unpaid consultant for the Salt Institute but that he now did no consulting for it or for the food industry and did not receive any support or take any money from industry groups.

Lowering salt consumption, Dr. Alderman said, has consequences beyond blood pressure. It also, for example, increases insulin resistance, which can increase the risk of heart disease.

“Diet is a complicated business,” he said. “There are going to be unintended consequences.”

One problem with the salt debates, Dr. Alderman said, is that all the studies are inadequate. Either they are short-term intervention studies in which people are given huge amounts of salt and then deprived of salt to see effects on blood pressure or they are studies, like this one, that observe populations and ask if those who happen to consume less salt are healthier.

“Observational studies tell you what people will experience if they select a diet,” Dr. Alderman said. “They do not tell you what will happen if you change peoples’ sodium intake.”

What is needed, Dr. Alderman said, is a large study in which people are randomly assigned to follow a low-sodium diet or not and followed for years to see if eating less salt improves health and reduces the death rate from cardiovascular disease.

But that study, others say, will never happen.

“This is one of those really interesting situations,” said Dr. Lawrence Appel, a professor of medicine, epidemiology and international health at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. “You can say, ‘O.K., let’s dismiss the observational studies because they have all these problems.’ ” But, he said, despite the virtues of a randomized controlled clinical trial, such a study “will never ever be done.” It would be impossible to keep people on a low-sodium diet for years with so much sodium added to prepared foods.

Dr. Briss adds that it would not be prudent to defer public health actions while researchers wait for results of a clinical trial that might not even be feasible.

“The low-salt advocates suggest that all 300 million Americans be subjected to a low-salt diet. But if they can’t get people on a low-salt diet for a clinical trial, what are they talking about?”

He added: “It will cost money, but that’s why we do science. It will also cost money to change the composition of food.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The focus of this story was avoiding harm by eating too much (or too little) salt. “The investigators found that the less salt people ate, the more likely they were to die of heart disease — 50 people in the lowest third of salt consumption (2.5 grams of sodium per day) died during the study as compared with 24 in the medium group (3.9 grams of sodium per day) and 10 in the highest salt consumption group (6.0 grams of sodium per day). And while those eating the most salt had, on average, a slight increase in systolic blood pressure — a 1.71-millimeter increase in pressure for each 2.5-gram increase in sodium per day — they were no more likely to develop hypertension.” It does a great job presenting the numbers in absolute terms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The defense system that doctors are trying to breach evolved to keep out toxins and microbes. It consists mainly of cells that line the walls of capillaries in the brain and are so tightly packed that many molecules in the bloodstream cannot slip out between cells to reach the brain tissue itself. But certain drugs, like mannitol, will temporarily open the barrier and were first used more than 20 years ago to help other medicines reach the brain.

The new technique refines the art of opening the barrier: it uses microcatheters — fine, highly flexible tubes that are inserted into an artery in the groin and then threaded up into tiny blood vessels nearly anywhere in the brain — to spray chemotherapy directly onto tumors or areas from which they have been removed. The catheters are normally used to deliver clot-dissolving drugs to the brain to treat strokes.

“This will substantially alter the way that chemotherapy is given in the future,” said Dr. John Boockvar, the brain surgeon who devised the trial. “But we have to prove that at certain doses, nobody gets hurt.”

Referring to glioblastoma patients, Dr. Riina said, “Everyone is looking for something to do for these people.”

“Even if you buy someone just a year, that could be a wedding or a graduation,” he continued. “You never know what might happen in the year they hold onto.”

The study, which began in August, is still in its earliest phase, meaning its main goal is to measure safety, not efficacy — to find out if it is safe to spray Avastin directly into brain arteries and at what dose. Nonetheless, the doctors were pleased when M.R.I. scans of the first few patients showed that the treatment seemed to erase any sign of recurring glioblastomas. But how long the effect will last remains to be seen.

Despite a beautiful scan, the first patient who was treated died in October, from pneumonia and the spread of glioblastoma to his brainstem.

Innovations are desperately needed to make headway against glioblastoma, which is “one of the most deadly tumors that exist in humans,” said Dr. Russell Lonser, chairman of surgical neurology at the National Institutes of Health.

“This is a very good start,” Dr. Lonser said. “The early data is very interesting and exciting.”

The complexity of a study like this goes beyond the science. Clinical trials are also a complicated pact, emotionally and ethically, between desperate patients and doctors who must balance their ambition as researchers against their duty as clinicians, and must walk a fine line between offering too much hope and not enough.

“I tell patients, ‘I’m going to try to cure your disease, but so far glioblastoma is an incurable disease,’ ” Dr. Boockvar said.

“I’m optimistic,” Mr. Sugrue said one morning in September, after scheduling a second brain operation. But he had tears in his eyes.

There are about 10,000 new cases of glioblastoma a year in the United States, mostly in people over 45. The tumors are notorious for growing back like weeds even after being cut out and blasted with chemotherapy and radiation, and they are nearly always fatal. With the best treatment, the median survival time is about 15 months.

But in the last five years, the number of patients who survive 2 years has increased to 25 percent, from 8 percent, largely because doctors began using a chemotherapy pill called temozolomide, or Temodar, along with radiation (Temodar is believed to seep through the blood-brain barrier).

Dr. Boockvar said he thought that if he could just keep patients alive for two years, more advances might come along and give them time.

“The glioblastoma population is very studyable, unfortunately, because the prognosis is so grim,” he said.

Patients often wind up on the front lines of research, figuring they have little to lose and hoping they will be lucky enough to test the big breakthrough. More than 500 studies for people with glioblastoma are listed on the government Web site www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Mr. Sugrue, who lives in Stamford, Conn., with his wife, Donna, and their children Molly and Tim, began having headaches in April. He thought he had a sinus problem. But a scan found a brain tumor nearly the size of a golf ball. A local doctor referred him to Dr. Boockvar. He had the standard treatment: surgery, temozolomide pills and six weeks of radiation, which ended on June 25.

By July, an ominous bright spot on his M.R.I. scan suggested that the tumor might already be growing back. He continued chemotherapy, but the spot kept enlarging.

By mid-September, the Sugrues were back in Dr. Boockvar’s office to plan their next step. Stubbly hair was growing in on Mr. Sugrue’s scalp, except for a bare patch, around an arcing scar above his right ear. His eyes, bright blue with thick, dark lashes that gave him a boyish look, searched the doctor’s face.

The headaches had returned. New scans, displayed on a computer screen, showed signs of brain swelling and bright spots that should not have been there. Dr. Boockvar recommended more surgery and then chemotherapy with Avastin, which had recently been approved for recurring glioblastoma.

It was approved for intravenous use — to be dripped into a vein, usually in the arm — but he said Mr. Sugrue would be an ideal candidate for his study, in which the drug would be infused directly into an artery in the brain, producing levels at least 50 times what the intravenous route could achieve. One other patient had been treated that way, and M.R.I. scans showed that recurring tumors seemed to have melted away.

Mr. Sugrue said he was all for it, even though Dr. Boockvar warned him that the drug was no magic bullet. Then Dr. Boockvar ticked off the risks from a second brain operation.

“I have to quote you a 5 percent risk you’ll be visibly weak,” he said. “A 1 percent chance of paralysis on the left side.”

Mr. Sugrue wiped his eyes and began to apologize for losing his composure, but the surgeon cut him off and said, “In neurosurgery they say that if you don’t make your patient cry, you haven’t gotten informed consent.”

The trial grew out of a conversation about a year ago between Dr. Boockvar and Dr. Riina, an expert in using microcatheters to treat strokes.

“I said, ‘Why can’t you infuse chemotherapy for my brain tumor patients?’ ” Dr. Boockvar recalled. “And he said: ‘I can. Just show me what you want to do.’ ”

Dr. Riina said, “Technically, I can go anywhere in your brain.”

He said microcatheter technology had advanced “light-years” in the last decade and was just waiting for a new drug to come along for glioblastoma.

They wrote up a plan to test what they called “superselective intra-arterial cerebral infusion” of Avastin in 30 patients with glioblastomas that had recurred after standard treatment. Each patient would receive just one treatment directed into the brain, followed weeks later by a series of intravenous treatments with Avastin.

Their study involves a technique first developed about 30 years ago, which uses mannitol to open the blood-brain barrier temporarily to get chemotherapy into the brain. Mannitol pulls water out of the tightly packed cells lining the capillaries so that they shrink and pull away from one another, opening up gaps through which drug molecules can pass into the brain.

The technique was developed by Dr. Edward A. Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon at Oregon Health Sciences University and the Veterans Affairs Hospital in Portland. Its best results have been in people with a rare type of brain tumor called a primary central nervous system lymphoma. But it has not been helpful with glioblastoma, because until recently there was no chemotherapy to infuse that would have much effect on those tumors.

Dr. Neuwelt said that Avastin had helped to renew interest in opening the blood-brain barrier but that researchers disagreed about whether the drug would lend itself to that use.

Avastin starves tumors by blocking the growth of new blood vessels, which they need to survive. Dr. Boockvar said microcatheters should increase the odds of success by delivering a high dose of the drug directly to where it was needed most. Earlier research with other drugs used larger catheters inserted into the carotid arteries, which feed the entire brain — meaning that the tumor did not receive the most concentrated dose and that healthy brain tissue was exposed to the toxic drugs.

By mid-November, the researchers had treated five patients, including Mr. Sugrue; they first infused mannitol, waited five minutes and then sprayed in the Avastin. In all the patients’ M.R.I. scans, the telltale bright spots that marked tumor growth faded away after the treatment.

“I can’t tell you what it means,” Dr. Boockvar said. “Nobody knows.”

Indeed, the death of the first patient was a reminder that glioblastoma can invade other parts of the brain and the spinal fluid and that the highly localized spray of Avastin might miss deadly seeds of cancer.

But Dr. Boockvar remained hopeful for the remaining patients, describing the scans as “astronomically far better than I had anticipated.”

Mr. Sugrue was still in the hospital in late September when Dr. Boockvar burst into his room and got him out of bed to look at his own before-and-after scans.

“He took me to this room with all these computers and said, ‘I’ve got to show you this,’ ” Mr. Sugrue recalled. “This M.R.I. was a thing of beauty. I’m excited that he’s excited. That means a lot to me.”

Dr. Boockvar said: “Avastin may not be the best drug for this delivery technique. What’s exciting about our results is that we’ve proven there is a local effect.

“Suppose someone said, ‘I have much better drug.’ Now I can say I at least have a delivery system.”

With patients, Dr. Boockvar tries to walk a fine line, trying to level with them and yet not rob them of all hope. He knows the emotional toll that a cancer diagnosis can take: his own father had leukemia for about eight years and died in September. Mrs. Sugrue said the doctor urged her and her husband to resist doing an Internet search for glioblastoma because they would just read that it was a death sentence.

They said they tried to follow his advice, but when the subject of prognosis came up in an interview, both had tears in their eyes.

“You don’t ask the question if you don’t want the answer,” Mrs. Sugrue said. “What will be, will be. You do what you can.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explains that the infusion method has not been proven safe–indeed, that’s what the current study is designed to find out. 
In addition, the reporter cites the doctor’s estimated risks of the treatment the featured patient faces: a 5 percent chance of becoming "visibly weak" and a 1 percent chance of left-side paralysis. 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, June 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new drug for type 2 diabetes causes significantly less weight gain and may carry lower risks for hypoglycemia (low blood sugar), heart attack and stroke than standard medications, a new study indicates.

Researchers in Germany noted that the new drug, linagliptin (Tradjenta), is intended for use in patients that do not fare well with metformin, the most common first-line drug used to treat the disease.

Patients with type 2 diabetes may stop responding to metformin over time. Others who do not respond to metformin alone are given a second drug to help them maintain normal blood sugar levels. The researchers noted that which drug they should be prescribed is unclear.

The researchers pointed out that most patients are prescribed a class of drugs called sulphonylureas to supplement metformin. However, these drugs can sometimes lead to hypoglycemia and weight gain, which increases the patients' risk for heart attack and stroke.

To compare the effects of linagliptin to glimepiride (the most commonly used sulphonylurea), the researchers conducted a double-blind study over the course of two years. The study, which was funded by linagliptin's maker, Boehringer Ingelheim, involved 1,500 people from 16 countries with type 2 diabetes. None of the patients had responded to metformin alone.

Although the effectiveness of the drugs were similar, the study showed the side effects of linagliptin were much less severe than those of glimepiride. The researchers found that 7 percent of patients on linagliptin experienced hypoglycemia, compared to 38 percent of patients treated with glimepiride.

The patients on linagliptin also had fewer heart attacks and strokes compared to those being treated with glimepiride.

The researchers argued that since linagliptin allows the body to increase the amount of insulin it produces in a glucose-dependent way, the risk for hypoglycemia may be significantly lower.

And since hypoglycemia "can have substantial negative clinical consequences" in terms of risk for death, illness, mental function and poor quality of life, preventing it is crucial, study co-author Baptist Gallwitz, of Tubingen University Hospital, said in a news release.

The study authors pointed out linagliptin was licensed in 2011 and this is the first long-term study examining its safety and effectiveness. They added more research is needed to confirm their findings.

One expert said patients and doctors may still have to balance the superiority of linagliptin against its higher cost in comparison to older drugs.

The new study provides more evidence that drugs like linagliptin "are just as good as the old standby sulfonylurea therapies, with the added benefits of inducing fewer hypoglycemic events, causing less weight gain, along with a likely decrease in cardiovascular events," said Dr. Stuart Weiss, an endocrinologist at NYU Langone Medical Center and clinical assistant professor at the NYU School of Medicine, New York City.

But millions of Americans suffer from type 2 diabetes, so "cost issues favoring sulfonylureas may be the only reason for preferring continued sulfonylurea use," he added. The results of a larger, ongoing study currently underway may help resolve the issue of whether the newer drug is worth the extra money, Weiss said.

The study was published online June 27 in The Lancet.

The American Diabetes Association provides more information on type 2 diabetes.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There was inadequate/incomplete quantification of the harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Cognitive behavioural therapy could help many people with a dental phobia overcome their fear of visiting the dentist and enable them to receive dental treatment without the need to be sedated, according to a new study by King's College London.

Anxiety about visiting the dentist is common and becomes a phobia when it has a marked impact on someone's well-being; people with dental phobias typically avoid going to the dentist and end up experiencing more dental pain, poorer oral health and a detrimental effect on their quality of life. Estimates from the most recent Adult Dental Health Survey in the UK suggest around one in ten people suffers from dental phobia.

Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is a short-term therapy, typically lasting 6-10 sessions. CBT has been shown to help with a range of psychological problems, most notably for depression and anxiety-related disorders. Both cognitive and behavioural interventions have been shown to be successful in reducing dental anxiety and increasing dental attendance.

The latest study, published in the British Dental Journal, looked at the characteristics of 130 patients (99 women and 31 men) attending a psychologist-led CBT service and the outcomes of their treatment. Patients attending a clinic run by the King's College London Dental Institute Health Psychology Service at Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust were surveyed for their levels of dental anxiety, general anxiety, depression, suicidal thoughts, alcohol use and oral health-related quality of life.

Three-quarters of those assessed scored 19 or higher on the Modified Dental Anxiety Scale (MDAS), indicating dental phobia. The remainder all scored high on one or more items of the MDAS, suggesting a specific fear of some aspect of dentistry. Fear of dental injections and the dental drill were the most common high scoring items on the MDAS. Nearly all patients (94%) reported a knock-on effect from problems with their teeth, mouth or gums on their daily living and quality of life.

A proportion of the patients surveyed were found to have other psychological conditions - 37% had high levels of general anxiety and 12% had clinically significant levels of depression. Suicidal thoughts were reported by 12% of patients and four (3%) reported a recent intent to commit suicide. Individuals were referred to support services via the care of their GP and for suicide risk, immediate action was taken based on local service guidelines.

Of all patients referred, four-fifths (79%) went on to have dental treatment without the need for sedation and 6% had their dental treatment under sedation. The average number of CBT appointments required before a patient received dental treatment without sedation was five.

Professor Tim Newton from the Dental Institute at King's College London and lead author of the study said: "People with dental phobia are most commonly given sedation to allow them to become relaxed enough for a short period of time to have their dental treatment performed. However this does not help them to overcome their fear in the long term. The primary goal of our CBT service is to enable patients to receive dental treatment without the need for sedation, by working with each individual patient to set goals according to their priorities. Our study shows that after on average five CBT sessions, most people can go on to be treated by the dentist without the need to be sedated."

"However, there is a need for people with dental phobia to be carefully assessed by trained CBT practitioners working with dental health professionals. Some of the patients referred to us were found to be experiencing additional psychological difficulties, and needed further referral and management. CBT provides a way of reducing the need for sedation in people with a phobia, but there will still be those who need sedation because they require urgent dental treatment or they are having particularly invasive treatments. Our service should be viewed as complementing sedation services rather than as an alternative, the two together providing a comprehensive care pathway for the ultimate benefit of patients."

A recent study published in the same journal, co-authored by Professor Tim Newton, showed that more women than men reported dental phobia in the 2009 Adult Dental Health Survey. Those with dental phobia were more likely to come from a lower income background, have more caries in their teeth and suffer from poorer oral health overall.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release does not address risks, but CBT carries few risks (if any). In addition, the release states that in this study, patients who needed additional therapy beyond CBT for mental health issues were referred for more assistance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The blood test that millions of men undergo each year to check for prostate cancer leads to so much unnecessary anxiety, surgery and complications that doctors should stop testing elderly men, and it remains unclear whether the screening is worthwhile for younger men, a federal task force concluded yesterday.

In the first update of its recommendations for prostate cancer screening in five years, the panel that sets government policy on preventive medicine said that the evidence that the test reduces the cancer's death toll is too uncertain to endorse routine use for men at any age, and that the potential harm clearly outweighs any benefits for men age 75 and older.

"The benefit of screening at this time is uncertain, and if there is a benefit, it's likely to be small," said Ned Calonge, who chairs the 16-member U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. It published the new guidelines today in the Annals of Internal Medicine. "And on the other side, the risks are large and dramatic."

The task force and other groups concluded previously that it was unclear whether the benefits of the prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, test outweigh the risks. The new review of the scientific literature found no evidence to alter that assessment for younger men. It did find enough new data to recommend for the first time against screening for older men.

"We felt with sufficient certainty that your risk of being harmed exceeded your potential benefits starting at age 75," Calonge said.

The recommendations come at a time when doctors are increasingly questioning whether many tests, drugs and procedures are being overused, unnecessarily driving up health-care costs and exposing patients to the risks of unneeded treatment.

"There is this idea that more is always better, and if a test is available we should use it," said Howard A. Brody, a professor of family medicine at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. "A lot of times, we're doing more harm than good."

The guidelines address perhaps the most important and contentious issue in men's health, and were praised by officials at several leading medical groups, including the National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society. But they drew strong criticism from others who are convinced that routine screening is necessary.

"I think they're really missing the boat," said William J. Catalona, a professor of urology at Northwestern University. "It's a disservice to patients. A lot of men die from prostate cancer, and there's just an overwhelming amount of evidence that screening saves lives."

Each year, prostate cancer is diagnosed in more than 218,000 U.S. men. About 28,000 die of it, making it the most common cancer and second-leading cancer killer among men.

The PSA test, which measures a protein in the blood produced by prostate tissue, has significantly increased the number of prostate cancer cases being diagnosed at very early stages. But it remains unclear whether that translates into a reduction in the death rate from the disease. Prostate cancer often grows so slowly that many men die from something else without ever knowing they had it.

Because it is not clear precisely what PSA level signals the presence of cancer, many men experience stressful false alarms that lead to unnecessary surgical biopsies to make a definitive diagnosis, which can be painful and in rare cases can cause serious complications.

Even when the test picks up a real cancer, doctors are uncertain what, if anything, men should do about it. Many men simply are monitored closely to see if the tumor shows signs of growing or spreading. Others undergo surgery, radiation and hormone treatments, which often leave them incontinent, impotent and experiencing other complications.

"People say, 'What's the harm in screening?' In fact, there are several ways in which screening can actually be harmful," said Howard L. Parnes of the National Cancer Institute.

Since the task force issued its previous recommendations in 2002, at least eight new studies have been published. Among them was a large Swedish review that found that men age 65 and older who were treated for prostate cancer were no more likely to survive than those who were not.

"If therapy isn't providing meaningful benefit, then how could screening provide benefit?" Calonge said. "And we know that the therapy produces significant harms."

Men younger than 75 should be carefully counseled about the potential risks associated with the test and the lack of evidence about any benefit before getting it, the panel said.

Men at high risk for prostate cancer, such as African Americans and those with a family history of the disease, are the most likely to benefit from PSA screening. But the panel concluded that the evidence remains inconclusive for those men as well.

Several other experts said that the new recommendations strike a careful balance, and that they hope they might discourage large-scale screenings where the risks and benefits are not carefully laid out.

"I think they are right on target," Parnes said.

Others were highly critical, noting that prostate cancer death rates have plummeted in many countries after they instituted widespread PSA screening.

"We have seen a dramatic drop in mortality," said J. Brantley Thrasher, chairman of the urology department at the University of Kansas and a spokesman for the American Urological Association. "They're not paying attention to that."

Others objected to setting an age cutoff, saying men should be evaluated individually.

"Men are living a lot longer and healthier these days. I play golf with 84-year-old guys who beat me all the time," said E. David Crawford, a professor of surgery and radiation at the University of Colorado at Denver. "You have to individualize treatment. If a 75-year-old man is found to have high-grade prostate cancer, it's going to kill him, and we can intervene and do something for him."

Two large studies are underway -- one in the United States and one in Europe -- to answer the question of whether screening reduces mortality.

"If it turns out that PSA screening and aggressive treatment saves lives, maybe all the harm that it has caused is worth it," said Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer at the American Cancer Society. "If PSA screening does not save lives, then it's clearly not worth it. We just don't know yet."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Without quantifying the frequency, the story mentioned the common side effects of treatment for prostate cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For years pregnant women have been warned about eating tuna because of concerns about mercury exposure. But a federal panel has reignited the debate about the benefits and risks of eating tuna and other seafood during pregnancy.

Experts agree that seafood is a rich source of important nutrients, and that most of us don’t eat enough of it. Fish is rich in omega-3 fatty acids, B vitamins, iodine, selenium and vitamin D. And numerous studies show that the nutrients in fish are particularly important for brain development in fetuses and nursing infants.

As part of a sweeping review of nutrition recommendations, the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee recently reiterated the current seafood guidelines: Americans should eat a wide variety of seafood. The report also acknowledges the risk of mercury exposure from certain kinds of seafoods, and notes that women who are pregnant, nursing or may become pregnant should avoid certain kinds — tilefish, shark, swordfish and king mackerel — because of their high mercury content.

The panel withheld a recommendation about tuna, second only to shrimp in popularity in the United States. Current guidelines from the Food and Drug Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency warn pregnant and nursing women to limit tuna consumption to six ounces per week.

The advisory committee has recommended that these agencies “re-evaluate” their stance on tuna for pregnant women. In the report, the panel argues that albacore tuna is a “special case.” They noted that even when women ate double the recommended weekly amount of tuna, the benefits far outweighed the risks. “All evidence was in favor of net benefits for infant development and (cardiovascular disease) risk reduction,” the panel wrote.

The suggestion that pregnant women can eat more white albacore tuna — the type of tuna typically used in canned tuna — has upset advocacy groups that have called for increased warnings about mercury on tuna packaging.

“Tuna is responsible for nearly seven times more mercury exposure than the four high-mercury fish that the Federal Food and Drug Administration advises pregnant women not to eat,” said Michael Bender, director of the mercury policy project, in a statement. “So why would the proposed 2015 dietary guidelines recommend that pregnant women eat more of it?”

But Dr. Steve Abrams, a panel member involved in the seafood recommendations and medical director of the Neonatal Nutrition Program at Baylor College of Medicine, said that while women need to be aware of the types of fish they are eating, the evidence is strong that fish consumption by mothers is good for the brains of their babies.

“The goal of the dietary guidelines is to give people a healthy way to eat and not to include or exclude certain foods,” said Dr. Abrams. “The benefit of having (omega-3 fatty acids) in your diet really exceeds the likely risk of contamination. The point is that you should have a variety of types of seafood and not limit yourself to one type, and variety includes canned tuna.”

Alice Lichtenstein, senior scientist and director of the Cardiovascular Nutrition Laboratory at Tufts University said the panel hasn’t suggested that pregnant women eat more tuna. “The issue of fish contamination is a moving target and you need very current data,” said Dr. Lichtenstein. “It may be that the issue is re-evaluated and there is no change.”

Mercury levels in our oceans are on the rise due to an increase in industrial mercury emissions. Plants, plankton and tiny fish that have absorbed small amounts of mercury are eaten by larger fish. Over time, large fish sharks and swordfish accumulate high levels of mercury. As a result, health officials recommend fish like sardines, salmon, tilapia and trout that are lower on the food chain and have accumulated less mercury in their tissue.

The benefits of fish consumption on a developing fetus are clear. In a Harvard study of 135 mothers and infants, researchers tracked fish consumption during pregnancy and tested the mother’s hair to measure her mercury exposure. They found that for each weekly serving of fish the mother ate while pregnant, her baby’s score on visual recognition memory tests increased an average of four points. At the same time, a baby’s score dropped by 7.5 points for every one part per million increase in mercury found in the mother’s hair sample. The babies who scored highest on the memory tests were those whose mothers had consumed two or more servings of fish each week during their pregnancy, but were tested to have very low mercury levels.

Health officials have long worried about balancing warnings about mercury against the obvious benefits of consuming more fish. Currently fewer than one in five Americans eats the recommended two servings a week of fish. About one-third eat one serving of seafood weekly and nearly half of us eats very little seafood or none at all.

This fall Consumer Reports issued a lengthy paper on fish and mercury exposure, noting the special concerns about canned tuna due to its popularity. Six ounces of canned tuna contains 60 micrograms of mercury compared to just 4 micrograms of mercury in a six-ounce serving of salmon, according to Consumer Reports. (A six-ounce serving of swordfish contains 170 micrograms, the magazine said. )

For people who want to safely eat more seafood, the magazine recommended shrimp, scallops, sardines, salmon, oysters, squid and tilapia as the lowest-mercury seafood. Also low are haddock, pollock, flounder and sole, Atlantic croaker, crawfish, catfish, trout, Atlantic mackerel, crab and mullet. In addition to the usual warnings about high mercury fish, Consumer Reports added marlin and orange roughy to the list. They suggested limiting consumption of grouper, Chilean sea bass, bluefish, halibut, black cod, Spanish mackerel and fresh tuna.

To find out more about mercury in seafood, go to the Got Mercury? calculator created by the Sea Turtle Island Restoration Network at seaturtles.org/programs/mercury/.

 

 For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does discuss the aforementioned 2005 study, which found that a baby’s score on visual recognition memory tests was affected by the amount of mercury in the mother during pregnancy, so we’ll give it a pass. However, the story would have been better if it had — even briefly — addressed the full suite of possible health risks associated with mercury exposure during pregnancy. Also, the story discusses the findings of the 2005 study by referring to mercury measured in parts per million, but discusses mercury levels in tuna in terms of micrograms per ounce. It would have been great if the story had used the same units of measurement in both cases, so that readers could understand the significance of the 2005 study’s findings in regard to levels of mercury actually found in tuna. (A back-of-the-envelope calculation finds that if six ounces of tuna contains 60 micrograms of mercury, the mercury is present at a level of about 0.35 parts per million. But the story could have cited an expert.)
In addition, while the story does briefly discuss the advantages of eating fish, it does not really address the potential harms of not getting adequate amounts of omega-3 fatty acids or other nutrients found in tuna and other fish.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Even though her mammogram showed no sign of cancer, Sandra Litt knew she could feel a lump. She had a second mammogram. Nothing there, the radiologist assured her. "Then one night, I found the 'nothing there' had grown bigger," Litt said. Her self-exam had proved accurate. Two years ago, Litt underwent a double mastectomy and months of chemotherapy to survive an aggressive breast cancer. It defies common sense, she says, for scientists to conclude that breast self-exams do women more harm than good. "It's a very important tool," the 67-year-old Portland woman says. "Why throw away an important tool?" A scientific review, published in August by the

, highlighted the downside of doing breast self-exams: Women taught to perform the monthly ritual wind up having unnecessary biopsies. They are about twice as likely to undergo biopsies that won't find cancerous tumors, according to two studies tracking hundreds of thousands of women in China and Russia. Conflicting news coverage has heightened the confusion. "Breast self-exam has no benefit," one headline proclaimed. "Breast self-exam key in catching what mammogram may miss," another said. What is clear is that studies don't supply an answer that fits all women.

Dr. Elizabeth Steiner, director of the breast health education program at

, said each woman must decide for herself, with full knowledge of the pros and cons, whether to perform self-exams. And there's not a right or wrong answer. Some may do the exams and accept the risk of unnecessary biopsies, she said. Others may decide that either they can't commit the time to do them right, or that the potential for false alarms and anxiety isn't worth it. "That's a very personal decision," Steiner said.

When doctors began promoting breast self-exams in the 1950s, the benefits seemed obvious. Here was a simple, inexpensive do-it-yourself way for women to find tumors before it was too late. During the women's health movement of the 1970s, the self-exam gained importance as a means for women to take charge and rely less on a paternalistic health system. But researchers have learned that self-exams aren't at all simple. The technique is complicated and difficult to learn to do well. Guidelines on how to do them correctly have evolved, leaving many women and doctors with outdated ideas. Further, decades of research still have not produced good evidence that self-exams make any difference in breast cancer survival. "Not only do the trials not find a benefit, the trials demonstrate harm in terms of increased physician visits and benign breast biopsies," said Dr. Nancy Baxter, a University of Toronto surgeon who reviewed the evidence on self-exams for the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. She said self-exams may not reveal tumors early enough to improve survival. "By the time a breast cancer is large enough to be detected by self-exam, tumor biology is the most important predictor of outcome, not finding a tumor a few months before it would have become apparent," she said. Given the lack of evidence, the

considers the exams unproven. And the

has recommended against routine teaching of breast self-exams since 2001. Unnecessary biopsies may not be the only hidden cost. "One danger of pushing breast self-exams on patients is that they may be falsely reassured by it and opt out of their mammograms," said Dr. Heidi Nelson, medical director of the

in Portland. She stopped routinely teaching self-exams to patients after the large trials in China and Russia showed no benefit.

Some evidence does suggest that self-exams done properly could make a difference. For instance, they provide a means to search for tumors in outer parts of the breast where mammography may not reach. About half of breast cancers develop in the upper-outer quadrant of the breast, which is largely inaccessible to mammography scanners. A small study in Canada in 1997 found that self-exams seemed to improve survival among a subset of women using proper technique. The preferred method, known as the vertical strip, three-pressure test, has proved the most sensitive and least likely to produce false alarms, Steiner said. In the largest and most influential study to date, involving 266,000 women in Shanghai, Steiner said researchers taught an inferior method of exams. She said that could partly explain why the Shanghai study failed to find improved survival. Self-exams also appeal strongly to some younger women, whose main screening test is a manual exam done by a doctor or nurse. Mammography is considered inappropriate for women younger than 40, and many doctors don't recommend it until age 50. If a woman decides to do self-exams, Steiner said, it's important to learn to do them right -- and do them every month without fail. "Done haphazardly and irregularly, it is probably worse than no breast self-exam at all," Steiner said. She encourages women to schedule an appointment devoted to learning the technique, which should take at least a half-hour. A few minutes squeezed into a routine annual exam aren't enough, she said. Steiner said not all doctors are up to speed on breast exam technique, which calls for lying down, not taking a few minutes standing in the shower -- the form pushed for years by physicians and even anti-breast cancer groups. "It's important to ask, 'Do you feel confident in your own technique and training me how to do it?'" she said. Nelson cautions women not to skip their mammograms if they don't find lumps during self-exams. But finding a lump also is no reason to panic, given the limited accuracy of the self-test. Litt, the breast cancer survivor, has another piece of advice: "Do not ignore your own judgment; and be assertive," she said. "You don't get a do-over."

What to make of breast cancer's "1-in-8" statistic.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story lists the downsides of screening via a self-breast exam, namely,  over treatment via biopsies for false positives and false reassurance that mammography is not needed. The story appropriately notes a woman’s individual risk is a factor when choosing how and when to be screened. A woman at higher-risk may feel that  monitoring tissue changes via self-breast exams is useful.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Take charge of your biological clock,” the invitation urged.

It beckoned women to an evening seminar in Manhattan. There, they received a coupon for the latest in fertility management: a genetic test marketed as a way to help maximize their chances of becoming pregnant.

The hitch: Top reproductive endocrinologists point out that there’s no evidence the $950 DNA test can actually help women conceive. And even the company’s founder and CEO acknowledges the test can’t provide clear and definitive answers on which treatments women should try next if they’re struggling with infertility.

The Fertilome test hit the market at the start of this year and the company behind it, Celmatix, said more than 50 doctors have already ordered it for hundreds of women seeking scientific guidance on questions such as whether they should freeze their eggs for future use, or whether it’s worth it to try another round of in vitro fertilization. The Celmatix CEO, Piraye Yurttas Beim, said her team has heard of a small wave of “Fertilome babies” on the way.

Some reproductive specialists are enthusiastic. But others caution that Fertilome is just the latest genetic test promising more than it can deliver — and, in this case, playing to the fears of women who are anxious about becoming a mother. (Another example: a new $89 test that claims to tell women how their DNA could influence the level of a beneficial fatty acid in their breast milk.)

The Fertilome test, which must be ordered by a doctor, analyzes a woman’s DNA for 49 genetic variants that have been linked to various conditions that can sometimes cause fertility problems. A couple weeks later, the doctor gets back a long report listing the odds that a patient has certain conditions.

For example, she might be 4.4 times more likely than women without a particular genetic variant to have a condition known as primary ovarian insufficiency, characterized by irregular periods and diminished fertility before age 40.

That sounds alarming, and might prompt a younger woman who’s planning to delay pregnancy to freeze her eggs to be sure she has them available down the road. But the report does not explain that the condition is fairly rare — affecting just 1 in 1,000 women by age 30 and 1 in 250 women by age 35 — so the absolute risk is still very small.

And just because women have an elevated genetic risk for a condition doesn’t mean they actually have it.

Many of the other conditions that the test screens for are also quite rare. But the report doesn’t explain the prevalence.

So a patient may see a table showing that her genetic variants make her twice as likely to have a condition known as recurrent pregnancy loss, defined as repeated miscarriages. But the report doesn’t note that just 1 percent of women have that condition in the first place, making the odds still overwhelmingly in her favor. The doctor ordering the test, or a genetic counselor, is supposed to provide that information.

Without the proper context, “some of this can be very misleading and very frightening to patients,” said Dr. John Petrozza, chief of the division of reproductive medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital.

Petrozza said he worries that women might wrongly interpret a long litany of genetic risks to mean that their hopes to start a family are “doomed.” He also said he sees the test as “very costly for what it’s trying to do — and not really giving, at least at this point, what I would consider meaningful information.”

The Fertilome test was eight years in the making. It draws on more than 5,000 studies that have found associations between particular genetic variants and conditions that can cause fertility problems, company spokeswoman Colleen McMillen said.

Beim, the Celmatix CEO, said the test is already bringing “tremendous” value, in part by providing guidance that can act as a “tiebreaker” to help patients and their doctor decide which treatment to prioritize.

“It will help save a lot of heartache and time if we could know from the very beginning that [a given patient] is at risk for a uterine factor, or if it’s more her eggs,” said Dr. Angie Beltsos, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in Chicago who ordered the Fertilome test for one of her patients for the first time last month.

What the test can’t do: provide evidence-backed answers on what patients should try next. Nor can it tell patients whether they’re wired to get pregnant from IVF — or wired to fail it. “We’re not there. We’re not claiming we’re there,” Beim said.

Beim trained as a molecular genetics researcher. As a Ph.D. student at Weill Cornell in the 2000s, she worked on an early project in what’s now called precision medicine: identifying the specific genetic alterations in the tumors of lung cancer patients that seemed to predict whether they would respond to a certain drug.

After shifting her research focus to embryology, Beim found herself frustrated that the fertility field wasn’t benefiting from the same boom in translational genetics that was reshaping oncology. So she started her own company.

Celmatix also sells software, called Polaris, that pulls from the medical histories of hundreds of thousands of women to try to predict which fertility treatments are likely to work in different circumstances.

Fertilome — not to be confused with a line of weed killers and other gardening products with the same name — launched in January with a $1,900 price tag. Insurers don’t cover it; after it became clear that patients were balking at the bill, Celmatix cut the price in half.

Celmatix is mostly marketing the test to reproductive specialists, who are largely using it in the toughest infertility cases, Beim said.

But the company is also beginning to market directly to women — including younger women who aren’t trying to get pregnant yet.

The company has recently started promoting social media ads, like one that asks: “Are you getting the right fertility treatments for your DNA?” Another asserts: “Over 60% of millennial women are open to #eggfreezing. The Fertilome test can help you decide if it is right for you.”

The company’s website also features testimonials from women who say they have used Fertilome to help guide their decisions. There’s Ella, a 30-year-old with dark hair and stylish clothing who decided to freeze her eggs after taking the Fertilome test. Then there’s Maxine, a 27-year-old medical school graduate with short hair and a warm smile who used the test to help her juggle the timing of starting a family and starting her career.

The wrinkle: The images of Ella and Maxine are actually stock photos, available for purchase online.

After questions from STAT, the company added a disclaimer acknowledging that testimonials are not quite as they were promoted from the start: the names, images, and details of patients’ stories have been changed to safeguard their privacy.

Along with its social media outreach, Celmatix has held several after-work events for New York City-area women. It hosted one, on a Wednesday night in April, in its offices on Wall Street.

And on a Tuesday evening earlier this summer, the company partnered with a women’s group to host a conversation about “proactive steps you can take today to reach your future family building goals.” Appetizers, wine, and beer were served — and, in a gesture to the crowd full of women with pregnancy on their minds, non-alcoholic beverages were on the menu, too.

The company is also trying to reach OB-GYNs whose patients aren’t yet trying to get pregnant — or may be just beginning to try. Celmatix held webinars earlier this summer for OB-GYNs, telling them that the test could help “optimize management plans from the very start.”

Dr. Aimee Eyvazzadeh, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in the Bay Area, is among a few doctors who’ve been given vouchers by the company to offer the test for $500. She’s been ordering the Fertilome test for her patients about five times a week.

Eyvazzadeh said the test recently helped her counsel a patient to forgo a third round of IVF, because the patient had a genetic profile that suggested it would be unlikely to work and wasn’t in a financial position to gamble on such slim odds. (A round of IVF can cost $13,000.) That patient is now considering an egg donor.

Another one of Eyvazzadeh’s patients is 31-year-old Tara Smith.

For Smith, who works as a foster parent providing intensive care in Northern California, there’s nothing more important than family. She’s dreamed of having her own baby since she was a child herself.

That’s why Smith and her husband have spent about $70,000 over the past four years trying, without success, to get pregnant. They’ve seen doctors in St. Louis and Las Vegas, taken countless blood tests, and tried two rounds of IVF and several cycles of intrauterine insemination. Smith has long known that she has a condition called polycystic ovary syndrome, which can make it harder to get pregnant, but no one could figure out exactly why none of the treatments were working.

“It’s gut-wrenching. You’re almost like this alien,” Smith said. “Nobody knows what’s going on, and you can’t fix the problem.”

So when Eyvazzadeh suggested that she take the Fertilome test, Smith jumped at the possibility of finally getting answers. Eyvazzadeh walked her through the results last month before showing her the report, so Smith had an idea of what to expect. Still, Smith said, “my heart sank” when she saw her results for the first time.

She was 2.88 times more likely to have endometriosis, a painful disorder of the uterus, than a woman without a certain genetic variant. She was 1.54 times more likely to have primary ovarian insufficiency. She also carried three genetic variants that elevated her risk of having recurrent pregnancy loss. And she had 24 additional genetic variants that are more weakly associated with various conditions that can play a role in fertility problems.

Despite it all, Eyvazzadeh had a plan. Because many of Smith’s genetic variants were involved in immune response regulation, she instructed Smith to focus on minimizing inflammation.

At Eyvazzadeh’s recommendation, Smith spent about $200 buying dietary supplements like fish oils, turmeric, cayenne pepper, resveratrol, and berberine from Amazon and Walmart. Smith also embarked on a new diet, cutting out dairy and red meat. (A 2015 review of the evidence on the optimal diet to promote fertility — and the utility of supplements — found the data “conflicting.”)

They also plan to have Smith get infusions of intralipids — a cocktail of soy bean oil, egg yolks, and other fatty acids — during her third round of IVF, which she’s embarking on now. (Intralipid infusions are increasingly popular, but the practice was found not to help in a 2016 study of older women with a history of miscarriage.)

Smith has mostly positive feelings about her Fertilome test. Having a concrete plan based on what’s in her DNA gives her a new sense of hope. “Now I feel like we’re armed with information,” she said. But at the same time, she said, knowing what may be wrong with her makes her apprehensive about whether she’ll ever get pregnant.

After all, so far, the test has pointed her only to try nutritional tweaks of uncertain value. It doesn’t offer any definitive answers.

And that’s what gives Dr. Valerie Baker pause. A reproductive endocrinologist at Stanford, she recently suggested the test to a patient with longstanding infertility. The patient asked a good question: What would we do differently if we had this genetic analysis?

“I don’t know,” Baker recalled responding. “I probably wouldn’t do anything differently.”

She did not end up ordering the test.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: One of the strengths of this story is its explanation of the actual risk to a woman with a particular genetic variant identified by the test.  The test results cast risk in terms of relative likelihood (i.e., they determine if a woman is more likely, as a result of a genetic variant, to develop a specific condition that could affect her ability to get pregnant) while the story supplements that with numbers characterizing the “absolute” risk (that condition is rare in the first place, so even an increased risk is small in absolute terms).  Sources in the story also identify another harm: misinterpretation of results can heighten anxiety. The story could have gone further, to contemplate the possibility that women may make wrong decisions based on the incomplete information provided by the test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new form of therapy has for the first time been shown to improve the symptoms and behaviour of autistic children, offering a potential breakthrough in care for millions of families.

Six years after parents were trained to better understand and interact with their preschool children, researchers found that the therapy had moderated the behaviour of those who had been severely autistic, unresponsive or unable to speak.

A child who might have run around a supermarket squealing, heedless of their parent, putting objects in their mouth and pushing past shoppers to try to press the buttons at checkout, might instead wait in the queue and even help load the trolley, the research found.

The success of the preschool autism communication trial (Pact) has surprised even the researchers who designed it. There are no drugs to treat the condition, which typically sets in around the age of two, and many families have tried intensive training of their children by therapists, with mixed results. Pact instead trained the parents to help their children.

Prof Jonathan Green at the University of Manchester, who led the study published in the Lancet medical journal, said they had not found the cure for autism, but he and his team believed it had great potential and hoped it would be widely adopted.

“The advantage of this approach over a direct therapist-child intervention is that it has potential to affect the everyday life of the child,” he said. “Our findings are encouraging, as they represent an improvement in the core symptoms of autism previously thought very resistant to change.

“This is not a cure, in the sense that the children who demonstrated improvements will still show remaining symptoms to a variable extent, but it does suggest that working with parents to interact with their children in this way can lead to improvements in symptoms over the long term.”

The trial involved 152 children aged two to four. The families visited a clinic twice a week for six months, where parents were videoed with their children and a box of toys. Autistic children might not interact with their parents at all, but when eventually a child did offer a toy or made a noise that could be interpreted as a request, the incident was rerun on video and the parent encouraged to respond. If the child offered a toy, the parent reciprocated. If the child said a word, the parent repeated it and added something. The practice was repeated at home every day.

The therapy continued with the parents for the next six months with less intensity. At the end of the first year, the researchers could see the children had improved, but the most dramatic development was seen at the follow-up six years later. At the start of the trial, 50% of those in the control group who did not get the therapy and 55% of those who did were assessed as severely autistic. The children in the intervention group, though, got better. The proportion assessed as severe in the control group was 63% by the end of six years, compared with 46% in the intervention group.

Other experts applauded the work. “I can see why these researchers are excited,” said Dorothy Bishop, professor of developmental neuropsychology at the University of Oxford. “These results at follow-up are pretty consistent in showing the benefit of this early intervention for autism across a range of measures. My impression is that this is an intervention that reduces the severity of autistic symptoms, rather than curing autism. Nevertheless, for parents of children with autism, even a modest reduction would be worthwhile.”

Dr Max Davie, of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said it offered “a hugely cheering message for families”, while Uta Frith, emeritus professor of cognitive development at University College London, called it “a remarkably positive story, because the intervention itself was neither intensive nor invasive”.

The absence of any hope, as well as the very sudden regression in children’s behaviour, led many parents to believe in the discredited theory of Andrew Wakefield that the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine was the cause of autism.

“Parents commonly tell us that they fight for a diagnosis but when they finally get it the cupboard is bare, with little information or tailored support available to them,” said Dr James Cusack, director of science at the charity Autistica. “Too often, parents fall victim to the false claims of charlatans who prey on desperate families. These results look promising for the many thousands of parents who want to find early interventions for their children based on solid science.”

The researchers said children’s communication with their parents was improved at the end of the six years. The parents said there were also improvements in relations with other children, in social communication and in repetitive behaviours. But there was no change in child anxiety, challenging behaviours or depression in the autistic children and they would still need a lot of support while growing up.

About 1% of children and young people are affected by autistic spectrum disorder, which ranges from mild to severe. The lifetime costs to the UK, which include health, social care and education costs as well as productivity losses, are estimated at £1m to £1.5m per child and between $1.4m and $2.4m in the United States.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article quotes an outside expert who notes that the training intervention was non-invasive and non-intensive.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 4, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Regularly consumption of food and drink rich in substances called flavonoids, such as berries, apples, tea and red wine, can lower a man's risk of developing Parkinson's disease by 40 percent, new research suggests.

For women, however, a reduction in risk was only seen when they ate at least several servings of berries a week, according to the study. Men also had a risk reduction from frequently eating berries.

"For total flavonoids, the beneficial result was only in men. But, berries are protective in both men and women," said the study's lead author, Dr. Xiang Gao, a research scientist at the Harvard School of Public Health and an associate epidemiologist at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

"Berries could be a neuroprotective agent. People can include berries in their regular diet. There are no harmful effects from berry consumption, and they lower the risk of hypertension too," Gao added.

Results of the study are published online April 4 in the journal Neurology.

Parkinson's disease is a degenerative condition that affects the central nervous system. It causes movement disorders, such as tremors, rigidity and balance problems. About 500,000 Americans have Parkinson's disease, according to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

Flavonoids are substances found in plant foods that help prevent damage to the body's cells, known as oxidative damage. Anthocyanins are a type of flavonoid plentiful in such berries as strawberries and blueberries.

For the study, the researchers reviewed nutrition and health data from almost 50,000 men enrolled in the Health Professional Follow-Up Study and more than 80,000 women participating in the Nurses' Health Study.

The researchers looked at dietary intake of five major flavonoid sources: tea, berries, apples, orange juice and red wine.

Over 20 to 22 years of follow-up, 805 people developed Parkinson's disease -- 438 men and 367 women.

When researchers compared those who ate the most flavonoids with those who ate the least, they found that only men saw a statistically significant benefit, lowering their risk of Parkinson's by 40 percent.

Gao said it wasn't clear why only men benefited from the extra flavonoid intake, but he noted that other studies have also found differences between men and women. Gao said it's not clear if there's a biological mechanism causing these differences, or another factor.

But, when the researchers looked at the dietary compounds individually, it was clear that berries could benefit both men and women, lowering the risk of Parkinson's disease by about 25 percent for those who had at least two servings of berries a week.

Gao said that anthocyanins protect the cells from oxidative damage and they also have an anti-inflammatory effect, which may be how berries help to reduce Parkinson's risk.

The study findings should be interpreted cautiously because the participants were mostly white professionals, and the results might not apply to other ethnic groups. Also, recollections of dietary intake may be faulty, and it's possible that other properties of fruits and vegetables might have influenced the results, the authors said.

Dr. Michael Okun, medical director of the National Parkinson Foundation, said, "It is exciting to see research emerging about modifiable dietary issues that may affect the risk of getting diseases such as Parkinson's."

But, he added, it's important for people to realize that this research isn't applicable to people who already have the disease.

He also said it will be important to confirm these findings in other studies and learn the mechanism of how berries and other flavonoids appear to offer some protection against Parkinson's disease.

Learn more about Parkinson's disease from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story spends most of its time discussing the potential health benefits of berries. We’re not aware of any harm attributable to berry consumption (provided they are the edible kind).
And the story included this quote from the author:
“There are no harmful effects from berry consumption, and they lower the risk of hypertension too,” Gao added.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 2, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- There's still no cure for the common cold, but there may be a way to shorten its misery: A new study suggests that higher doses of zinc lozenges in certain formulations may cut the length of colds by more than 40 percent.

Researcher Dr. Harri Hemila, of the University of Helsinki in Finland, reviewed 13 placebo-controlled trials examining the effect of zinc lozenges on cold infections. Three of them found that zinc acetate in daily doses of more than 75 milligrams (mg) shortened colds' duration by 42 percent, on average.

Five trials using zinc salts other than acetate in daily doses greater than 75 mg shortened colds by an average of 20 percent, while another five using less than 75 mg per day produced no effect.

"Much of the variation in the published study findings can be explained by the daily dose of zinc administered in the zinc lozenges," said Hemila, who funded the research himself. "When focusing on those studies which have used large daily doses of zinc, there is strong evidence that zinc lozenges shorten the duration of colds."

The study is published in The Open Respiratory Medicine Journal.

Despite the popularity of zinc supplements, controversy over their effectiveness has continued since a much-publicized 1984 study first suggested a cold-limiting effect. Allowing the lozenge to dissolve instead of swallowing it seemed to provide a therapeutic effect. Since then, more than a dozen studies have been carried out, but data on the trace mineral's effectiveness has been mixed.

All of the trials examined by Hemila compared zinc lozenges to placebos. While surprised to note how strong the correlation was between daily doses of zinc and its effect on colds' duration, he said he and his colleagues still don't know why it seems to work.

"In the evidence-based medicine framework, we are primarily interested in the question whether there is an effect, and how great, whereas the mechanism of the effect is a secondary issue," he said.

No prior studies showed zinc lozenge use -- even up to 150 mg per day -- might cause harm aside from bad taste or constipation, Hemila said, and the most recent trial on zinc acetate indicated no significant differences between zinc and placebo groups in adverse effects even though the daily zinc dose was 92 mg.

Dr. Lisa Winston, an epidemiologist at San Francisco General Hospital, praised the study as a "pretty good synthesis of the data," although she noted that the trials Hemila reviewed involved small numbers of participants.

"It's an area of controversy and question . . . but I don't think the evidence is strong enough, nor do I think the author is suggesting, that we can base clinical practice on it," said Winston, also an associate professor in the University of California-San Francisco Department of Medicine. "I would tell my patients we still don't have a cure [for the common cold], and we don't know if zinc works."

The U.S. National Library of Medicine has more about the common cold.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story suggests that, “No prior studies showed zinc lozenge use — even up to 150 mg per day — might cause harm aside from bad taste or constipation” We give it a pass since it does note the major side effects seen.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the late 1940s, the steroid cortisone, an anti-inflammatory drug, was first synthesized and hailed as a landmark. It soon became a safe, reliable means to treat the pain and inflammation associated with sports injuries (as well as other conditions). Cortisone shots became one of the preferred treatments for overuse injuries of tendons, like tennis elbow or an aching Achilles, which had been notoriously resistant to treatment. The shots were quite effective, providing rapid relief of pain.

Then came the earliest clinical trials, including one, published in 1954, that raised incipient doubts about cortisone’s powers. In that early experiment, more than half the patients who received a cortisone shot for tennis elbow or other tendon pain suffered a relapse of the injury within six months.

But that cautionary experiment and others didn’t slow the ascent of cortisone (also known as corticosteroids). It had such a magical, immediate effect against pain. Today cortisone shots remain a standard, much-requested treatment for tennis elbow and other tendon problems.

But a major new review article, published last Friday in The Lancet, should revive and intensify the doubts about cortisone’s efficacy. The review examined the results of nearly four dozen randomized trials, which enrolled thousands of people with tendon injuries, particularly tennis elbow, but also shoulder and Achilles-tendon pain. The reviewers determined that, for most of those who suffered from tennis elbow, cortisone injections did, as promised, bring fast and significant pain relief, compared with doing nothing or following a regimen of physical therapy. The pain relief could last for weeks.

But when the patients were re-examined at 6 and 12 months, the results were substantially different. Over all, people who received cortisone shots had a much lower rate of full recovery than those who did nothing or who underwent physical therapy. They also had a 63 percent higher risk of relapse than people who adopted the time-honored wait-and-see approach. The evidence for cortisone as a treatment for other aching tendons, like sore shoulders and Achilles-tendon pain, was slight and conflicting, the review found. But in terms of tennis elbow, the shots seemed to actually be counterproductive. As Bill Vicenzino, the chairman of sports physiotherapy at the University of Queensland in Australia and senior author of the review, said in an e-mail response to questions, “There is a tendency” among tennis-elbow sufferers “for the majority (70-90 percent) of those following a wait-and-see policy to get better” after six months to a year. But this is not the case for those getting cortisone shots, he wrote; they “tend to lag behind significantly at those time frames.” In other words, in some way, the cortisone shots impede full recovery, and compared with those adopting a wait-and-see policy, those getting the shots “are worse off.” Those people receiving multiple injections may be at particularly high risk for continuing damage. In one study that the researchers reviewed, “an average of four injections resulted in a 57 percent worse outcome when compared to one injection,” Dr. Vicenzino said.

Why cortisone shots should slow the healing of tennis elbow is a good question. An even better one, though, is why they help in the first place. For many years it was widely believed that tendon-overuse injuries were caused by inflammation, said Dr. Karim Khan, a professor at the School of Human Kinetics at the University of British Columbia and the co-author of a commentary in The Lancet accompanying the new review article. The injuries were, as a group, given the name tendinitis, since the suffix “-itis” means inflammation. Cortisone is an anti-inflammatory medication. Using it against an inflammation injury was logical.

But in the decades since, numerous studies have shown, persuasively, that these overuse injuries do not involve inflammation. When animal or human tissues from these types of injuries are examined, they do not contain the usual biochemical markers of inflammation. Instead, the injury seems to be degenerative. The fibers within the tendons fray. Today the injuries usually are referred to as tendinopathies, or diseased tendons.

Why then does a cortisone shot, an anti-inflammatory, work in the short term in noninflammatory injuries, providing undeniable if ephemeral pain relief? The injections seem to have “an effect on the neural receptors” involved in creating the pain in the sore tendon, Dr. Khan said. “They change the pain biology in the short term.” But, he said, cortisone shots do “not heal the structural damage” underlying the pain. Instead, they actually “impede the structural healing.”

Still, relief of pain might be a sufficient reason to champion the injections, if the pain “were severe,” Dr. Khan said. “But it’s not.” The pain associated with tendinopathies tends to fall somewhere around a 7 or so on a 10-point scale of pain. “It’s not insignificant, but it’s not kidney stones.”

So the question of whether cortisone shots still make sense as a treatment for tendinopathies, especially tennis elbow, depends, Dr. Khan said, on how you choose “to balance short-term pain relief versus the likelihood” of longer-term negative outcomes. In other words, is reducing soreness now worth an increased risk of delayed healing and possible relapse within the year?

Some people, including physicians, may decide that the answer remains yes. There will always be a longing for a magical pill, the quick fix, especially when the other widely accepted and studied alternatives for treating sore tendons are to do nothing or, more onerous to some people, to rigorously exercise the sore joint during physical therapy. But if he were to dispense advice based on his findings and that of his colleagues’ systematic review, Dr. Vicenzino said, he would suggest that athletes with tennis elbow (and possibly other tendinopathies) think not just once or twice about the wisdom of cortisone shots but “three or four times.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 
The article provided adequate detail on the main harms associated with steroid injections: disruption of the long-term healing process and relapse into pain and disability. It might have been useful to also mention other potential side effects and potential harms related to steroid injections.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 12, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Higher vitamin D levels in patients with advanced colon cancer appear to improve response to chemotherapy and targeted anti-cancer drugs, researchers say.

"We found that patients who had vitamin D levels at the highest category had improved survival and improved progression-free survival, compared with patients in the lowest category," said lead author Dr. Kimmie Ng, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Those patients survived one-third longer than patients with low levels of vitamin D -- an average 32.6 months, compared with 24.5 months, the researchers found.

The report, scheduled for presentation this week at the Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium in San Francisco, adds more weight to suspicions that vitamin D might be a valuable cancer-fighting supplement.

However, colon cancer patients shouldn't try to boost vitamin D levels beyond the normal range, one expert said.

The study only found an association between vitamin D levels and colon cancer survival rates. It did not prove cause and effect.

Researchers for years have investigated vitamin D as a potential anti-cancer tool, but none of the findings have been strong enough to warrant a recommendation, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society.

"Everyone comes to the same conclusion -- yes, there may be some benefit, but we really need to study it carefully so we can be certain there aren't other factors that make vitamin D look better than it is," Lichtenfeld said. "These findings are interesting, and show that vitamin D may have a role in improving outcomes in cancer care."

In this study, researchers measured blood levels of vitamin D in 1,043 patients enrolled in a phase 3 clinical trial comparing three first-line treatments for newly diagnosed, advanced colon cancer. All of the treatments involved chemotherapy combined with the targeted anti-cancer drugs bevacizumab and/or cetuximab.

Vitamin D is called the "sunshine vitamin" because human bodies produce it when the sun's ultraviolet rays strike the skin. It promotes the intestines' ability to absorb calcium and other important minerals, and is essential for maintaining strong, healthy bones, according to the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

But vitamin D also influences cellular function in ways that could be beneficial in treating cancer, Ng said. For example, she said it appears to reduce cell growth, promote the death of diseased cells, and inhibit the formation of new blood vessels to feed cancerous tumors.

The study authors found that certain types of cancer patients tended to have lower vitamin D levels. These included people whose blood specimens were drawn in the winter and spring months, people who live in the northern and northeastern states, older adults, blacks, overweight or obese people, and those who had lower physical activity and were in worse physical condition.

The patients were divided into five groups based on vitamin D levels, ranging from low to high. After adjusting for prognosis and healthy behaviors, the researchers found that patients in the group with the highest levels of vitamin D lived about eight months longer on average than those in the group with the lowest levels.

"We had a lot of information on their tumor, their treatment and their survival times, and their diet and lifestyle," Ng said. "That really allowed us to adjust for other potential factors that could influence what we're seeing."

It also took longer for cancer to progress in people with higher vitamin D levels -- an average 12.2 months compared with about 10 months in the group with the lowest. No significant differences were seen with regard to the type of therapy the patients received.

This increase in progression-free survival is the most compelling evidence indicating that vitamin D makes a difference in colon cancer, said Dr. Smitha Krishnamurthi, an associate professor of hematology and oncology at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine in Cleveland.

"That is interesting because that's more of a cancer-specific endpoint as opposed to overall survival, which could be influenced by other factors like heart health," Krishnamurthi said.

Everyone should maintain healthy vitamin D levels anyway, to protect their bone health, Ng and Krishnamurthi said.

Based on this new study, Krishnamurthi said she would emphasize the importance of vitamin D for patients with colon cancer.

"They should take supplements to bring it into normal range, because we know it is good for bone health and it may have an anti-cancer effect," she said.

However, "if someone has a normal vitamin D level, I wouldn't take supplements to increase it because we won't know the true effect on cancer until we see the results of a clinical trial," she said.

The U.S. National Institutes of Health funded the study. Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more on vitamin D and cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story makes it clear that patients should not take supplements to increase vitamin levels if they are already normal, thus preventing harms from oversupplementation. However, we wish the story had specifically mentioned potential side effects of high dose vitamin D.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Each year, five million people have wisdom teeth removed, but it's up in the air whether all of those surgeries were necessary.

Wisdom teeth, also called the third molars, are four teeth that grow at the very back of each corner of the mouth. For most people, they start to grow in between ages 17 and 25. They're thought to crowd out other teeth or cause tooth decay, which is why many dentists and oral surgeons think it's better to just nip those problems in the bud and take them out as a preventative measure.

But there's a serious debate between dentists and oral surgeons: should they preemptively remove someone's wisdom teeth if the patient doesn't have any symptoms?

Simply put, there's no right answer. It comes down to what you, as a patient, want. Here's what you need to know to figure that out.

Dentists and oral surgeons are fighting over wisdom teeth

Dentists and oral surgeons agree across the board that there's cause to remove wisdom teeth if a patient is in pain or if there are signs of disease popping up, like tooth decay or infection. That's an obvious choice. But taking out wisdom teeth when there aren't any symptoms is where the professionals get into it.

Many dental professionals stick with a watch and wait approach with wisdom teeth to avoid surgery if possible. "Many people don’t have adequate space in their jaw for the teeth to come into full position, but that alone isn’t justification of having them all removed," says Dr. Scott Tomar of University of North Carolina's School of Dentistry. Tomar says that as a dentist he feels the risks of complication, including infection and hitting nerves during surgery, outweigh any benefits of preventative removal.

In 2007, oral surgeon Dr. Jay Friedman called the preventative removals a public health hazard in the American Journal of Public Health. The American Public Health Association has sided with this argument since 2008, when it formally opposed the preventative removal of wisdom teeth. (The same thing happened with tonsils, which doctors no longer remove just to get rid of the chance of infection later on.)

Americans spend an estimated $3 billion a year having their wisdom teeth removed

Some doctors, though, still see preventative oral surgery as being two steps ahead of the problem. If you're going to need your wisdom teeth out eventually, why not have them removed when you're younger and are more likely to recover more easily? Some think of removing the wisdom teeth early on as a way to lessen the crowding of other teeth

"You might not have symptoms now, but you can't assume it's gonna be that way for the rest of your life," says Dr. Ray White, an oral surgeon working at University of North Carolina. Rather than let the teeth cause problems later on, many oral surgeons remove them.

But a 2012 Cochrane review of randomized clinical trials found there's no evidence that removing wisdom teeth will prevent or reduce crowding of other teeth down the line. And a different Cochrane review found that watching and waiting can "may reduce the number of surgical procedures by 60 percent or more.

The question comes down to which side of the fence medical professionals fall on

It's worth noting that oral surgeons make a good chunk of their paychecks by removing wisdom teeth, so there is a financial incentive involved.

"Are there people gaming the system? Sure. You don't get paid much for not doing anything," White says. "But I'd hope we can get past that."

The American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial surgeons says, "There is no pat answer, cookbook recipe, or flow chart that is universally accepted regarding the decision making process" in these cases. So the question comes down to which side of the fence medical professionals fall on, and what works best for their patients.

The risks and benefits of removing your wisdom teeth

There's a chance that if you opt not to have your wisdom teeth taken out, they might be fine for the rest of your life.

There's also a chance that they'll need to come out later. If that's the case, you can't always plan for it. Opting to have them removed gives patients time to plan around the procedure, which leaves people out of commission for about three days.

But inconvenience isn't the only risk. "The risk for complications increases as people get older, and the duration of disability after the operation gets longer as people get older," says oral surgeon Dr. Thomas Dodson.

In some cases, the extraction can be more painful if you wait, Dodson says. That's because the tooth is easier to remove if its roots aren't fully developed.

The common risks related to the surgery include poor wound healing, infection, pain, and uncontrolled bleeding. Nerve injury, in rare cases of wisdom teeth removal, can leave people with permanent numbness around the face and mouth, according to the APHA.

Americans spend an estimated $3 billion a year having 10 million wisdom teeth removed, according to the American Public Health Association. That's a hefty bill for something we may or may not need. How much it costs depends on how the molars are situated. A simple surgical extraction for a wisdom tooth that's showing through the gums should run about $230, according to Healthcare Bluebook. If it's impacted (pushed against another tooth and unable to fully come through the gum), the cost jumps to about $400 per tooth.

Update: Added information about the number of teeth removed.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Risks associated with wisdom tooth extraction are clearly spelled out in the story. These include “poor wound healing, infection, pain, and uncontrolled bleeding” along with nerve injury which can, in rare cases, leave people with permanent facial numbness. As noted above, some quantification of these results would have been ideal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, May 8, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Countless people -- often men with enlarged prostates -- need to visit the bathroom during the night. But help could soon be at hand in the form of a nasal spray, new research suggests.

A spritz of a synthetic hormone, already used by bed-wetting kids, might benefit older people struggling with the problem called nocturia.

"Nocturia is very common in patients over 50 years old, and can cause significant problems by causing loss of sleep, and injury due to falls," said study lead author Dr. Jed Kaminetsky.

The millions of people with nocturia wake up two or more times a night to urinate. Besides an enlarged prostate, Kaminetsky said, common causes are bladder problems, poor circulation and obesity.

Kaminetsky is a clinical assistant professor of urology at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

In the United States there's no approved drug to treat the problem, the study authors said.

The new drug, while promising, is of concern because of its potential to lower blood sodium levels in the elderly, one doctor said. Meanwhile, another researcher suggested that exercise might help stave off nocturia.

Known as SER-120, the nasal spray contains desmopressin, a low-dose synthetic version of the naturally occurring hormone vasopressin. Vasopressin, an anti-diuretic, reduces urine production.

SER-120 appears to delay urine production for four to six hours during sleep, said Kaminetsky, "and wears off by morning when patients awaken and start to drink fluids."

He is scheduled to present his team's research Sunday in San Diego at a meeting of the American Urological Association. The research was funded by the spray's manufacturer, Serenity Pharmaceuticals.

Desmopressin is commonly used to treat bed-wetting among children ages 6 and up, the study authors pointed out.

To assess its potential in adults, the study team enlisted nearly 1,400 men and women, 50 and older, who had a history of nocturia.

For three months, participants were randomly assigned to use either the desmopressin spray (two doses were tried) or a non-medicinal spray (a placebo).

Patients kept three-day urination diaries, and filled out quality-of-life questionnaires.

Desmopressin spray prompted "a significant decrease" in the frequency of nightly bathroom trips compared with the untreated group, Kaminetsky said. On average, patients reported at least two fewer episodes a night.

The treatment group also experienced a "significant increase" in the length of time they could sleep before awakening to urinate. That uninterrupted sleep period extended to more than four hours, Kaminetsky said.

The researchers also found that those in the higher-dose spray group experienced a "significant improvement" in overall quality of life, compared with the untreated group.

Though SER-120 is still considered investigational, Kaminetsky said the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing the findings, with a possible decision late this year.

Dr. Tomas Griebling, a professor of urology at the University of Kansas, described the study results as "promising," but added a note of caution.

"Other researchers have examined the utility and safety of desmopressin for the treatment of nocturia in the past," he said. "However, there have been concerns about safety, particularly in elderly patients."

Griebling said the American Geriatrics Society includes desmopressin in the Beers Criteria for potentially inappropriate medications for older adults, primarily because of concerns about resulting low blood sodium levels.

But the lower doses used in this study (1.5 or 0.75 mcg) "may help to improve the overall safety profile, particularly for geriatric patients," he said. "Additional research will be needed to fully answer this question in the future."

The study team said two of the higher-dose patients developed significantly low blood sodium levels (hyponatremia) as did one person taking the placebo.

Dr. Julien Dagenais, a urologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, explored nocturia from another angle. He analyzed physical activity data reported by more than 10,000 men and women (aged 20 and older) in a U.S. health and nutrition survey conducted between 2005 and 2010.

People who reported higher levels of exercise were less likely to suffer from nocturia, Dagenais found. This suggests that the anti-inflammatory impact of routine exercise may minimize nocturia, he said.

These findings will also be presented at the American Urological Association meeting. Data and conclusions presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

There's more on nocturia at the National Association for Continence.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story includes risks of using this drug in the elderly, and mentions that it is already on a list of drugs not to be given to the elderly.  The story also discusses incidences of low blood sodium levels that sometimes occur with this drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, May 19, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A leukemia drug might also effectively treat severe asthma, a small-scale clinical trial suggests.

Gleevec (imatinib) reduced the "twitchiness" of airways, making them less likely to reflexively constrict when exposed to an allergen or asthma trigger, said senior researcher Dr. Elliot Israel.

"We showed we could decrease the amount of airway twitchiness by a third," Israel said. "That's a substantial change, and that was significant compared with the placebo group."

Israel is director of the respiratory therapy department at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

The drug also improved overall airway function, an effect researchers hadn't expected, Israel said.

People whose severe asthma isn't controlled despite use of high-dose steroid medications are at risk of declining lung function and poor quality of life, the researchers said in background notes.

But, this powerful cancer drug can't be recommended for them on the basis of this small study, Israel and other specialists noted.

Gleevec fights leukemia by blocking a specific receptor on cancerous white blood cells, inhibiting their ability to multiply and spread, Israel said.

That same action also affects mast cells, a type of white blood cell distributed throughout the body that promotes inflammation and causes allergic reactions, Israel said.

For example, mast cells in the skin are responsible for hives, while mast cells in the lungs have been associated with severe asthma, he said.

"By blocking the signal that helps keep mast cells alive, we were hoping to reduce the number of these cells," Israel said. "By doing that, we hoped to produce improvements beyond the maximal therapy that these patients with severe asthma are on."

Israel and his colleagues recruited 62 severe asthma sufferers for the study. All received top-notch asthma treatment, and were randomly assigned to take either Gleevec or a placebo pill once daily during the 6-month trial.

Blood tests showed that Gleevec did reduce mast cell activity in patients, Israel said.

Further, allergy challenge tests showed a decrease in airway reactivity among patients taking Gleevec, the researchers reported. Airways became less likely to close off after exposure to an allergen.

Physical examinations showed that people taking Gleevec actually experienced a slight overall widening of their airways, Israel added.

"There was a small but significant improvement in the airway narrowing in these patients, which we didn't expect because we didn't think the mast cells were necessarily promoting that airway narrowing all the time," Israel said.

Side-effects were not as severe as expected, he added. One person dropped out because of a sharp decline in white blood cells, which bounced back after the drug was discontinued. Another person dropped out because of leg cramps associated with the drug.

"All in all, we were expecting a significantly greater pattern of side-effects, and we didn't see it," Israel explained.

According to Dr. Len Horovitz, a pulmonary specialist with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, "This drug represents a new mechanism for the immune modulation of severe asthma." Horovitz was not involved with the study.

"It has been a while since a new approach and treatment for severe asthma has emerged," Horovitz said. "Further studies will be needed to assess its utility in moderate asthma."

Pulmonologist Dr. Theodore Maniatis is medical director of Staten Island University Hospital in New York City. He sounded a more cautionary note.

"This is a very early work that in no way should encourage asthmatics," Maniatis said. "While it is a very interesting study for pulmonologists and immunologists, it is a very small study."

Until now, "this immune-modulating drug has been used only for cancer and is toxic," he added. "It will take years of study to determine the usefulness of this drug in treatment."

Israel agreed that further clinical trials are needed. "Before you go out and recommend this be used in general, you really want to repeat this in a larger population with greater numbers," he said.

It likely will be three to four years before Gleevec could be approved for asthma treatment, Israel estimated.

If proven effective, Gleevec might provide a relatively inexpensive new treatment for asthma patients. Two generic versions of the drug were launched last year, which could make it less pricey than new-wave asthma drugs headed for the market, Israel added.

The study was published May 18 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on asthma, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story just barely passes the bar on this one, reporting that side-effects “were not as severe as expected.” It adds: “One person dropped out because of a sharp decline in white blood cells, which bounced back after the drug was discontinued. Another person dropped out because of leg cramps associated with the drug.”
It also quotes an independent expert saying the drug is “toxic.” For lay readers, that might be a confusing term.
Also, there’s no mention of the general risks of imatinib, which include infections, bleeding, liver problems, and heart problems. The fact that this is a type of chemotherapy could have been mentioned, too.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study has found that it is possible to find a large number of "silent" cancers in the lungs of heavy smokers by periodically screening them with CAT scans. When the tumors are then surgically removed, most people live five years or more, in striking contrast to patients whose cancers are found only after they experience symptoms.

The study of nearly 32,000 people in eight countries boosts hope that early detection by CAT scans may reduce the death toll of lung cancer, much as mammography has done for breast cancer. But while the research clearly shows that the interval between diagnosis and death was longer in screened patients, it does not definitively show they lived longer -- a subtle difference with significant public health consequences.

Lung cancer kills about 162,000 Americans a year and is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women. Only 15 percent of people with the disease survive five years from the time it is diagnosed.

What it will take to prove that CAT scans are either useful or a waste of time and money is a matter of great controversy.

Some people, including many treatment advocates, think there is enough evidence to urge all heavy smokers to have routine CAT scans. Others, including researchers and policymakers in the government, say it is a question that will not be settled for five or six years, when other studies are complete.

The new research, which appears in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, seems destined to heat up that argument.

"I think it provides valuable information on many things. What it doesn't do is prove that you can reduce the number of people who will die from lung cancer," said Gary J. Kelloff, an oncologist at the National Cancer Institute.

Laurie Fenton, president of the Lung Cancer Alliance, an advocacy group headquartered in Washington, said: "We think this is a breakthrough for lung cancer. I think we have enough data to move forward and apply this to a high-risk population."

In 1994, the study, called the International Early Lung Cancer Action Program, began screening smokers and former smokers, as well as a few nonsmokers exposed to radon, beryllium and other cancer-causing substances.

In all, 31,567 people were screened. In the ensuing years, about 27,000 more scans were done, with some people having them annually. All were "spiral" or "helical" CAT scans in which the machine films the entire chest in the time that a person can hold a single breath.

About 13 percent of the baseline scans and 5 percent of the later ones found abnormalities. Many of these lump-shaped masses were watched with further scans to see whether they grew; others were examined with other imaging devices. Ultimately, 535 were biopsied to see if they were lung cancer -- and 484 were.

Of that group, 85 percent had small tumors that had not spread. Such early lung cancers can usually be cured; the problem is that they are usually found at that "asymptomatic stage" only by chance when someone has a CAT scan or chest X-ray for an unrelated reason.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that abnormal scans can lead to biopsies and that the scans may pick up cancers that "grow so slowly they will never pose a health problem."  The story should have also mentioned radiation exposure as a potential harm and described the consequences of false positive test results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The paper was published last week in The Cochrane Library, a journal devoted to systematic reviews of health care interventions. In all, the researchers examined eight trials involving 3,417 men and women ages 18 and older.

None of the studies compared A.A. with no treatment at all, and the researchers said that made it more difficult to draw conclusions about effectiveness. About one-fifth of alcoholics achieve long-term sobriety without treatment.

There is no single known cause of alcoholism, but the researchers wrote that about two-thirds of alcohol dependence could be attributed to genetic factors and one-third to environmental causes like stress or emotional problems. Men and women are equally affected, and age does not appear to affect prognosis.

A member of the staff of the general service office of Alcoholics Anonymous said the organization did not comment on published studies of the program, but some experts objected to the methods and conclusions of the review.

“Although the randomized controlled trial is the gold-standard methodology in comparing between conditions,” said Thomas G. Brown, an assistant professor of psychiatry at McGill University, “it washes out a factor that may be important in potentiating A.A.’s benefits, namely patient choice and preference.” In other words, having a patient choose the form of treatment, rather than being assigned to it as in most studies, could be an important factor.

Despite the largely negative findings, John F. Kelly, a clinical psychologist at Harvard, said he still believed that A.A. and other 12-step programs were effective.

A.A. and other 12-step programs “are not cure-alls,” Dr. Kelly said, “but I would say at a minimum, they help.”

Dr. Edward V. Nunes, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia, said research had demonstrated that certain elements of A.A. were effective. “Some of the wisdom embodied in A.A., such as the notion of persons, places and things that trigger drinking, are very much a part of cognitive-behavioral therapy, which is a scientifically driven, empirically validated treatment,” Dr. Nunes said.

The review covered only carefully controlled trials. But Sarah Zemore, of the Alcohol Research Group of the National Alcohol Research Center, said studies that observed the results of a treatment without setting up randomized control groups could also be informative.

“Does A.A. or some other mutual-help group work for people who seek it voluntarily?” she said. “Obviously, a randomized trial cannot address that question. But observational data can.”

It is unlikely that substance abuse experts will widely reject A.A. on the basis of these findings.

“A.A. has helped a lot of people,” Dr. Nunes said. “There are a lot of satisfied customers. On the basis of that, we have to take it seriously.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There is no mention of the harms of treatment, however, the story notes that A.A. and 12-step programs are not a panacea for alcohol dependence, as they do not work for everyone. The story does cite researchers in the field of addictions research and treatment who note that people often attend A.A.meetings as only one component of their treatment. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When actress and author Lena Dunham went public about having endometriosis, a disorder of the uterus, she wanted to make something clear: The pain it causes can be completely debilitating, and women desperately need better treatments.

Soon, it seems, women like Dunham with endometriosis pain will have a new option for relief. An endometriosis pain treatment was just approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and it’s expected to arrive at pharmacies as soon as August. The pill, called elagolix (brand name Orilissa), from the drugmaker AbbVie, is the first FDA-approved oral treatment in more than a decade for the moderate to severe pain that comes with endometriosis.

“This [medication] could really be transformative,” said Hugh Taylor, an OB-GYN at Yale Medical School who led the key trials testing the drug.

Endometriosis is one of the most common gynecological conditions, affecting as many as one in 10 women of reproductive age. And it can be incredibly painful. The reason is simple: Women with the condition are growing excess tissue in their abdomen that they can’t shed.

Every month, a woman’s uterine lining thickens and sheds during her period if she’s not pregnant. With endometriosis, that tissue thickens and bleeds, but it happens outside of the uterus — on the fallopian tubes, or even in the nose or lungs. Because the extra tissue has no way to exit the body (it can’t go through the vagina since it’s not growing in the uterus), it builds up and becomes trapped, leading to pain and, in some cases, infertility.

There’s no cure for endometriosis. To manage symptoms, women are usually prescribed birth control or over-the-counter painkillers as a first-line approach, but they don’t always work. In severe cases, a doctor may suggest “excision surgery” to remove the extra tissue. (Dunham had eight surgeries and ended up getting a hysterectomy, which was considered an extreme measure.)

Enter elagolix. Endometriosis is an estrogen-driven disease, and the drug works by lowering estrogen levels. Two large double-blind, placebo-control randomized trials, which 1,285 women completed, tested whether it can help women control endometriosis pain. The results, published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine, were impressive. The patients in those trials scored their pain from 0 (no pain) to 3 (severe pain). On average, they had pain levels of 2.2 out of 3 before starting on the drug — and they experienced a 2-point reduction in pain after taking the treatment for three months.

“It’s a major advance,” said Dr. Louis DePaolo, head of the fertility and infertility branch at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, “and another option women have that’s effective.”

Now the less good news: The drug won’t cure endometriosis; it’ll only tamp down the pain it causes. Many women in the trial experienced the symptoms of menopause — hot flashes, headache, insomnia — and researchers have also found the drug causes bone loss. We have no idea about the long-term effects of taking the drug because there are no trials lasting for longer than a year, or how it stacks up against other painkillers (since the trials only compared it to placebo). That’s not to mention cost: The drug’s price is listed at $850 per month. But for some, the risks and costs may be worth it. Here’s why.

Endometriosis is incredibly common — but it can go undiagnosed for years

Endometriosis is a chronic, sometimes highly disruptive condition. The three main ways it manifests are through pelvic pain, infertility, and pelvic masses such as cysts, scar tissue, and fibroids. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, some important signs of endometriosis include:
• Pain before and during periods

But many women don’t know they have endometriosis. It’s sometimes mistaken or dismissed for regular period pain. Definitively diagnosing the disorder requires invasive surgery; doctors need to peer inside the pelvis through a laparoscopy. (Imaging is rarely helpful in getting a clear diagnosis.) This involves making a small incision in the belly and inserting a tube with a tiny camera to see if the pelvic organs show signs of tissue scarring and buildup. So it’s no surprise it takes between three and 11 years after the onset of symptoms to diagnose endometriosis.

Doctors aren’t sure why some women get it

Adding to the mystery around endometriosis: No one knows exactly what causes it, but doctors have some theories.
• Retrograde menstrual flow: During a period, when a woman is shedding her uterine lining, some of that tissue can flow through her fallopian tubes and into her pelvis, which researchers think may cause endometriosis. But doctors have also found that the rate of retrograde menstruation is about the same in women with and without endometriosis, so they think additional factors spur the disorder in some.
• Genes: The disorder runs in families, so doctors believe there’s a genetic component. If a woman’s mom or sister had endometriosis, the woman is believed to be at a higher risk.
• Somatic mutations: Researchers are also finding that somatic mutations — acquired changes to DNA that happen after a person is born — may also be an endometriosis driver.
• Immune system dysfunction: Problems with the immune system can hamper a woman’s ability to clear her menstrual debris, leading to endometriosis.
• Environmental factors: There’s some evidence to suggest environmental exposures to certain chemicals may contribute to one’s risk of developing endometriosis.

The treatments available don’t always help, and some have severe side effects

When birth control pills or over-the-counter painkillers fail to help endometriosis pain, women are often left choosing between a monthly injection called Lupron Depot, which can put women into a profoundly menopausal state, or Danazol, a male hormone that often causes acne and facial hair growth.

In women for whom these drugs aren’t effective, or who don’t want to take medications, surgery to remove the displaced endometrial tissue can be a highly effective option. But the trouble with surgery is that endometriosis can recur, so women may need more surgeries. The success of surgery also depends on finding a skilled and experienced surgeon, and there’s always the risk of surgical complications.

The new drug elagolix is not risk-free, either. In the trials, women who took the drug had greater bone loss than did those who received placebo, and this wasn’t entirely surprising. Like other endometriosis treatments, the drug works by lowering estrogen levels (since endometriosis needs estrogen to grow). When that happens, women experience menopausal side effects. The most common in the trials were hot flashes, headaches, and insomnia. (Elagolix is available in two doses — 150 mg per day, or 200 mg twice daily — and the women on the higher dose experienced the side effects more frequently.) Mood swings and night sweats were less common, and one woman in the trial died by suicide (though there’s no indication that the medicine was a cause of her death).

DePaolo pointed out, “[Elagolix] doesn’t have the pronounced side effects some of the other compounds have.” That’s because, he said, it doesn’t drive down estrogen levels as severely.

But for patients who have tried other estrogen-lowering medicines, elagolix isn’t all that appealing. “This drug is palliative in nature. It does not cure or shrink the disease,” Casey Berna, director of programs and partnerships for the advocacy group EndoWhat. The drug’s side effects also concerned her, as did the lack of knowledge about its long-term impact.

For other women, though, the trade offs may be worth it. But in either case, women with severe endometriosis are still left choosing between terrible pain, surgery, or drugs with serious side effects.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The text does an impressive job of sharing information about the debits of the drug, including bone loss and symptoms of menopause.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By Amy Norton NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People with multiple sclerosis have long said that smoking marijuana helps ease their painful muscle cramping. And a new clinical trial suggests they are not just blowing smoke.

The study, published Monday, found that for 30 MS patients with muscle “spasticity,” a few days of marijuana smoking brought some relief.

But the big caveat, researchers say, is that it’s not clear that the downsides of pot smoking are worth it.

Some people with MS are already using medical marijuana to treat certain symptoms, including spasticity — when the muscles in the legs or arms contract painfully, in something akin to a “charley horse.”

There is some science behind the idea: The body naturally produces cannabinoids, the group of chemicals found in marijuana. And studies have suggested the cannabinoid receptors on our cells help regulate muscle spasticity.

But the evidence that pot smoking actually helps with spasticity has been anecdotal.

“We’ve heard from patients that marijuana helps their spasticity, but I think a lot us thought, ‘Well, it’s probably just making you feel good,’” said Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, the lead researcher on the new study.

“I think this study shows that yes, (marijuana) may help with spasticity, but at a cost,” said Corey-Bloom, of the University of California, San Diego.

The cost, her team found, is that smoking caused fatigue and dizziness in some users, and generally slowed down people’s mental skills soon after they used marijuana.

But it’s not clear if that would have any long-term consequences, Corey-Bloom said.

About 400,000 people in the United States have MS, a chronic disease in which the protective coating around nerve fibers starts breaking down.

The new study, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, included 30 MS patients with muscle spasticity that had failed to get better with standard medication.

Corey-Bloom’s team had each patient smoke marijuana or “placebo” joints — which looked, smelled and tasted like the real thing, but lacked the active ingredient in marijuana, known as THC.

Each patient smoked marijuana once a day for three days and used the placebo cigarette once a day on three separate days. Before and after each treatment, an independent rater assessed the patients’ muscle spasticity.

Overall, the study found, measures of spasticity dropped an average of three points —about 30 percent — on a 24-point scale when patients smoked marijuana, but didn’t change after they smoked the placebo.

The issue of treating spasticity is “certainly an important one,” said Nicholas LaRocca, vice president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society.

“Spasticity is a big problem for many people with MS, and the current medications don’t necessarily work for everyone,” said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study.

“But smoking marijuana does not appear to be a long-term solution, because of the cognitive effects,” he told Reuters Health.

People with MS are already at some risk of “cognitive changes,” LaRocca pointed out, so the potential for lasting effects from long-term marijuana smoking is a concern.

However, LaRocca said, researchers are developing cannabinoid-based medications for MS. That includes a cannabinoid mouth spray called Sativex that has been approved in the UK, Canada, Spain and New Zealand to treat MS-related spasticity.

Research into cannabinoids and spasticity should continue, LaRocca said, because medications may be able to harness the benefits of specific cannabis compounds, without the side effects linked to smoking pot.

Both LaRocca and Corey-Bloom said there were limitations to the current study.

“Blinding” people as to whether they are on marijuana or a placebo is tough since the drug creates a “high” feeling.

In this study, 17 of 30 patients were able to correctly guess whether they were using marijuana or a placebo at each of their six visits with the researchers. And the rest often guessed correctly.

“It’s pretty clear that the patients were not really blinded,” LaRocca said. “What effects that might have had on the results is unclear.”

Corey-Bloom said that should not have influenced the spasticity findings, since an independent researcher (who didn’t know whether patients were smoking marijuana or the placebo) rated spasticity using a standard scale.

But another limitation, she pointed out, is that the study looked at the effects, and side effects, of marijuana over only a few days. “We can’t say anything about long-term effects,” Corey-Bloom told Reuters Health.

For now, LaRocca recommended that people with spasticity see a doctor experienced in treating MS. And if you’re on an anti-spasticity medication and it’s not working well enough, or the side effects are too much, tell your doctor, he said.

For some people, a change in the medication dose might help.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story included the important quote, “We can’t say anything about long-term effects.”
And, short term, the story reported that the study found some patients had fatigue and dizziness.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are lung cancer scans really ready for prime time?

News that annual CT lung scans can reduce the risk of lung cancer death among former and current heavy smokers was celebrated by national heath officials this month. A major government study found the screening scans saved the life of one person for every 300 current or former smokers who were scanned.

But now cancer and screening experts are worried that the limited findings will be used by private screening centers to promote the test to a broader group than was studied. That, in turn, could lead to thousands of unnecessary lung scans, causing excess radiation exposure and unnecessary biopsies and surgery.

Dr. Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, said he was stunned to hear a radio advertisement for an Atlanta screening center cite the study just a few days after the government had announced the results. The wording of the ad seemed to be aimed at a broad group, ranging from heavy smokers to women who had never smoked, Dr. Brawley said.

“We really need to weigh the harms associated with screening,” he said. “The scientific community still needs to digest this. To take a trial that involves people at high risk for lung cancer and to extrapolate it and say it’s good for people with intermediate or low risk is not appropriate.”

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, focused on a specific high-risk group: 53,000 current and former heavy smokers, aged 55 to 74, who had smoked for at least 30 pack-years. That means someone who smoked one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years or three packs a day for at least 10 years would qualify for the study.

Former smokers who had accumulated 30 pack-years were included only if they had stopped smoking within the previous 15 years.

The smokers and former smokers were given either annual CT lung scans or chest X-rays. Compared with conventional X-rays, the CT, or computed tomography, scans create a detailed three-dimensional image of the lungs. The study was stopped when it was found that the scanning group had a 20 percent lower risk of dying from lung cancer than those being screened with X-rays.

But the early results also showed a downside of scanning: one of every four lung scans showed an abnormality, which often led to additional worry, radiation exposure from follow-up scans and, sometimes, lung biopsies and even risky surgery. But because the study was stopped early, a full analysis of the harms caused by screening scans is still months away.

Reading the scans is tricky because harmless nodules can be misinterpreted as suspect lesions. In the study, even experienced radiologists at major cancer centers had a high rate of false positives, suggesting that the rate would be even higher in the real world.

“There is a learning curve to reading spiral CTs,” Dr. Brawley said. “I’m concerned that some radiologists might be early in that learning curve and some patients may be harmed because of it.”

While the study found a benefit to scanning a specific group of high-risk smokers, that doesn’t mean other groups will get the same benefit, says Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. In lower-risk groups, for instance, it’s likely that thousands of people would need to be exposed to the risks of screening before a single life was saved. And it’s possible that many of those scanned unnecessarily could be seriously harmed.

“The aggregate harms to all the people’s lives who are not saved have to be taken into account,” Dr. Bach said. “Even in these highly controlled settings, about 1 percent of the people had surgery or a part of their lung removed for something they thought was cancer and it wasn’t.”

Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms.

For now, most consumers who want a scan will have to pay for it themselves, although it is expected that insurance companies eventually will approve scanning for those in high-risk groups. (Medicare officials have indicated that they will soon reconsider paying for the screening tests.) The government has estimated the cost at about $300 a scan, but some centers may charge $1,000 or more.

The day the government announced the study results, Westside Medical Imaging of Beverly Hills, Calif., issued a press release saying that the study “should once and for all settle the controversy” about whether CT lung scans save lives.

In the release, Dr. Norman E. Lepor said the scans were an “indispensable” part of annual exams for patients who have smoked for 10 years.

In an interview, Dr. Lepor said that he only offers lung scans to those at high risk, and that he turns people away who are at low risk but want the scan anyway because “they just want to know.”

Dr. Lepor said it would be “imprudent” not to incorporate the latest study data into his practice right away.

“There are people who, with good conscience and their take of the data, say it’s not ready for prime time, and there are people who look at the same data and they come to other conclusions,” Dr. Lepor said. “This is not the first study that has supported screening. We know from our own anecdotes that we have saved a lot of lives.”

Dr. Lepor said that he had just met a woman who had smoked for 50 years and was concerned about her risk. “She’s the poster person for this test,” he said.

Dr. Brawley said he’s worried that the few early press releases and radio advertisements are just the beginning of widespread promotion of screening lung scans.

“It was sort of ominous to be working Sunday evening in my home office and this thing comes on the radio,” he said. “A lot of people run out when there is a new announcement and get the new test. We’re very frightened some people are going to be harmed because of this.”

A version of this article appeared in print on Nov. 16, 2010, on page D5 of the New York edition of The Times.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story was clear on this:
In a rarity for such a story, “downsides” was even in the headline.  The third paragraph read:  “But now cancer and screening experts are worried that the limited findings will be used by private screening centers to promote the test to a broader group than was studied. That, in turn, could lead to thousands of unnecessary lung scans, causing excess radiation exposure and unnecessary biopsies and surgery.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- While the majority of morbidly obese patients who undergo gastric banding say they are generally satisfied years later, almost 40 percent are saddled with major complications, while about half have to have their bands removed, a small, new Belgian study reveals.

The finding comes on the heels of a recent study out of the University of California, San Francisco that suggested gastric bypass surgery is superior to alternative surgical methods (such as gastric banding) for promoting weight loss and/or eliminating type 2 diabetes.

The current observations stem from a research effort led by Dr. Jacques Himpens, of the European School of Laparoscopic Surgery at the Saint Pierre University Hospital in Brussels, whose team assessed the status of 82 patients that had undergone the procedure known as "laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding" (LABG) more than a decade prior to the study launch.

Himpens and his colleagues outline their findings in the March 21 online issue and the July print issue of the Archives of Surgery.

LAGB creates a small pouch by placing a constricting ring, or band, around the top portion of the stomach; the smaller stomach size allows patients to feel full more quickly.

Since its introduction in 2001, the banding approach has become a popular alternative to "Roux-en-Y gastric by-pass" surgery, which involves the literal stapling of the stomach in order to redirect food past part of the small intestine to instigate reduced food absorption as well as a quicker sensation of satiety.

But LAGB surgery has come under criticism in the past for involving a relatively high risk for complications, including wound infection and injury to the spleen and esophagus, and a poor prognosis in terms of long-term quality of life. It is also been reported that LAGB patients are likely to regain much of their lost weight years down the road.

To explore satisfaction levels and the long-term complication history of gastric banding, in 2009 Himpens and his team examined a pool of patients who had undergone the surgery between 1994 and 1997.

The results: 12 years or more later, more than 60 percent of the banding patients said they were "satisfied" with their experience. On average, excess weight loss had been maintained at a level approaching nearly 43 percent, and quality of life appeared to be equal to that of patients who had not undergone the surgery.

However, 39 percent of the patients had experienced serious complications, including abnormal pouch expansion (9), band erosion (23) and band infection (1). Another 22 percent experienced relatively minor complications. Almost 50 percent had to have the bands entirely removed, while 60 percent needed to undergo subsequent surgery. The procedure "appears to result in relatively poor long-term outcomes," the researchers concluded.

One in six of the patients ended up deciding to have a gastric bypass procedure, and all of these patients demonstrated good outcomes following their subsequent surgery.

Himpens said that patients should limit their expectations with respect to banding, noting that "all weight-loss operations have a high failure rate". But he added that "it is still defendable for surgeons to continue doing this."

"The high failure rate of the band gastroplasty [in] the long term is not that much worse than other procedures," he noted. "[I] therefore think patients will continue to ask for the procedure."

But he cautioned that patients undergoing band surgery should do so knowing that they need to commit themselves to rigorous long-term follow-up.

Meanwhile, in a critique published alongside Himpens work, Dr. Clifford W. Deveney, a professor of surgery in the department of surgery at Oregon Health and Science University in Portland, concluded that the current study does "not shed a favorable light on the use of LAGB".

"The band has a spotty history," Deveney said. "Some groups have very good results, with 60 to 70 percent weight loss. But other groups have either poor weight loss or complications, or both."

"So I think," he continued, "that the patient should be made aware of these facts, and also that the weight loss is going to be less with the band than with a gastric bypass. And that it'll take longer to achieve the weight loss, because with gastric bypass most of the weight loss occurs over the first year, while with a band it takes five to six years."

"It's also easier to 'cheat' on the band," he added. "You can eat around the band and render it ineffective if you're not disciplined in following a healthy diet. With gastric bypass that's not as much of an issue. But all this is not to say that I think we shouldn't be doing bands. It's just not as good as bypass."

Dr. Mitchell S. Roslin, chief of bariatric surgery at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y., said he was not surprised by the findings.

"I always tell my patients that bands are like going a diet with a seatbelt," he said. "And that there's bound to be a 5 percent extraction rate of these bands per year that they're in. Which actually comes to about the same percent of band removals these researchers observed among their patients."

"I think the problem with the bands is simply that having a fixed obstruction underneath your esophagus is not a natural occurrence," Roslin noted. "And also these bands make it more difficult to eat, but they do not make every patient less hungry. So there's a big variability in treatment effect. You'll see patients who do great and patients who don't. Almost like a camel with two humps."

"So bands are easy to sell and very heavily marketed," he added. "But for many patients, there are better options."

For more on gastric banding, visit the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provided quantitative information about the harms observed in the study population who had had gastric banding surgery. It says, “However, 39 percent of the patients had experienced serious complications, including abnormal pouch expansion (9), band erosion (23) and band infection (1). Another 22 percent experienced relatively minor complications. Almost 50 percent had to have the bands entirely removed, while 60 percent needed to undergo subsequent surgery. The procedure “appears to result in relatively poor long-term outcomes,” the researchers concluded.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A long-awaited postmortem released this morning of Pfizer's (NYSE: PFE) failed heart drug held out hope for the discovery of a safe version of the revolutionary heart pill.

The study said there were still many unanswered questions about Pfizer's pill, torcetrapib, the first in a new class of heart medicines known as a CETP inhibitors, which raise HDL, or good cholesterol, and lower LDL, or bad cholesterol.

Pfizer suspended development of the tablet, its most important experimental drug, after it caused an increase in deaths and heart problems in clinical trial volunteers. Cardiologists had hoped it would reduce the buildup of plaque in blood vessels that can cause heart attacks.

It was unclear what the mixed bag of data presented at the American Heart Association's Scientific Session in Orlando would mean for CETP drugs under development by Merck and Roche, and another candidate in early-stage development by Pfizer.

The study, presented by Australian heart researcher Philip Barter, who oversaw Pfizer's torcetrapib clinical trials, concluded torcetrapib caused "off-target" effects, including deaths, elevated blood pressure, cardiovascular problems and a possible link to cancers.

Of the 15,067 patients in seven countries taking part in the randomized clinical trial, called Illuminate, 82 patients taking a combination of torcetrapib and Lipitor died, compared with 51 taking Lipitor alone, which was the control group, according to the study.

At 12 months in patients receiving torcetrapib, there was a 72 percent increased in good cholesterol and a 24.9 percent decrease in bad cholesterol.

However, the study found the tablet triggered an increase in the hormone Aldosterone, which helps regulate both blood pressure and bodily fluids. Torcetrapib, the study found, decreased potassium and increased bicarbonate and sodium in the bloodstream, resulting in an increase in blood pressure.

The study suggested a "clean" version of torcetrapib could increase so-called good cholesterol without raising blood pressure and causing adverse cardiovascular events.

"It is still possible that CETP inhibitors without off-target effects of torcetrapib could be viable as a therapy for cardiovascular disease," said an editorial published in today's edition of the New England Journal of Medicine, which concluded: "It is possible that CETP inhibition might be better suited to certain subgroups of patients, such as those with impaired clearance of LDL cholesterol or low levels of HDL cholesterol at base line," the editorial said. "In any case, it is premature to announce the death of CETP inhibitors on the bases of the torcetrapib experience alone."

There are other mechanisms for raising HDL cholesterol, such as Kos Life Sciences' Niaspan, and Merck's niacin-based drug.

George E. Jordan may be reached at gjordan@starledger.com or (973) 392-1801.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions the increased risk of death, heart disease and elevated blood pressure with the failed drug. However, in the absence of evidence, the story should not be suggesting that a more "clean" version of the drug would not have such harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK -- Treatment with a HER2-targeted therapeutic cancer vaccine provided clinical benefit to several patients with metastatic HER2-positive cancers who had not previously been treated with a HER2-targeted therapeutic, according to data from a phase I clinical trial presented at the Fourth CRI-CIMT-EATI-AACR International Cancer Immunotherapy Conference: Translating Science into Survival, held Sept. 30-Oct. 3.

Among 11 evaluable patients who had received more than the lowest dose of the vaccine, six (54 percent) had clinical benefit. One patient with ovarian cancer had a complete response that lasted 89 weeks, one patient with gastroesophageal cancer had a partial response that lasted 16 weeks, and four patients (two with colon cancer, one with prostate cancer, and one with ovarian cancer) had stable disease.

"Immunotherapy marshals the exquisite specificity of the immune system to destroy cancer, and some types may have potentially fewer side effects than traditional chemotherapy," said Jay A. Berzofsky, MD, PhD, chief of the Vaccine Branch at the Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. "We are using a vaccine approach to generate an immune response to HER2, which is found at high levels on and drives the growth of several types of cancer, including breast, ovarian, lung, colorectal, and gastroesophageal cancers.

"Our results suggest that we have a very promising vaccine for HER2-overexpressing cancers," continued Berzofsky. "We hope that one day the vaccine will provide a new treatment option for patients with these cancers."

The patients' vaccines are individually customized by Berzofsky and colleagues using their own immune cells isolated from their blood. The blood-derived immune cells are modified in several ways in the laboratory. The final product, which is administered intradermally (between the layers of the skin), comprises patient-derived dendritic cells genetically modified with an adenovirus to produce parts of the HER2 protein.

Preclinical studies, which were previously published in the AACR journal Cancer Research, showed that this type of vaccine could eradicate large, established tumors as well as lung metastases in mice.

In the dose escalation portion of the phase I clinical trial, patients were injected with the vaccine on weeks 0, 4, 8, 16, and 24 after enrollment in the study. Among the six patients who received the lowest dose of the vaccine, 5 million dendritic cells per injection, no clinical benefit was seen. Among the 11 patients who received either 10 million or 20 million dendritic cells per injection, six had clinical benefit.

Adverse reactions were predominantly injection-site reactions that did not require treatment. No cardiotoxicity was seen.

"Based on the current safety and clinical benefit data, the dose of the vaccine was increased to 40 million dendritic cells per injection and the trial opened to patients who have previously been treated with a HER2-targeted therapeutic, including patients with breast cancer," said Berzofsky.

"Moving forward, we would like to investigate whether we can increase the proportion of people who benefit from treatment with the vaccine by combining it with checkpoint inhibitor therapy," he added.

According to Berzofsky, the main scientific limitation of the study is that it is a relatively small, phase I clinical trial with no placebo control. However, the approach is sufficiently promising to warrant additional trials.

This study was supported by intramural funds from the National Cancer Institute. Berzofsky declares no conflicts of interest.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The only harm mentioned in the release was some injection site discomfort. The release also mentioned that the patients were tested to see if there was cardiotoxicity (heart dysfunction or muscle damage) and none was found.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Dec. 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- If colon cancer screening was as easy as taking a breath, more people might do it. Now, a small pilot study suggests such a test could be developed.

The study, of 78 people with and without colon cancer, found that those with the disease tended to have a distinct pattern of chemicals in their breath. And when researchers analyzed the study participants' breath samples, they correctly identified the colon cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

The findings, reported online Dec. 5 in the British Journal of Surgery, sound good. But if you're waiting for your doctor to offer such a test, don't hold your breath.

"It's an interesting concept, but this is in the very early stages," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate and colorectal cancers for the American Cancer Society.

"There's no way to tell if this would work in the general population," said Brooks, who was not involved in the research.

What's more, he added, there are already several good ways to catch colon cancer -- or, even better, precancerous growths called polyps, which can then be removed before a tumor develops. Yet about 40 percent of Americans who should be getting screened are not.

"Colon cancer is a highly preventable disease," Brooks said. "And I would encourage the four out of 10 people who are not taking advantage of the existing screening tools to talk with their doctor."

The idea of using a breath test to catch cancer is not new: Researchers are looking into breath tests for detecting a number of cancers, including lung and breast tumors. It's all based on studies showing that breath samples from cancer patients tend to have a distinguishing pattern of so-called volatile organic compounds (VOCs).

When it comes to colon cancer, people already have several options for screening, which for most adults should begin at age 50 -- or possibly earlier if you are at higher-than-normal risk.

The choices include a yearly stool test that looks for hidden blood, or either of two invasive tests that scope the colon: sigmoidoscopy every five years, along with stool testing every three years; or colonoscopy every 10 years.

But many people are turned off by those tests.

So Dr. Donato Altomare and colleagues at the University Aldo Moro in Bari, Italy, decided to test the feasibility of a breath test.

Analyzing breath samples from 37 patients with colon cancer and 41 healthy middle-aged adults, the researchers found 15 VOCs that seemed to differ between the two groups.

They then used a statistical model to see if certain VOC patterns separated the colon cancer patients from the healthy participants. In the end, the researchers were able to correctly identify the cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

But, Brooks pointed out, that also means the breath test was wrong about one-quarter of the time.

There's no way of knowing how well such a screening test would work in the real world -- including how many people might wrongly get a positive result and undergo needless invasive tests to follow up, Brooks said.

Another big question, he added, is whether breath analysis could pinpoint people with colon polyps.

"One of our goals in screening is to detect polyps, not cancer," Brooks said. "This study doesn't address that."

Altomare's team acknowledges that there is a lot of work left to do. It's still unclear which breath chemicals should be measured, or what statistical method is best for weeding out cases of colon cancer.

Brooks said it would be nice to have a very simple, accurate screening test -- whether that means a breath test or blood or urine tests. Yearly stool tests are simple and cheap, but people often don't want to do them.

"We're always searching for simpler things to do," Brooks said. But for now, he added, "this study raises many more questions than answers."

Learn more about colon cancer from the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned that this test would inevitably produce false-positive results that would lead to needless invasive follow-up tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EWING, N.J., March 14, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Nasdaq: CPXX) today announced positive results from the Phase 3 trial of VYXEOS™ (cytarabine: daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection (also known as CPX-351) in patients with high-risk (secondary) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) compared to the standard of care regimen of cytarabine and daunorubicin known as 7+3. The trial met its primary endpoint demonstrating a statistically significant improvement in overall survival. Data will be submitted for presentation at the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2016 Annual Meeting.

The median overall survival for patients treated with VYXEOS in the study was 9.56 months compared to 5.95 months for patients receiving 7+3, representing a 3.61 month improvement in favor of VYXEOS. The hazard ratio (HR) was 0.69 (p=0.005) which represents a 31 percent reduction in the risk of death versus 7+3. The percentage of patients alive 12 months after randomization was 41.5% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 27.6% on the 7+3 arm. The percentage of patients alive 24 months after randomization was 31.1% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 12.3% on the 7+3 arm.

"The overall survival advantage seen with CPX-351 compared to 7+3, along with a superior response rate and no increase in serious toxicity indicates that we'll likely have a new standard of care for treating older patients with secondary AML," said Jeffrey E. Lancet, M.D., senior member and chief of the Leukemia/Myelodysplasia Program at Moffitt Cancer Center and the principal investigator for the study. "This represents a major step forward for a very difficult-to-treat patient population."

VYXEOS also demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in induction response rate (CR+CRi of 47.7% versus 33.3%; p=0.016) and this significance was maintained for the analysis of CR alone (CR of 37.3% versus 25.6%, p=0.040).

Sixty-day all-cause mortality was 13.7% versus 21.2%, in favor of patients treated with VYXEOS.

No substantial difference in Grade 3 or higher adverse events was observed between VYXEOS and 7+3. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, hematologic adverse events were similar for overall infections, febrile neutropenia, and bleeding events. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, non-hematologic adverse events were similar across all organ systems, including cardiac, gastrointestinal, general systems, metabolic disorders, musculoskeletal, nervous system, respiratory, skin and renal.

"These findings confirm that VYXEOS provides the first opportunity we've had in decades to extend survival for patients with high-risk AML," added Gail Roboz, M.D., Professor of Medicine and Director of the Leukemia Program at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University and the New York-Presbyterian Hospital in New York. "Also, more patients in remission means more who are eligible for potentially curative therapy."

Based on these results the company expects to submit a New Drug Application (NDA) for VYXEOS with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) later this year and submit a Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) with the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the first quarter of 2017.

"The successful outcome of this Phase 3 trial represents an important advance for AML patients, their families and clinicians," said Scott Jackson, Chief Executive Officer of Celator Pharmaceuticals. "It also marks a major milestone for Celator, for VYXEOS, and for our CombiPlex® platform. We offer our sincere thanks to the patients and investigators who participated in this study and we will work closely with regulatory authorities to make this new treatment available to the AML community as soon as possible."

The clinical trial was conducted in partnership with The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society® (LLS) through its Therapy Acceleration Program (TAP), which has supported the clinical development of VYXEOS beginning in Phase 2.

Celator will host a conference call and live audio webcast on Tuesday, March 15, 2016 at 8:00am EDT to discuss the results of the Phase 3 trial. To participate in the conference call, please dial 877-303-6316 (domestic) or 650-521-5176 (international) and refer to conference ID 71930208. The live webcast of the call can be accessed in the Investors section of Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. An archived webcast will be available on Celator's website beginning approximately two hours after the event.

VYXEOS (cytarabine:daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection, also known as CPX-351, is a nano-scale co-formulation of cytarabine and daunorubicin at a synergistic 5:1 molar ration. VYXEOS represents a novel approach to developing combinations of drugs in which molar ratios of two drugs with synergistic anti-tumor activity are encapsulated in a nano-scale liposome in order to maintain the desired ratio following administration. VYXEOS was granted orphan drug status by the FDA and the European Commission for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). VYXEOS was also granted Fast Track designation for the treatment of elderly patients with secondary AML. In addition to the Phase 3 trial, Celator published results from two randomized, controlled, Phase 2 trials with VYXEOS. The first trial was conducted in newly diagnosed elderly AML patients and the second trial was conducted in patients with AML in first relapse.

The randomized, controlled, Phase 3 trial (Protocol NCT01696084), enrolled 309 patients at 39 sites in the United States and Canada, and compared VYXEOS to the conventional cytarabine and daunorubicin treatment regimen (commonly referred to as 7+3) as first-line therapy in older (60-75 years of age) patients with high-risk (secondary) AML. Patients were stratified for age (60 to 69 and 70 to 75 years of age) and AML type; treatment-related AML, AML with documented history of MDS with prior treatment with hypomethylating agent therapy, AML with documented history of MDS without prior hypomethlyating agent therapy, AML with a documented history of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMMoL), and de novo AML with a karyotype characteristic of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).

Patients were randomized 1:1 to receive either VYXEOS or 7+3. Patients could receive one or two inductions, and responding patients could receive one or two consolidations. First induction for VYXEOS was 100u/m2; days 1, 3, and 5 by 90-minute infusion and for the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 7 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1, 2, and 3 (7+3). Second induction for VYXEOS-treated patients was 100u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Only patients with documented CR or CRi were eligible to receive chemotherapy consolidation. Consolidation for VYXEOS-treated patients was 65u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a rapidly progressing cancer of the blood characterized by the uncontrolled proliferation of immature blast cells in the bone marrow. AML is generally a disease of older adults, and the median age of a patient diagnosed with AML is about 67 years. The American Cancer Society estimates that there will be 19,950 new cases of AML and 10,430 deaths from AML in the U.S. in 2016. In Europe the number of new cases is estimated to be 18,000 and in Japan the number is 5,500. The Company estimates that nearly 70 percent of AML patients are over the age of 60, and approximately 75 percent are intermediate or high risk. Furthermore, approximately half of those patients are considered suitable for intensive treatment.

Even with current treatment, overall survival for AML is poor. In patients over 60 years of age, the 5 year survival rate is less than 10%. In high-risk (secondary) AML, overall survival is lower, resulting in an acute need for new treatment options for these patients.

Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc., with locations in Ewing, N.J., and Vancouver, B.C., is an oncology-focused biopharmaceutical company that is transforming the science of combination therapy, and developing products to improve patient outcomes in cancer. Celator's proprietary technology platform, CombiPlex®, enables the rational design and rapid evaluation of optimized combinations of anti-cancer drugs, incorporating traditional chemotherapies as well as molecularly targeted agents to deliver enhanced anti-cancer activity. CombiPlex addresses several fundamental shortcomings of conventional combination regimens, as well as the challenges inherent in combination drug development, by identifying the most effective synergistic molar ratio of the drugs being combined in vitro, and fixing this ratio in a nano-scale drug delivery complex to maintain the optimized combination after administration and ensuring exposure of this ratio to the tumor. Celator's pipeline includes the lead product, VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), a nano-scale liposomal formulation of cytarabine:daunorubicin being studied for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia; CPX-1, a nano-scale liposomal formulation of irinotecan:floxuridine studied in colorectal cancer; and a preclinical stage product candidate, CPX-8, a hydrophobic docetaxel prodrug nanoparticle formulation. The Company is advancing its CombiPlex platform and broadening its application to include molecularly targeted therapies. The Company is seeking research and development collaborations with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies where its proprietary technology may provide benefit.

For more information, please visit Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. Information on ongoing trials is available at www.clinicaltrials.gov.

To the extent that statements contained in this press release are not descriptions of historical facts regarding Celator, they are forward-looking statements reflecting the current beliefs and expectations of management made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as "may," "will," "expect," "anticipate," "estimate," "intend," and similar expressions (as well as other words or expressions referencing future events, conditions or circumstances) are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements contained in this press release include, among others, statements regarding the safety, potential efficacy, therapeutic potential, and commercial potential of VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), our expectations regarding the timing of our regulatory filings, our expectations regarding our research and development programs and advancing our CombiPlex platform and the potential to establish research and development collaborations applying our proprietary technologies with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies. Forward-looking statements in this release involve substantial risks and uncertainties that could cause our development programs, future results, or achievements to differ significantly from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, the uncertainties inherent in the conduct of clinical studies, whether clinical study results obtained to date will be predictive of future results, whether the final results of our clinical studies will be supportive of regulatory approval to market VYXEOS and other matters that could affect the commercial potential of our drug candidates. Celator undertakes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements. For a further description of the risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from those expressed in these forward-looking statements, as well as risks relating to the business of the company in general, see Celator's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, subsequent reports on Form 10-Q and 8-K, and other filings by the company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release noted that serious harms from the drug were comparable to the standard therapy and listed the adverse events including infections, febrile neutropenia, bleeding, cardiac, gastrointestinal, general systems, metabolic disorders, musculoskeletal, nervous system, respiratory, skin and renal.
One word of caution about the harms. The study was not blinded (according to its listing on ClinicalTrials.gov) and these adverse effects may have been subjectively found, potentially biasing the results.  We are not given enough information about this in the news release.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The immune checkpoint blockade drug nivolumab reduced tumor burden in 24.4 percent of patients with metastatic bladder cancer, regardless of whether their tumors had a biomarker related to the drug's target, according to clinical trial results from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. The study will be presented Sunday, June 5, 2016 at the 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meeting.

"The response rate is better than we've seen for other potential second-line treatments and nivolumab is really well-tolerated, which is important because bladder cancer patients are a fragile group after frontline treatment with platinum chemotherapy," said Padmanee Sharma, M.D., Ph.D., professor of Genitourinary Medical Oncology at MD Anderson.

Nivolumab unleashes an immune system attack on cancer by blocking activation of a protein called PD-1 on T cells, white blood cells that find and attack cells, viruses or bacteria that have specific targets. PD-1 acts as a brake, or checkpoint, to shut down activated T cells. PD-1 is turned on by a ligand called PD-L1, which is often found on cancer cells and other types of cells.

The presence of PD-L1 on a patient's tumor has been considered a potential biomarker to guide treatment. The study found no significant difference in response rates between those with little to no PD-L1 on their tumors (26 percent) and those with greater PD-L1 expression (24 percent).

"We can get good results without choosing to treat patients based on PD-L1 status," said Sharma, who also is scientific director of MD Anderson's immunotherapy platform and an investigator with the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at MD Anderson. The platform is part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program, launched in 2013 to reduce cancer deaths by accelerating development of therapies, prevention efforts and early detection from scientific discoveries.

This Phase I/II clinical trial treated 78 patients: five (6.4 percent) had complete responses, 14 (18 percent) had partial responses, in which tumor burden shrinks by at least 30 percent, and 22 (28.2 percent) had stable disease. Thirty (38 percent) patients had disease progression.

Treatment-related side effects included mainly low-grade fatigue, itching, elevated lipase, rash, nausea, joint pain and anemia. Grade 3 or 4 side effects occurred in 20.5 percent of patients. Two patients discontinued therapy because of adverse events related to the drug.

At a median follow up of 213 days, 33.3 percent remained on treatment, and 45.6 percent of patients survived for at least one year, which Sharma noted "is better than anything we've seen in the past."

Overall survival will be analyzed in conjunction with the Phase II portion of this clinical trial, which provides nivolumab or a combination of nivolumab plus the immune checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab. The trial allows patients to cross over to the combination if nivolumab alone fails.

Initial results from the Phase II portion of the trial will be presented later this year.

Both nivolumab, known as Opdivo, and ipilimumab, known as Yervoy, were developed and marketed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, which funded the clinical trial.

Ipilimumab targets the CTLA-4 checkpoint on T cells and was the first immune checkpoint inhibitor. It was based on the research of Jim Allison, Ph.D., chair of Immunology, executive director of the immunotherapy platform and director of the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at MD Anderson.

Ipilimumab was the first drug ever shown to extend the survival of patients with metastatic melanoma. Long-term follow up shows 22 percent of those treated with the drug survive 10 years or longer.

Nivolumab has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for advanced melanoma, lung cancer, kidney cancer and Hodgkin lymphoma. The five-year survival rate for those with metastatic melanoma treated with nivolumab is 34 percent. The two-year survival rate of patients treated with both drugs in combination is 69 percent.

Until May 18, there were no drugs approved for second-line treatment of metastatic bladder cancer. The U.S. FDA approved atezolizumab, which blocks PD-L1, for these patients.

Co-authors with Sharma, who presented the data at ASCO, are Petri Bono, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Joseph Kim, Yale Cancer Center; Pavlina Spiliopoulou, Beatson, West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow; Emiliano Calvo, Centro Integral Oncológico Clara Campal, Madrid,Spain; Rathi Pillai, Emory Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta; Patrick Ott, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston; Filippo DeBraud, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; Michael Morse, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, N.C.; Dung Le, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore; Dirk Jaeger, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; Emily Chan, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn.; Chris Harbison, Chen-Sheng Lin, Marina Tschaika, Alex Azrilevich, of Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Jonathan Rosenberg of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release states that “Treatment-related side effects included mainly low-grade fatigue, itching, elevated lipase, rash, nausea, joint pain and anemia. Grade 3 or 4 side effects occurred in 20.5 percent of patients. Two patients discontinued therapy because of adverse events related to the drug.” That’s enough to earn a satisfactory rating. However, it could have been better. The release says adverse effects “included mainly” manageable problems. But more than 20 percent of patients had “grade 3 or 4” side effects — and that is not trivial. The release would have been much stronger if it had offered some insight into those more severe effects, or even explained what “grade 3 or 4” effects means. Grade 3 effects, according to the National Cancer Institute, are “severe” — while grade 4 effects are “life-threatening or disabling.” That merits more discussion than it got.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors love the detailed pictures created by CT scans. Patients often expect a scan. But now researchers are warning that the radiation patients get each time computerized tomography is used to detect injuries and disease will cause thousands of extra cancers in coming years.

A new study from the National Cancer Institute projects 29,000 excess cancers from the 72 million CT scans that Americans got in 2007 alone. Nearly 15,000 of those cancers could be fatal.

CT-related cancers will impose a similar burden each year — unless the number of scans and the radiation dose-per-scan can be reduced.

"Physicians [and their patients] cannot be complacent about the hazards of radiation or we risk creating a public health time bomb," says Dr. Rita Redberg, editor of Archives of Internal Medicine, which is publishing the paper in this week's issue.

Children, younger adults and women are especially susceptible. Two-thirds of the excess cancers will occur in women, the NCI researchers say.

A separate study in the journal documents needlessly high radiation exposures from CT scans at four San Francisco-area hospitals.

That study looked at actual radiation doses for 11 common types of CT scans in more than 1,100 patients. For the same body part, the doses varied enormously from one hospital to another and even within the same hospital. The researchers found a 13-fold range between the highest and lowest radiation dose.

That means many unsuspecting patients are getting considerably more radiation than they need for an adequate CT image.

"For the same body part, the same patient with abdominal pain being evaluated for possible cancer, there can be a profoundly different radiation dose," says Dr. Rebecca Smith-Bindman, a radiologist at the University of California at San Francisco who led that study.

Smith-Bindman says neither doctors nor patients appreciate the amount of radiation exposure that U.S. patients are accumulating from CT scans. The number of scans has increased at a rate of 10 percent a year recently, jumping from 3 million scans in 1980 to more than 70 million a year today.

"It's often said that the radiation dose of a chest X-ray is comparable to flying across the continent," Smith-Bindman says, referring to natural radiation exposures at high altitudes. "But a CT scan can be comparable to 500 transcontinental flights."

She adds that a single CT scan can deliver about the same radiation dose that survivors of the atomic blasts at Nagasaki and Hiroshima endured.

"I think we need to pause and think about whether the extra information [from CT scans] really helps us make a diagnosis," Smith-Bindman says. "In most cases it does, and we should be using CT scanning in those cases. But in other situations it doesn't ... and the potential for harm outweighs the benefits."

She says patients should start asking doctors if they really need a particular CT scan, and if so, whether it can be done with minimal radiation exposure. It's especially important for younger adults and parents to ask the questions.

Smith-Bindman says radiation exposures can be cut substantially by eliminating unnecessary CT scans — both initial scans and repeat or follow-up scans now often done routinely. Also some fancier CT studies, involving multiple "slices" through the body in a single examination, can be replaced by simpler CT tests, conventional X-rays or tests such as ultrasound or MRI that don't involve radiation.

Another way is to reduce the amount of radiation involved in each scan.

Dr. James Thrall, chairman of the American College of Radiology, agrees. He says at his institution, the Massachusetts General Hospital, doctors who order a CT scan or other imaging study must list the reason. A computer program feeds back an "appropriateness score." A low score indicates the test is unlikely to be necessary.

"Our experience over the last five years has been rather phenomenal," Thrall says. Instead of an annual growth rate of 12 percent in CT scans, it's now about 1 percent, lower than the hospital's annual growth in patient load. "That means we're doing fewer scans per person," he says.

To cut down on unnecessarily high radiation doses, Thrall says, the College of Radiology is also developing an "alarm" system that will alert hospitals when their CT scan exceeds an acceptable dose. That will require hospitals to feed dose data to a central computer run by the radiology group.

In the long run, experts say, newer-generation CT scanners will come equipped to prevent excessive radiation doses. But it will take a while for thousands of current machines to be replaced.

Thrall doesn't agree with the National Cancer Institute's projection of 29,000 excess cancer deaths a year from CT radiation.

"I think it's almost undoubtedly less than 29,000," he says. "But in one respect, it doesn't matter whether it's 29,000 or 1,000. There are opportunities for us in radiology to do all the good things we do using less radiation."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the harm of exposure to radiation due to CT scanning. The story could have also mentioned other harms from overuse of scanning, such as follow-up testing and procedures to evaluate suspicious findings that turn out to be benign. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking fish oil may help prevent full-blown psychotic illness in at-risk adolescents and young adults, a study released today hints.

These at-risk individuals may have weak or transient psychotic symptoms, and already show schizophrenia-like brain changes, Dr. G. Paul Amminger of The University of Melbourne in Australia, a researcher on the study, told Reuters Health. But while psychiatrists now know how to identify these individuals, he added, they don’t know what to do with them. “At the moment there’s no state-of-the-art guideline (on) how to treat those people.”

Prescribing antipsychotic medications may be helpful, Amminger added, but these medications have serious side effects, and can also be stigmatizing. “For young people they don’t want to commit themselves to a treatment which they might need to take for the next five to ten years,” he said. Furthermore, only about a third of people at high risk for psychotic disorders will go on to develop full-fledged mental illness in a given year.

There’s considerable evidence that abnormal fatty acid metabolism may contribute to the development of schizophrenia, Amminger and his team note in the Archives of General Psychiatry. To investigate whether omega-3 fatty acids might help prevent psychotic illness, they randomly assigned 81 at-risk individuals, 13 to 25 years old, to take 1.2 grams a day of omega-3s in fish oil capsule form or a placebo for 12 weeks and then followed them for another 40 weeks.

The researchers included people who met at least one of the following three criteria: having low-level psychotic symptoms; having transient psychotic symptoms; or having a schizophrenia-like personality disorder or a close relative with schizophrenia, along with a sharp decline in mental function within the past year.

Seventy-six of the 81 study participants, or 94 percent, completed the trial, Amminger noted, which underscores the safety and tolerability of fish oil.

At one year, 5 percent of the study participants taking omega-3s had developed a psychotic disorder (2 of 41 people), compared to 28 percent of those on placebo (11 of 40). People taking fish oil also showed significant reductions in their psychotic symptoms and improvements in function, while they were at no greater risk of adverse effects than people taking placebo capsules.

The effect of fish oil capsules, Amminger noted, was similar to that seen in two trials of antipsychotic drugs in at-risk individuals.

There are a number of mechanisms through which omega-3s could protect the brain, Amminger said; they are a major component of brain cells. They are also key to the proper function of two brain chemical signaling systems, dopamine and serotonin, which have been implicated in schizophrenia. Fish oil also boosts levels of glutathione, an antioxidant that protects the brain against oxidative stress.

Trials of medications for treating mental illness typically don’t include people younger than 18, Amminger noted, while starting minors on these medications is “always very difficult, and always quite controversial.”

But if future research bears out the current findings, he added, fish oil promises to offer a safe way to help prevent psychosis in at-risk people, and could also potentially be used to prevent or delay the onset of chronic depression, bipolar illness, and substance abuse disorder — all of which are far more common than psychotic illness.

He and his colleagues are now planning a multicenter trial of fish oil for the prevention of psychotic illness in 320 at-risk people.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While fish oil supplements are generally recognized as safe, the story could have told readers about potential side effects which can be gastrointestinal and include blood clotting problems, particularly for people taking blood thinners.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 20, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Stem cell transplants may halt the progression of aggressive multiple sclerosis (MS) in nearly half of those with the debilitating disease, but picking the right patients for the treatment is key, a new study suggests.

Specifically, younger patients with a relapsing form of MS who were not severely disabled and who hadn't found relief with other treatments fared better than others over five years, the international team of researchers found.

However, in some cases the treatment proved fatal, the researchers reported.

"Stem cell transplantation cannot be considered a cure for MS. However, it can be considered a concrete option for patients showing aggressive MS who have not responded to approved treatments," said study co-author Dr. Riccardo Saccardi. He's from the cell therapy and transfusion medicine unit at Careggi University Hospital in Florence, Italy.

Using patients' own stem cells to reboot the immune system is a way to halt the advance of the disease. But the treatment can be risky because the patient's immune system has to be wiped out before the stem cells are transplanted, the researchers said.

In fact, nearly 3 percent of the patients died shortly after receiving the transplant, and those deaths were directly related to the transplant, the researchers reported.

Those deaths are a major concern, one neurologist said, because MS is not in itself life-threatening.

In effect, those patients gambled with a treatment that could be fatal for a disease that isn't, said Dr. Michael Racke, a professor in the department of neurology at Ohio State University.

Racke pointed out that stem cell transplants were first used to treat deadly diseases, such as leukemia, lymphoma and other cancers.

"There may be a population of MS patients that could be identified that might do well with transplant," he said. "It's important to select patients in such a way that they actually get well with the transplant."

A trial that compares stem cell transplants with other therapies to see whether stem cell transplants can become a treatment for patients who have progressive MS is about to start, added Racke, who co-authored an editorial that accompanied the study.

More than 2 million people in the world suffer from MS, in which the body attacks the central nervous system, according to the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.

MS can cause many symptoms, including blurred vision, loss of balance, poor coordination, slurred speech, tremors, numbness, extreme fatigue, problems with memory and concentration, paralysis and blindness.

These symptoms can come and go, or persist and worsen over time. Most people are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 50, although individuals as young as 2 and as old as 75 have developed the disease, the society says.

Medications can slow the progression of MS and help patients manage symptoms, but there's no cure.

To see how patients did over the long term after stem cell transplants, Saccardi and colleagues followed 281 patients from 13 countries who received stem cell transplants between 1995 and 2006.

The researchers found that 46 percent of the patients experienced progression-free survival at five years after transplant.

Within 100 days of transplant, however, eight patients died (nearly 3 percent). Those deaths were related to the transplants, Saccardi said.

The researchers think these deaths were most likely due to the transplant technology used before 2006, which has since improved.

The report was published online Feb. 20 in the journal JAMA Neurology.

Dr. Paul Wright is chair of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., and Long Island Jewish Medical Center, in New Hyde Park, N.Y. He said, "As neurologists battle with current therapies that are limited for progressive MS in younger patients, this study provides a possible new avenue for treatment."

Visit the National Multiple Sclerosis Society for more on MS.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story focuses on one potential adverse outcome: death. The story addresses this using clear, unambiguous language, which is good. In addition, the story notes: “Those deaths are a major concern, one neurologist said, because MS is not in itself life-threatening.” That’s a key point to make. The story could have been stronger if it had addressed the potential for other, nonfatal outcomes, but we give it a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women undergoing surgery for endometrial cancer can confidently opt for a minimally invasive hysterectomy performed by a skilled surgeon — with or without a robot’s help — suggests a new review of surgical outcomes.

The researchers found that the two advanced minimally invasive techniques led to similar results, and both appeared to be generally superior to the traditional open procedure.

“With minimally invasive surgery by an experienced surgeon’s hands, the incisions are smaller, pain and suffering is less, visualization is better, and recovery is faster than with open surgery,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat of the Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta who was not involved in the review, told Reuters Health.

“Robotics makes it easier for surgeons to transition from open to minimally invasive procedures,” he added.

More than 40,000 women are diagnosed with endometrial cancer in the U.S. every year. Treatment usually involves surgical removal of the uterus, known as hysterectomy. At the same time, lymph nodes are often removed to determine the stage of the cancer and whether further treatment is necessary.

The research team from the Florida Hospital Cancer Institute, in Orlando, reviewed eight prior studies, including nearly 1,600 patients who underwent either an open, closed or robot-assisted hysterectomy and lymph node removal.

In the open surgery, a relatively large incision is made in the abdominal wall. The closed procedure, known as laparoscopy, requires a much smaller cut, through which small instruments and a video camera are inserted. However, this minimally invasive approach also calls for significant training on the part of the surgeon to overcome challenges such as the counterintuitive movements involved in working from images on a TV monitor.

Robotic-assisted surgery is similar to laparoscopy, only the instruments and cameras are integrated into robotic arms, which the surgeon operates through a control console. The robotic equipment provides better three-dimensional vision, increased range of motion and intuitive, downscaled movements, while adding a few thousand more dollars to the procedure’s price tag, the authors note.

“Also with the computer-enhanced robotic technology, no matter how much coffee you drink in the morning, your movements don’t have tremors,” said Nezhat.

Based on their review, the researchers found that minimally invasive surgeries done with a human hand and instruments or with robotic assistance equipment took around the same time and resulted in similarly long stays in the hospital. However, about half as much blood was lost when robots were enlisted than with standard laparoscopy.

Both minimally invasive techniques resulted in longer-duration operations than open surgery. But both also led to shorter hospital stays and, in the case of robotic surgery, less blood-loss.

Further, the average number of lymph nodes removed was about the same in the robotic and open procedures, suggesting that both approaches result in about equal surgeon accuracy in staging endometrial cancer.

No differences between the three methods were seen in the numbers of complications, report the researchers in the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology.

“The robot will not really decrease human errors but it will make the surgery easier,” Dr. Tommaso Falcone of the Cleveland Clinic, in Ohio, who was also not involved in the study, told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

“Robotics increases the chance that a hysterectomy can be done by laparoscopy,” he added. “However, if the surgeon is skilled enough to do the hysterectomy without the robot by laparoscopy then the outcomes will be similar.”

Nezhat further noted that while robotic assistance can be a good “enabler” for a minimally invasive approach, surgeons should have at least the basic knowledge of regular laparoscopy too, as there may be times when the robotic equipment doesn’t work.

The reviewers point out that some of the differences found, such as the longer operation times for robotic-assisted surgery, may be due to surgeons’ inexperience with the new tool and could improve over time.

On the other hand, the newness of the technology could have deterred surgeons from using it for difficult cases, potentially biasing the results in a positive way for the robotic technique.

Robotic surgery equipment only received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval in 2005. More research is needed to be able to compare long-term outcomes, wrote the researchers.

Nezhat advises women to look for a surgeon experienced in doing minimally invasive surgery. If a robot is to be enlisted, he recommends asking how the procedure would be performed if the robot is not available or if it doesn’t work.

“Robotic-assisted surgery is in its infancy, and it definitely has a future,” said Nezhat. “Its benefits should offset its higher costs.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that “No differences between the three methods were seen in the numbers of complications, report the researchers in the journal Obstetrics & Gynecology.”  The researchers reported a very complete breakdown of intraoperative and post-operative complications – including what differences were statistically significant or not.  We’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
So imagine my enthusiasm when I learned last fall that the Food and Drug Administration had finally approved the first implantable sensor to continuously measure glucose, beeping or vibrating a warning whenever levels head too high or too low. On Monday, June 12, I took the train down to Washington to be hooked up while the annual meeting of the American Diabetes Association was in town.

The device, made by Medtronic MiniMed, is called the Paradigm Real-Time, a combination insulin pump and continuous glucose sensor. The sensor doesn’t control the pump but allows a diabetic to make quicker, presumably better decisions. I’d already been on a stand-alone MiniMed pump for a few years, but I found it only an incremental improvement over taking insulin by injection.

Like the pump, the sensor requires injecting a tiny catheter (less than an inch long) into the midsection of the body, and changing it every three days to avoid infection. The sensor has a coated tip that measures the electrical conductivity of the interstitial fluid, the juice floating between fat cells right under the skin. As luck would have it, the conductivity is directly proportional to how much glucose is floating around in the juice.

Even with the help of an expert trainer from MiniMed, I found that injecting the catheter took much more dexterity than injecting one for a pump. It has to be placed above the hip or the buttocks, which makes reaching it awkward, and then the wire leading from the sensor has to be connected to a transmitter that wirelessly sends the information to the pump.

When everything was in, I had two catheters and the transmitter all taped to my body, plus the pump hanging on my belt. Kind of weird, but kind of cool, in a sci-fi way, and I remained thrilled at the prospect of seeing my first glucose reading.

Then the waiting began. The sensor needs three hours to settle in before it can begin transmitting data. By late afternoon, when it was supposed to start, I got an error message instead. When I tried to recalibrate it a half-hour later, it still wasn’t working right, so I had to remove it and inject a second one. It was after 9 p.m. before the second one finally began working.

At first, I was transfixed by the numbers as they were updated every five minutes. That night, however, the sensor kept beeping me awake, nearly every hour, warning that my glucose level was too high.

I kept following the recommendations of the embedded calculator, taking only very small amounts of insulin to bring my sugar level down. But by morning, I was still high, so I followed my own usual guesstimate and took much more.

Two hours later, while attending a session at the diabetes association meetings, in which four experts talked about the new sensors, I heard mine beep again, this time warning me that my glucose level was plummeting. I quickly drank a juice box, and within minutes my numbers started leveling off. I had avoided my first low. All the hassles of the past 24 hours were forgiven. This bionic diabetic was in rapture.

Over the next six weeks of testing, I came down to earth as I realized that while the sensor enabled me to drastically cut my usual number of lows, it did not eliminate them.

The main problem was that the sensor was simply not as accurate as a blood-glucose tester. MiniMed’s studies show the sensor’s accuracy can be off by as much as 18 percent. Another sensor, just approved by the F.D.A. and made by DexCom, is said by some researchers to be a bit more accurate, as is a third device, from Abbot, which has not yet been approved. But none are as accurate as a standard blood-sugar test.

I also had three sensor catheters slip out and require early replacement, which would be especially annoying to anyone paying the $35 that each sensor costs; I wasn’t, because MiniMed had supplied everything free for testing, but everybody else will, since the sensors are not yet covered by insurance. With each catheter intended to last just three days, the bill comes to $350 a month.

But the bottom line is that over the entire six weeks I had only a few lows that left me feeling woozy, the kind I used to put up with two or three times a week.

On July 24, my test period over, I felt like Mr. Magoo without his glasses. I made it through our annual Cape Cod vacation without incident, but Annie kept a wary eye on me. I think I owe it to her to start shelling out that $350 per month, at least until the insurance companies figure out what a lifesaver this transformative new technology can be.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Through one man’s story-telling, harms are described and included malfunctions with the machine leading to recalibration or inserting new catheters, trouble relying on machine recommendations for insulin dosages, potential for infection at the injection site, and inconvenience of being awakened or disturbed by the beeping or buzzing alarm. Of course, it’s not clear whether these are the only harms, but they seem reasonable. The story could be improved by reporting on actual harms reported in clinical trials. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The antidepressant Prozac may alleviate repetitive behavior and obsessive-compulsive symptoms in adults with autism, reducing these defining symptoms of the disorder, according to new research.

The research, which included 37 high-functioning autistic adults, mainly diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome, followed participants for 12 weeks. Taking Prozac (fluoxetine) doubled the chances that a patient would show overall improvement, measured by their clinicians. Half of the participants taking Prozac had significant reductions in obsessive-compulsive symptoms, compared with 8% taking placebo. Side effects were mild to moderate and participants taking Prozac did not show increases in suicidal thoughts or ideas.

“Repetitive behavior is a core symptom of the illness,” says lead author Dr. Eric Hollander, medical director of the Autism and Obsessive-Compulsive Spectrum Program at Montefiore Medical Center in New York, explaining that “from a very early age, these children have rituals and routines. For example, they like to line up their toys and they get very bent out of shape if there is any deviation.”

MORE: What Does a 400% Increase in Antidepressant Use Really Mean?

A previous, larger study of a similar medication, Celexa (citalopram), in autistic children did not find a reduction in repetitive behaviors, but the drug did reduce irritability and was superior to placebo among children who had the highest levels of irritability. Irritability can sometimes lead to repetitive behaviors because autistic people often engage in these activities to soothe themselves.

Both Prozac and Celexa belong to a class of antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. Prior research on SSRIs in autistic people has also looked at Luvox (fluvoxamine) and found a reduction in repetitive behavior in adults but not children. It is not known if the differences between these studies are due to differences between the medications or other factors.

Obsessive behaviors may also arise in autistic people in response to the stress or discomfort of unpredictable situations. “Many of these individuals have expectations for what’s going to happen, and if there is an unexpected deviation, they experience a lot of discomfort and then they do all these kinds of behaviors,” says Hollander. That’s why people with autism may obsessively avoid locations where they previously experienced discomfort, for example, or they may engage in a repetitive habit like washing, checking, counting, touching or tapping.

When taking Prozac, Hollander says, “Patients acknowledge experiencing less discomfort. They’re more able to go outside their comfort zone and to better resist their habits and rituals.” One participant in Hollander’s study was previously too anxious to take the subway or eat in a restaurant, but, when taking Prozac, was able to tolerate these unpredictable environments.

“It takes the edge off,” Hollander explains, noting that the findings were statistically significant and clinically meaningful. “The clinicians could tell that people were doing better not only in terms of OCD symptoms but overall distress and ability to function.”

MORE: Why Are So Many Foster Care Children Taking Antipsychotics?

The only drugs approved to treat irritability and repetitive behaviors in autistic children are the atypical antipsychotics Risperdal (risperidone) and Abilify (aripiprazole), which tend to have more severe side effects than Prozac does. Those drugs carry significant risk for weight gain, diabetes and movement disorders.

Responding to the research, Yale Child Study Center director Fred Volkmar told WebMD: “The question remains, ‘Is fluoxetine better than risperidone for this symptom?’ It would be interesting to see studies comparing these two drugs head to head.”

Hollander has previously received funding from pharmaceutical companies, but the current study was paid for by a grant from the Food and Drug Administration’s “orphan” drug program. That program funds research on rare conditions with new drugs or those no longer patented that are not likely to be pursued by industry. When the research was originally funded, Hollander says, autism was considered to be a rare condition.

The study was published in the American Journal of Psychiatry.

Maia Szalavitz is a health writer at TIME.com. Find her on Twitter at @maiasz. You can also continue the discussion on TIME Healthland’s Facebook page and on Twitter at @TIMEHealthland.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does say that, “Side effects were mild to moderate and participants taking Prozac did not show increases in suicidal thoughts or ideas.”  It could have noted, though,  that 12 weeks may not be long enough for side effects to emerge.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, doctors in Cleveland will stimulate the brain of a person disabled by stroke to help them regain function and independence.

Someone has a stroke in the United States every 40 seconds, and it has become the leading cause of serious long-term disability among Americans. That’s why doctors at the Cleveland Clinic will test deep brain stimulation (DBS)—a procedure in which electrodes are implanted in the brain to provide small electric pulses as a way to help people recover control of their movements.

The hospital recently received the green light from federal authorities to start the first ever human trial of DBS for stroke, and plans to announce Tuesday that it will perform the procedure as soon as an initial patient is identified.

Close to 800,000 Americans have a stroke each year and estimates suggest about half of those people will be disabled from it. With physical therapy, many people regain some motor function, but the brain damage cannot be reversed and many still have profound movement problems.

“Despite advances in physical therapy and acute treatment of stroke there are still too many people who live with long term disabilities, and new technologies are needed,” said Dr. Andre Machado, the chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Neurological Institute who is leading the trial and will perform the procedures.

DBS has been used to treat tremors associated with Parkinson’s disease, but Machado said the new approach, if successful, will achieve something novel. “The big difference is that when we are treating the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, we’re trying to make the symptom, like a tremor, go away,” he said. “When we are treating stroke, we are really trying to make movement come back. There is something inherently different about that.”

And inherently harder. DBS has never been used on humans as a way to regain a function. And experts aren’t even entirely sure why it works for Parkinson’s in the first place. But for 10 years, Machado and his team have been studying the effects of DBS on rats. They found that rats with strokes who received DBS had more proteins in the brain that are associated with brain plasticity—and twice as many synapses or connections between nerve cells compared to rats with strokes who did not undergo DBS.

If all goes as planned, Machado will insert the electrodes in the brain of someone severely disabled by stroke who has exhausted all other options without improvement. The electrodes will be placed on parts of the brain that communicate with the damaged region and surrounding areas. The electrodes will be attached to a wire that connects them to a battery pack located under the skin in the chest—the pack looks similar to a pacemaker. The stimulation will hopefully jump-start the brain’s recovery process and help them gain more control while undergoing standard therapy.

The team will focus on people who suffer ischemic strokes, which is when blood flow to the brain is blocked. About 87% of all strokes are this type.

DBS is a type of brain surgery, and comes with risks like bleeding, infection and need for more surgeries. Since the procedure is experimental, there may be some unknown risks as well. Depending on how the first procedure goes, the hospital will enroll more people into its trial. If ultimately successful, DBS could become a treatment used in tandem with physical rehabilitation. “The goal of this therapy is not to replace physical training, but rather to boost the effects,” Machado said. “The proposition here is to make that recovery greater.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Near the end, the story does mention that “DBS is a type of brain surgery, and comes with risks like bleeding, infection and need for more surgeries” so it earns a Satisfactory rating. It also points out some harms may be unknown. But we would have been happier if the risks were not buried in the last paragraph of the story by which point, odds are, some people would have stopped reading.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It’s hard to talk about carbs without talking about wheat, and it’s hard to talk about wheat without talking about gluten. Gluten is not a carbohydrate; it’s a mix of proteins found in wheat and its close relatives (including spelt, kamut and farro), as well as in barley and rye. It’s what gives bread its elasticity, but it also sets off the immune system of people with celiac disease, damaging the small intestine and sometimes producing painful and unpleasant symptoms.

Even some people who don’t have celiac disease feel better when they don’t eat wheat. They may assume that they have gluten sensitivity, but some researchers believe that it’s not the gluten they’re sensitive to. Instead, it’s fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides and polyols, or FODMAPS.

Never was a group of molecules more desperately in need of an acronym. FODMAPs are a group of carbohydrates that don’t get broken down and absorbed in the small intestine. Instead, they pass through to the large intestine, where they draw water into the gut and start to ferment. The process by which FODMAPs are broken down and fermented can cause gastrointestinal distress: diarrhea, bloating, pain, flatulence and constipation. Wheat and rye are high in FODMAPs, as are onions, garlic, apples, stone fruit, pistachios and many other foods.

Research by Peter Gibson, a professor of gastroenterology at Australia’s Monash University, has found that some people who believed they were gluten-sensitive were, instead, FODMAP-sensitive. A low-FODMAP diet eased their symptoms, as it does for about 70 percent of people who suffer from irritable bowel syndrome, a condition that causes abdominal pain and bowel changes. Gibson estimates that, overall, about 10 percent of the population may be FODMAP-sensitive.

But there’s a problem with a low-FODMAP diet. The fermentation that is painful to that 10 percent is good for your gut because it stimulates growth of the kind of bacteria associated with digestive health. “Following strictly the low-FODMAP diet is associated with changes in the microbiota that many would not equate with good health,” says Gibson, who stresses that a low-FODMAP diet should be used to reduce specific symptoms, not as a way to improve health.

If your gut can handle FODMAPs, foods that contain a lot of them can be very good choices — partly because the fermentation helps your gut biome and partly because the way FODMAPs are digested means you’re absorbing fewer calories than indicated on a FODMAP-rich product’s label. Unless you have specific symptoms that a low-FODMAP diet alleviates, Gibson says, “enjoy your FODMAPs!”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This is the strongest aspect of the story and the area where readers are likely to find some value. The story explains that the low-FODMAP diet has drawbacks, since foods high in FODMAPS are thought to stimulate growth of certain bacteria associated with digestive health. We’d add that anything that restricts consumption of fruits and vegetables has the potential to reduce the quality of your diet and potentially impact your health. This is especially true for children. The story rightfully stresses that a low-FODMAP diet should be used “to reduce specific symptoms, not as a way to improve health.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, April 12, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Eating apples every day may be good for your cardiovascular health, new research suggests.

Women who ate dried apples every day for a year lowered their total cholesterol by 14 percent and their levels of "bad" LDL cholesterol by 23 percent.

"I never expected apple consumption to reduce bad cholesterol to this extent while increasing HDL cholesterol or good cholesterol by about 4 percent," Bahram Arjmandi, chair of the department of nutrition, food and exercise sciences at Florida State University in Tallahassee, said in a statement.

Arjmandi was to present the findings Tuesday at the Experimental Biology meeting in Washington D.C. The U.S. Department of Agriculture provided partial funding for the study.

Many foods can have an effect on cholesterol levels, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Foods containing saturated fats, trans fats and dietary cholesterol can raise your cholesterol levels, while foods with healthier fats such as olive oil can lower your cholesterol. Foods with fiber, such as fruits, vegetables and whole grains, can reduce cholesterol levels, while carbohydrates that are low in fiber tend to raise triglyceride levels and lower "good" HDL cholesterol levels.

In the current study, the researchers wanted to assess the long-term effect that apple consumption might have on cardiovascular health.

They recruited 160 women between the ages of 45 and 65. The women were randomly assigned to one of two dietary intervention groups. One group was given 75 grams of dried apples every day for a year, while the other group was given dried prunes daily for a year.

The daily serving of dried apples contained about 240 calories, according to the study. An apple contains about 5 grams of fiber, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

The researchers found that women eating dried apples lowered their total cholesterol by 14 percent. LDL cholesterol dropped by 23 percent. Daily apple consumption also significantly lowered levels of C-reactive protein and lipid hydroperoxide, two substances that may indicate an increased risk of heart disease. What effects, if any, the prunes had on cholesterol levels were not mentioned in the study abstract.

The researchers theorized that the nutrients in apples may reduce inflammation in the body.

Despite the addition of several hundred calories a day to their diet, the apple-eating women didn't gain weight over the course of the study. In fact, they lost an average of 3.3 pounds.

Registered dietician Jessica Shapiro said she wasn't surprised that the women didn't gain weight. The addition of apples to the diet probably kept the women feeling fuller because of the fiber content in the apples, she explained.

"Apples really are an amazing fruit for many reasons," said Shapiro, who is a clinical nutritionist who counsels cardiac patients at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City. "A large reason apples are so good is the fiber. Apples have both soluble and insoluble fiber. Insoluble is found more in the skin, and the pulp is more soluble fiber."

"The pulp of an apple gets to be a very viscous gel-like substance that grabs cholesterol and pulls it out of the body. It's kind of like nature's toothbrush, and it's brushing the bad stuff out," she explained.

"Another good thing in apples is pectin. It's a substance that's used to make jellies or jams, and pectin contributes to the viscosity of what's going through the body, and bulks it up to help remove it. Apples also have tons of antioxidants and other natural components," she said.

Shapiro said she would recommend fresh apples over dried apples, because some nutrients are probably lost in the drying process.

But Shapiro stressed that making healthy changes to what you eat can only do so much.

"Changing your diet can make a big difference, but eating a healthy diet is only part of it. Once your cholesterol is high, diet may not be enough," she said. "Some people are predisposed because of their genes to having high cholesterol, and a healthy diet may not be enough."

Shapiro also advised against making any changes to your medications, including cholesterol-lowering drugs, without talking to your doctor first.

Also, she cautioned, when increasing the fiber in your diet, do it slowly. This will help prevent bloating and gas that may occur if you increase your fiber intake too quickly. She said that 25 to 30 grams of fiber daily is the recommended intake, and she suggested increasing your current intake by about 5 grams daily each week to give your body a chance to get used to the increased fiber.

Learn more about the importance of fruits and vegetables from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We can’t think of any potential harms, and the story stated that “Despite the addition of several hundred calories a day to their diet, the apple-eating women didn’t gain weight over the course of the study. In fact, they lost an average of 3.3 pounds.” 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
June 2, 2010 (San Francisco) -- A quick spray of a new drug may help men who suffer from premature ejaculation last nearly six times longer, new research suggests.

The numbers aren't huge. Men who sprayed the head of their penis with PSD502 five minutes before sex lasted an average of just over three minutes after three months of treatment, compared with just over 30 seconds before.

Nonetheless, doctors like Irwin Goldstein, MD, director of San Diego Sexual Medicine at Alvarado Hospital in San Diego, tell WebMD they're excited because this is the first time a drug is being rigorously tested for men with really serious premature ejaculation problems.

Up to 30% of men suffer some degree of premature ejaculation, defined as ejaculation that occurs within one minute of vaginal penetration. It's the No. 1 sexual health problem in men.

Premature ejaculation can be devastating for both a man and his partner, triggering anxiety, depression, and relationship problems, says Goldstein, who heard the results presented at the annual meeting of the American Urological Association.

Not all men with premature ejaculation suffer to the same degree as the men in the study, says researcher Ira Sharlip, MD, clinical professor of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. He consults for Shionogi Pharma Inc., which makes the spray and funded the work.

"Yet I think a substantial number of [men with premature ejaculation] would use it," he tells WebMD, alternatives being unproven products with names like "Stay Erect" and "Play Longer."

At the meeting, Sharlip presented the pooled results of two pivotal studies of PSD502 involving 530 men with premature ejaculation.

A total of 358 of the men gave themselves three quick sprays of PSD502 to the head of the penis five minutes before sex and then wiped it off right before penetration.

PSD502, which contains two common topical painkillers, lidocaine and prilocaine, is "slightly oily, but not objectionably so," Sharlip says.

The rest of the men used a placebo spray. All used the product for three months, for a total of 23,000 doses.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Again, this was the most complete story of the three reviewed in discussing side effects: 
"A total of 6.1% of the men and 6.7% of their partners suffered at least one side effect. In men, the most frequent side effect was loss of erection; it occurred at least once in 3.1% of men. In the partners, the most frequent side effect was burning in the vulvovaginal area; 5% of women reported it at least once."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 9, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Scientists report positive results in early testing of a wireless pacemaker that's placed in the heart instead of being connected to it via wires from the upper chest.

There are still many questions regarding the pacemaker, produced by Nanostim Inc. It's only been implanted in a few dozen people who were studied for a matter of months, limiting information about its long-term use and safety. It's also not clear when the pacemaker may be publicly available, and its cost is unknown. And the existing version of the device won't work for most pacemaker patients because it lacks some key features.

Still, a new company-funded study shows that "this is now a possibility" that could reduce infections and the severity of pacemaker surgery, said study author Dr. Vivek Reddy, director of the Cardiac Arrhythmia Service at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City. "This is going to be the future," he said.

Pacemakers zap the heart with low levels of electricity when the heartbeat becomes too fast, too slow or too irregular. Some are combined with defibrillators, which give the heart a major jolt when needed.

Currently, pacemakers include two components: a battery-powered generator that produces the electrical "prompts" that the wires deliver to the heart when needed, Reddy said. These wires can break or become infected, he explained, making the idea of a wire-free pacemaker appealing.

The new pacemaker is about the size of a AAA battery and provides jolts to one chamber of the heart, Reddy said. Most people with pacemakers require jolts to both chambers, so the pacemaker in its current form wouldn't work for them.

In the new study, researchers implanted the pacemaker in 32 people for the first time through a puncture in the skin; in 10 patients, they had to reposition it. The researchers reported positive results at up to three months. However, one patient died of a stroke while convalescing after suffering a heart injury during implantation and another had the pacemaker replaced with a defibrillator.

Why get a wire-free pacemaker? "For patients with heart problems, this could potentially mean fewer infections related to leads and less discomfort during the implant procedure," Reddy said. And children who get pacemakers wouldn't face chest scarring, he added.

Dr. Saman Nazarian, a cardiologist and assistant professor of medicine at Johns Hopkins Hospital, said the findings are promising and "the new technology has enormous potential." He expects the pacemaker "will likely be utilized for some select patients" after more testing.

Still, he said, the new device will probably be more expensive than other pacemakers, and may pose special risks of its own.

Dr. Harish Doppalapudi, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, added that there are unanswered questions regarding replacement of the new pacemakers.

"When the battery of the implanted leadless pacemaker is exhausted, a new implant is necessary, with all the potential risks associated with this," Doppalapudi said. "It is not known if it will be feasible to safely retrieve the old device. If the old device is left in place, it is not known what the long-term effects of this will be."

Study author Reddy has received grant funding from Nanostim, and works for the company as a consultant. He also has received stock options from the company.

The study was to be presented Wednesday at the Heart Rhythm Society annual meeting in Denver. Findings presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

For more about pacemakers, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that:
“researchers implanted the pacemaker in 32 people for the first time through a puncture in the skin; in 10 patients, they had to reposition it. …one patient died of a stroke while convalescing after suffering a heart injury during implantation and another had the pacemaker replaced with a defibrillator.”
One independent expert in the story said the new device “may pose special risks of its own.”
Another said, “When the battery of the implanted leadless pacemaker is exhausted, a new implant is necessary, with all the potential risks associated with this. It is not known if it will be feasible to safely retrieve the old device. If the old device is left in place, it is not known what the long-term effects of this will be.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
He and other experts emphasized that though the removal of the healthy breast sharply reduced the risk of a new cancer developing in that breast — the risk is not zero because some tissue can remain — it was the cancer that had already been diagnosed that posed the greatest threat to a patient’s life.

“For the vast majority of our patients, this does not impact the chances of dying of breast cancer, and that’s the key thing here,” said Dr. Julie R. Gralow, the chairwoman of the communications committee of the American Society of Clinical Oncology and an associate professor of medical oncology at the University of Washington and the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle.

“My first reaction to this study, because it came as a bit of a surprise, was, ‘Oh, are we doing our job explaining that point to patients?’” Dr. Gralow said. “We want to support women in doing what feels right to them. But our job is to make sure they have all the accurate information.”

The study used data from cancer surveillance registries covering about a quarter of the United States to identify 152,755 patients whose cancer was diagnosed in one breast from 1998 to 2003. The rate rose steadily, with 4.5 percent of all patients who received breast cancer diagnoses in 2003 having the surgery, up from 1.8 percent in 1998.

The numbers were much higher among women who had the breast with cancer removed, rather than a lumpectomy. That group was much more likely to choose to have the healthy breast removed, as well. In that group, 11 percent chose a double mastectomy in 2003, up from 4.2 percent in 1998. Patients with Stage 1 breast cancer chose the procedure more often than those with more advanced cancer.

“What we’re actually seeing is more and more women at the two extremes: either having minimal surgery, a lumpectomy, or having a bilateral mastectomy,” Dr. Tuttle said. “Fewer women are having just one breast removed.”

Younger women, white women and women with a previous cancer diagnosis were more likely to opt for a contralateral prophylactic mastectomy, the study found, as were women who had lobular histology, meaning the cancer started in the lobules or milk-making glands of the breast.

Though the researchers had limited information about the patients, Dr. Tuttle suggested that younger women might be choosing the procedure because their cancers tended to be very aggressive, and they had more years ahead of them in which a second cancer might develop.

Though all women with breast cancer are at risk of developing a second cancer in the uninvolved breast, the risk is slightly greater with lobular histology, Dr. Tuttle said, and white women may be more likely to carry genetic mutations associated with an increased risk of developing cancer in the contralateral breast.

Several developments may be driving the trend toward prophylactic mastectomies, experts said. More women are undergoing genetic testing after a diagnosis of breast cancer, and improvements in both mastectomy and breast-reconstruction techniques have made the option of a double reconstruction less daunting.

Doctors and patients’ advocates urged women considering the procedure to go for counseling and take their time before making a decision, noting that other risk-reducing options were available, like tamoxifen therapy for estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer and the use of more sensitive magnetic resonance imaging screening for earlier detection.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The focus of the story discusses the recent increase in bilateral mastectomy after the diagnosis of cancer in one breast.  This may be overtreatment for some women.  The story notes that physicians should provide women with accurate information about the survival benefit of all treatments, including less invasive options for reducing the risk of a recurrence. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Targeted magnetic pulses to the brain were shown to reduce craving and substance use in cocaine-addicted patients. The results of this pilot study, published in the peer-reviewed journal European Neuropsychopharmacology, suggest that this may become an effective medical treatment for patients with cocaine addiction, although a larger trial is needed to confirm the initial findings.

Cocaine use is widespread in the Western World. Last year, 2.3 million young Europeans (aged 15 to 34) used cocaine, and the US National Institute on Drug Abuse estimates that 1.4 million Americans suffer from cocaine addiction1. There is no effective drug treatment for cocaine addiction, with behavioural therapies being the main element of any treatment regime. Now a group of researchers working in Italy and the USA have shown in a preliminary clinical study that cocaine use can be reduced by treatment with rTMS (repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation).

As author, Dr Antonello Bonci (Scientific Director, National Institute on Drug Abuse, and Adjunct Professor, John Hopkins University, Baltimore) said:

"Despite the fact that more than 20 million people worldwide suffer from cocaine use disorders2, there are no effective neurobiological treatments for patients with this devastating condition".

The practical work was conducted by team of scientists led by Dr Luigi Gallimberti, from the University of Padova Medical School, Italy, who enrolled 32 patients who were seeking treatment for cocaine addiction at the hospital clinic. The participating patients were randomized to receive either rTMS or standard symptom-relieving medications.

The experimental group received one rTMS session per day for five days, and then once a week for the following three weeks, for a total of 8 TMS sessions over 29 days. Those in the control group received pharmacological treatment for symptoms associated with cocaine addiction (such as depression, anxiety and sleep problems). The study indicated the safety of rTMS in patients with cocaine addiction. There was significantly less craving and there were a significantly higher number of cocaine-free urine drug tests in the rTMS compared to the control group. In addition, 69% (11/16) patients) in the experimental group showed no relapse to cocaine use, whereas only 19% (3/16) patients) in the control group showed a similar positive result (the results are adjusted for patients who dropped out of the trial).

Dr Bonci said: "rTMS is a non-invasive and very safe therapeutic approach which is used with other mental health and neurological conditions, such as depression and neuropathic pain. Our study suggests that rTMS may also represent a new treatment for patients with cocaine use disorder".

At the end of the first 29 days of the experiment, the experimental group was given the option of continuing the treatment, whereas those in the control group were given the possibility of receiving the same rTMS treatment as the experimental group for 63 days. Results further confirmed the beneficial effects of rTMS in helping patients to maintain abstinence from cocaine.

Dr. Bonci continued: We consider this study promising but preliminary. We need to replicate the work in a bigger group of patients using sham-TMS as the control condition. As far as we know, this work represents the first clinical report indicating that rTMS treatment results in significant reduction in cocaine use. It is also important to emphasize that, in this study patients were seeking treatment for their cocaine addiction in a hospital setting: the group studied, albeit small, was a "real world" sample. We have continued to follow patients from the trial, and the improvement seems to be sustained over time, up to 12 months, although we don't have any hard data on that yet. It is important that this is taken forward to a larger trial.

We decided to target an area of the brain involved in decision making, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DL PFC). This was because previous animal studies from our lab had shown that compulsive cocaine-seeking was associated with hypoactivity in the prelimbic cortex, which is a brain area that shares similar behavioural roles to the DL PFC. Importantly, we had found that increasing the activity in the prelimbic cortex could significantly reduce cocaine self-administration".

"This study represents a creative approach to a disorder that is notoriously difficult to treat in the real world. These pilot data also show that biological treatments nowadays reach far beyond medications and that new neuroscience methods may be used for targeted changes in brain regions relevant for complex mental disorders".
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release states that the magnetic stimulation treatment is safe and non-invasive and is already in use to treat patients with depression and neuropathic pain.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The number of Americans undergoing CT scans has increased dramatically in recent years, driving a significant increase in the amount of radiation that many people are being exposed to from medical procedures.

That trend is raising concern that the high-tech exams could cause a small but significant excess of cancers in coming decades and spurring debate about whether the increasingly ubiquitous tests are being overused, exposing millions of Americans to needless risk. "The radiation doses from CT have been pretty clearly demonstrated to increase cancer risk," said David J. Brenner, a professor of radiation oncology at Columbia University who co-authored the most recent of a series of reports in the past year warning about the potential risks of CT scans. "On an individual basis there's probably not a big risk, but a small cancer risk applied to an increasingly large population spells trouble down the road. That's the concern."

Although some prominent medical groups have issued warnings against overusing the exams -- especially for children -- some experts worry about frightening patients away from the invaluable tests.

"You don't want people to avoid getting a potentially lifesaving diagnosis or therapy because they are afraid to get a CT scan," said Arl Van Moore Jr., a Charlotte radiologist who chairs the American College of Radiology's board of chancellors. "When a scan is done the right way for the right reasons, the benefits clearly outweigh the risks of doing it."

CT (computed tomography), sometimes called CAT (computed axial tomography), is performed by computerized machines that scan patients with X-rays to create three-dimensional cross-sectional images of organs and other parts of the body, providing far greater detail than standard single X-rays.

The number of scans performed each year in the United States has increased sharply, rising from about 3 million in 1980 to at least 67 million in 2006. There are many reasons for the increase, including improvements in the technology that have speeded the procedure, a growing list of uses and a proliferation of the machines.

"CT has become ubiquitous," said Jason Launders, a senior project officer at the ECRI Institute, an independent nonprofit health-care research organization outside Philadelphia that released a report last year warning about the potential risks. "Now if you go into an emergency room you can be scanned in a few minutes. You can't get that kind of information any other way. So physicians tend to use CT as sort of a first line in working out a diagnosis."

The use of CT scans is expected to continue to rise as possible new applications, such as for lung and colon cancer screening, become more widespread.

While the value of CT scans for screening remains the focus of debate, no one questions the value of the tests for allowing doctors to quickly diagnose a wide variety of health problems, including head injuries, heart problems, cancer, appendicitis, fractures and gallstones.

"CT is probably the biggest advance in diagnostic radiology that has ever occurred," said Thomas Ohlhaber, deputy director of the Division of Mammography Quality and Radiation Programs at the Food and Drug Administration. "Exploratory surgery that was common 10 or 15 years ago has virtually disappeared and all the risks associated with that have gone away because of CT. But nothing comes free of risks."

The concern comes from the fact that CT scans expose patients to much more radiation than standard X-rays. A CT chest scan, for example, exposes a patient to more than 150 times more radiation than a standard chest X-ray. That's more than twice as much as a typical person receives from the environment in an entire year. (See graphic.)

The upsurge in CT use has fueled a big jump in the annual amount of radiation that each American is receiving from medical procedures of all kinds. The average level of that exposure has increased about 600-fold since 1980, according to a federal report being published this year.

"At the moment, about half of medical radiation exposure is from CT scans," said Fred A. Mettler Jr., a radiation health expert at the University of New Mexico who helped prepare the report. CT scans represented just a few percent of the average American's exposure to radiation from medical tests in 1980, he noted.

Because it would take decades to follow a large number of patients who have undergone CT scans to determine the exact risks posed by the exams, there are no direct data demonstrating the danger. But researchers have estimated the risk based on what is considered the best information available about the health effects of radiation -- data collected from survivors of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, as well as exposure of nuclear plant and medical workers.

Using that information, experts have estimated that every 1,000 to 2,000 CT scans may produce one fatal cancer that would not have occurred otherwise.

Although that overall risk is relatively small, the large number of scans being performed could translate into a significant number of cancers. Brenner and his colleagues estimate that CT scans may be responsible for perhaps 2 percent of all cancers in the United States. The ECRI Institute estimated the scans may be causing 6,000 extra cancers each year, half of them fatal.

"Twenty years from now we could see a huge bonus of cancer coming through because of indiscriminate use of CT today," Launders said. "That's the real issue people are worried about."

The individual risk varies depending on the age of the patient and the type of scan. Younger people face more risk than older people because they have more time for a cancer to develop. Children are especially vulnerable because their rapidly developing bodies are at least four times as sensitive to the damaging effects of radiation. A child's risk may run as high as one case of cancer for every 500 scans, experts say.

Among adults, "young women have the highest risk," said Andrew Einstein of Columbia University, who evaluated the risks from cardiac CT scans in a paper published in July in the Journal of the American Medical Association. A 20-year-old woman faced the greatest risk -- one additional cancer for every 143 scans, he reported.

Some question the estimates, saying the risk of exposure from radiation from multiple CT scans may not be the same as from radiation from an atomic bomb.

"It's very difficult, in our opinion to equate the data from Hiroshima, where you had an instantaneous entire-body dose of radiation, compared to a cumulative dose for multiple CT scans," said Moore, the radiologist. "It's apples and oranges. It's not really the same."

Einstein, Mettler and others, however, disagree. "Radiation is radiation. Those are X-rays that the folks at Hiroshima and Nagasaki got. These are X-rays from a CT scan. They're really the same thing," said Brenner, whose report was published in November in the New England Journal of Medicine. "If the dose is the same, then the risk is going to be the same."

Although the companies that make the CT machines have been developing new protocols designed to minimize radiation exposure, particularly for children, everyone agrees that the most prudent thing to do is to eliminate unnecessary use.

While there are scant hard data about how often CT scans are done needlessly, several experts estimated that perhaps one-third could be eliminated. There are many reasons CTs may be overused. Some CTs are full-body "virtual physicals" performed on people who appear perfectly healthy -- a practice widely opposed by medical authorities.

Some say part of the blame lies with physicians who have financial interests in imaging facilities. "There is statistical evidence that indicates that more scans are ordered when a physician has a financial interest than when he doesn't," said Moore.

Defensive medicine also plays a role, with some doctors ordering the tests to stave off accusations that they withheld the most cutting-edge technology from their patients.

In other cases, overuse results from worried patients and from parents demanding CT scans that may not be needed. Other times doctors may not realize how many tests involving radiation patients have already undergone -- information that could influence a doctor's decision -- or may order a CT scan when other tests that do not involve radiation, such as a blood test, an MRI or an ultrasound, would suffice. "There are alternatives that are arguably just as good," Brenner said.

And patients also can take more responsibility for reducing the number of unnecessary scans.

"If a patient walks in and says, 'Tell me what the dose is from this and tell me what the risk is,' they are going to make the doctor start thinking about it," Mettler said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the harms of radiation exposure due to CT scans. Notably, the story comments on how many excess cases of cancer could be explained by the radiation exposure and that some of the risk is easily avoidable: some scans are unnecessary.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental drug dramatically reduced the toxic plaques found in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease, a team reports in the journal Nature.

Results from a small number of patients who received a high dose of the drug, called aducanumab, hint that it may also be able to slow the loss of memory and thinking.

"If that hint of a clinical benefit is confirmed, it would be a game changer in the fight against Alzheimer's disease," says Dr. Eric Reiman, executive director of the Banner Alzheimer's Institute in Phoenix. Reiman wrote a commentary that accompanies the study in Nature.

But it will take much larger studies to show for sure whether aducanumab really does slow down Alzheimer's disease, Reiman says.

Officials of Biogen, which is developing the drug, were also cautious about interpreting the results of the study, which included 165 patients in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease.

"We think we have something important here," says Dr. Alfred Sandrock, chief medical officer for Biogen. "We hope we're right because if it's true it would benefit millions of patients. But we don't know we're right yet."

 

 The results are encouraging for pharmaceutical companies that have spent billions of dollars on efforts to come up with the first drug to treat the underlying cause of Alzheimer's. Those efforts have failed to produce a single approved drug so far.

But last summer, Biogen began presenting its results with aducanumab at scientific meetings, including the Alzheimer's Association International Conference in July. These early reports suggested the drug had a remarkable ability to remove plaques in the brain.

"It was surprising, encouraging and thought-provoking to see such a striking reduction of existing plaques," Reiman says.

The publication in Nature on Wednesday provides details about those early reports.

Biogen has already begun two much larger studies of aducanumab. They will include a total of 2,700 patients, and results are still several years off.

But there are reasons to think aducanumab may succeed where other drugs have failed.

One is that the drug appears to ignore benign forms of amyloid protein while attacking the toxic forms thought to damage brain cells. Another is that aducanumab seems to enhance the ability of existing immune cells in the brain to devour toxins, including amyloid.

But there's a downside. The process of removing plaque sometimes causes fluid to build up in the brain. In rare cases, it can also cause bleeding. These side effects are known as amyloid-related imaging abnormalities, or ARIA.

"We were actually anticipating that we would see it," Sandrock says. And the researchers did. Twenty patients dropped out of the trial because of adverse effects.

If aducanumab works in larger studies, it could help settle a long-running debate about whether amyloid is really the root cause of Alzheimer's. This idea is known as the amyloid hypothesis.

And large studies showing that removing amyloid can preserve memory and thinking "would go a long way toward validating the amyloid hypothesis," Sandrock says.

Results like those could also lead to the first approved drug to treat the underlying cause of Alzheimer's rather than just the symptoms.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story is clear that the drug’s effects on amyloid plaque are accompanied by potential harms:
But there’s a downside. The process of removing plaque sometimes causes fluid to build up in the brain. In rare cases, it can also cause bleeding. These side effects are known as amyloid-related imaging abnormalities, or ARIA.
We’re also told that about 20 participants dropped out of because of adverse effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) An aspirin a day may keep the doctor away. It may also reduce your chances of dying from cancer, according to a study on long-term regular aspirin use and different kinds of cancer.

Yin Cao, an instructor in the Medicine, Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, presented the information Monday at the American Association for Cancer Research meeting in Washington.

Cao looked at data from over 86,000 women who were part of the Nurses' Health Study between 1980 and 2012 and over 43,000 men who were part of the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study from 1986 to 2012.

Over that 32-year period, over 8,200 women and nearly 4,600 men died of cancer. The risk of death overall was 7% lower for women and 11% for men who took aspirin regularly, compared with those who did not. The risk of dying from cancer was 7% lower for women and 15% lower for men who took aspirin regularly, compared with those who didn't take a regular dose.

The strongest connection was with colorectal cancer: There was a 31% lower risk for women and 30% for men who were among regular aspirin takers, as other studies have showed. But it also lowered women's risk of dying from breast cancer by 11% and men's risk of dying from prostate cancer by 23%. Men's risk of dying from lung cancer was also lower.

"Evidence has been accumulating very rapidly showing aspirin works in reducing cancer and cardiovascular disease mortality," Cao said. "It is good to remember, though, if a person wants to take a low-dose aspirin, especially if a person has had cancer, they will want to have an initial conversation with their doctor first."

Not everyone can take aspirin, particularly if you are at high risk for ulcers and gastrointestinal bleeding. Studies have showed an increased risk of both when taking a daily aspirin, but the benefit does outweigh the risk for most other people.

"There has been a great deal of interest in understanding the possible benefits associated with common drugs," Tamimi said in an emailed statement. "This study found strong evidence that aspirin use may reduce cancer death. The study was well conducted and was able to control for a number of important confounders. Therefore the findings are believed to be very robust, and suggest that aspirin, which is widely available, cheap and has limited toxicity, has the potential to have widespread benefit on cancer mortality for breast, colon, lung and prostate cancer."

Studies have also found that aspirin can help patients who have had (or are at high risk for) a heart attack or stroke, and of course it is a good drug to relieve pain. Even the ancient Egyptians used the natural form of it for pain relief centuries ago.

Cao hopes her study will continue to broaden the body of research to include cancer-related deaths overall. Next, her group hopes to study what specific groups may most benefit from this practice, particularly based on those individuals with varying cancer risk.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states “Not everyone can take aspirin, particularly if you are at high risk for ulcers and gastrointestinal bleeding. Studies have showed an increased risk of both when taking a daily aspirin.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alex Pierce, 25, took up distance running with great enthusiasm a couple of years ago. Then she developed knee pain so severe that she could not climb stairs.

So Pierce, a doctoral student in food science, went to see physical therapist Matt Briggs at The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center in Columbus. He performed deep massages, suggested changes in her running form and taught her how to exercise her thigh and gluteal muscles to better protect her knees. She believes all of that helped.

But Pierce, like a growing number of patients, had another treatment she is convinced helped even more. It’s called "dry needling," and it involves the insertion of thin, non-medicated solid needles into muscles or connective tissues. Proponents say it can reduce pain and improve movement. Pierce has had the procedure more than half a dozen times and believes it is one reason she will be able to run her fourth marathon in November.

“This has kind of changed my life,” she says.

Testimonials like that are a big reason dry needling has caught on with some physical therapists, athletes and other patients, Briggs says. But testimonials are not scientific proof.

And there, Briggs says, is where dry needling is lacking. While some studies have shown promise, he says, “the quality of the evidence is not strong.” That’s why Briggs and his colleagues are starting a study looking at dry needling in “runner’s knee,” the condition that has plagued Pierce. Their goal, and the goal of other researchers now looking at dry needling, is to produce results rigorous enough to show whether it really works.

For now, here’s what consumers should know:

Physical therapists say it is not, “though superficially, it may look the same,” says Justin Elliott, vice president of government affairs for the American Physical Therapy Association. For one thing, he says, dry needling as performed by a physical therapist is not rooted in ancient Chinese medicine — there’s no talk about redirecting the body’s energy flow by placing needles at certain points in the body. Instead, needles are placed directly in problem areas.

Elliott says dry needling also is practiced by some chiropractors, naturopathic physicians and nurses, which puts it outside the realm of any one specialty.

Acupuncturists beg to differ. “What is being called dry needling is clearly a form of acupuncture” and should be done only by professionals extensively trained in that discipline, says Thomas Burgoon, a West Chester, Pa., physician who is president of the American Academy of Medical Acupuncture. He says many acupuncturists do exactly what the physical therapists describe, with the same kind of needles.

Burgoon’s group has persuaded some states to bar physical therapists from the practice. 



How might it work?

One theory is that the needles cause tight muscles to twitch, then relax. The needles may also increase blood flow or set off nerve responses that alter pain perception, Briggs says.

Another possibility: It’s a placebo effect, an improvement triggered by the expectation that a treatment will work rather than by the treatment itself. To look for that possibility, the Ohio State study will compare patients who get the real needle treatment to those poked with sham needles that don’t pierce the skin.

Mark Crislip, an infectious-disease doctor in Portland, Ore., who recently wrote about dry needling for Science-Based Medicine — a website critical of alternative medicine — says the version practiced by physical therapists doesn’t “come with the mystical baggage that accompanies acupuncture.” But he says it may well be a “theatrical placebo.”

What do published studies say?

“It’s a mixed bag,” Elliott says. In a 2011 review, the physical therapy association rated the evidence for dry needling a 3 out of 5, based on the best studies. A formal analysis of 35 trails on acupuncture and dry needling for chronic lower back pain was published by the Cochrane research group in 2005. It found they “may be useful” additions to standard treatment. But it said higher quality studies were needed.

What are the risks?

Needling can produce minor bleeding and some soreness, but in trained hands, and with the use of sterile needles and gloves, “it’s a very safe procedure,” Briggs says.

In rare cases, deep needling can lead to a punctured lung or injuries to nerves and blood vessels, and acupuncturists fear non-specialists will be more likely to make such mistakes, Burgoon says.

Will insurers pay for this?

Many will not. Charges for patients can range from $10 to $75 per session, says Edo Zylstra, CEO of KinetaCore, a company that offers intensive three-day weekend courses in dry needling to physical therapists.

Do all physical therapists offer this?

No. The physical therapy association tells members in seven states to steer clear because of recent court or regulatory decisions or language in existing licensing laws. They are: California, Florida, Hawaii, Idaho, New York, South Dakota and Washington.

And most of the nation’s 200,000 licensed physical therapists are not trained in the technique. About 6,000 have taken courses in dry needling in the past few years, Zylstra says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We like that the story called out risks specifically, which is something we don’t see often. It says, “Needling can produce minor bleeding and some soreness, but in trained hands, and with the use of sterile needles and gloves, “it’s a very safe procedure,” Briggs says. In rare cases, deep needling can lead to a punctured lung or injuries to nerves and blood vessels, and acupuncturists fear non-specialists will be more likely to make such mistakes, Burgoon says.”
The story would have been stronger if it had quoted a source with no vested interest in discussing risks. Also, it’s worth pointing out that these risks are real whether “trained hands” do the procedure or not.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Tiny Israeli drugmaker Oramed Pharmaceuticals Inc on Wednesday said its experimental oral insulin succeeded in significantly reducing night-time blood glucose in patients with type 2 diabetes, according to initial data from a midstage trial.

The result is likely to surprise many skeptics who did not believe insulin could be delivered orally because they doubted it could survive the onslaught of digestive juices so it could have the intended effect.

Oramed uses a protective coating and a high-enough dose of insulin so that most of it can be destroyed and still deliver a clinically beneficial amount of the hormone.

The positive results must be replicated in a larger Phase III trial before the drug, known as ORMD-0801, can be submitted for approval. But the data from the Phase II, 180-patient trial represents a major milestone.

“It’s been a long trip but it’s finally at the point that it’s beyond a doubt, the oral insulin works,” Nadav Kidron, chief executive of Jerusalem-based Oramed, said in a telephone interview.

The 28-day study involved patients whose type 2 diabetes was not adequately controlled by metformin. They were dosed before bed time and had their overnight glucose levels continuously monitored. Those who received the oral insulin had a mean night-time glucose reduction of nearly 6.5 percent compared with a placebo.

There were no reported serious adverse side effects and no issues with hypoglycemia, or dangerously low blood sugar, the company said. Oramed said it plans to publish more detailed data from the study once it has had time to analyze the full results.

While insulin is typically associated with type 1 diabetes, many patients with type 2 eventually see their disease progress to the point where they need insulin. Type 2 accounts for more than 90 percent of the nearly 400 million people with diabetes worldwide.

A safe and effective oral insulin, if approved, is expected to become a multibillion-dollar product.

The main attraction of an insulin pill, aside from avoiding injections, is that it comes much closer to the path of natural insulin, which is produced in the pancreas and goes directly to the liver. ORMD-0801 goes from the gut to the liver, while injected insulin circulates throughout the body before it gets there.

Some doctors believe high levels of insulin circulating through the rest of the body may increase health risks.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story states that there were “no reported serious adverse side effects and no issues with hypoglycemia, or dangerously low blood sugar.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 15, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- For women with advanced breast cancer who carry the BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations, an experimental drug could improve survival, a new study suggests.

The BRCA mutations are linked with a greater risk for aggressive breast and ovarian cancer. The drug, talazoparib, works by blocking an enzyme called poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP), thus preventing cancer cells from killing healthy ones.

In a phase 3 trial of 431 women, funded by the drug's maker, those who received talazoparib lived longer without their cancer progressing than women treated with standard chemotherapy by an average of three months, researchers found.

"For women with metastatic breast cancer and a BRCA mutation, PARP inhibitors may be considered for their treatment," said lead researcher Dr. Jennifer Litton, an associate professor of breast medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

When it's functioning properly, BRCA actually helps repair damaged DNA and prevents tumors, but when BRCA1 and BRCA2 go awry, they encourage breast cancers.

PARP inhibitors such as talazoparib appear to interfere with the function of mutated BRCA in breast cells, causing them to die rather replicate.

In addition, several ongoing studies are looking at combinations with PARP inhibitors "to try to expand who may benefit or lengthen how long they may work," Litton said.

The trial results are preliminary, as talazoparib has not yet been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

In January, the FDA approved the first PARP inhibitor, Lynparza, to treat BRCA-mutated breast cancer.

Similar drugs have already been used to treat advanced, BRCA-mutated ovarian cancer, according to the agency.

In the current trial, the women who were randomly selected to receive talazoparib had a higher response rate to treatment than women who received standard chemotherapy: 63 percent versus 27 percent, the researchers found.

The drug does have side effects. Among women receiving talazoparib, 55 percent had blood disorders, mostly anemia, compared with 38 percent of those receiving standard chemotherapy.

In addition, 32 percent of the women receiving talazoparib had other side effects, compared with 38 percent of those on standard chemotherapy.

Oncologist Dr. Marisa Weiss is the founder and chief medical officer of Breastcancer.org. "Smart medicines like this PARP inhibitor work better than traditional chemo in women with HER2-negative metastatic disease and a BRCA1/2 genetic mutation," she said.

This targeted form of treatment takes advantage of a weakness in the BRCA gene to further cripple the cancer cell's ability to repair itself, grow and spread, said Weiss, who was not involved with the study.

Normal cells are mostly spared. As a result, more cancer cells are killed with fewer side effects, Weiss said.

"Most importantly, patients themselves have reported a better experience with less hair loss and improved quality of life," she said.

Weiss advises women with advanced breast cancer to have genetic testing.

"In both my clinical practice and within the online support community, we advise women with metastatic breast cancer to get genetic testing upon diagnosis, in order to get the best care first," she said.

The trial was funded by drug maker Pfizer, and the results were published Aug. 15 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on breast cancer, visit Breastcancer.org.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained some of the harms, notably blood disorders, and included the rate of harms in both the treatment group and the control group, which is a useful comparison to include.
One detail that also would have been useful to include: The rate of severe adverse events was similar in both the treatment and control groups. The drop-out rate (how many women dropped out of the study due to side effects) was slightly higher in the talazoparib group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The drug, finasteride, is available as a generic for about $2.00 a day, and millions of men safely take it now to shrink their prostates, its approved use.

With finasteride, as many as 100,000 cases of prostate cancer a year could be prevented, said Dr. Eric Klein, director of the Center for Urologic Oncology at the Cleveland Clinic.

Dr. Howard Parnes, chief of the prostate cancer group at the National Cancer Institute’s division of cancer prevention, also is convinced. “There is a tremendous public health benefit for the use of this agent,” he said.

While it might seem convoluted to offer a drug to prevent the consequences of overtreatment, that is the situation in the country today, others say. Preventing the cancer can prevent treatments that can be debilitating, even if the cancers were never lethal to start with.

“That’s the bind we’re in right now,” said Dr. Christopher Logothetis, professor and chairman of genitourinary medical oncology at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. “Most of the time, treatment wouldn’t help and may not be necessary. But the reality is that people are being operated on.”

“We are trying to avoid a diagnosis to avoid a prevention whose value is disputed,” he said. With finasteride, Dr. Logothetis added, “we’re trying to overcome our other sins.”

Other experts say, Not so fast. Finasteride might not make much of a difference in the death rate because so few men die from prostate cancer. What the drug’s proponents are advocating is taking a drug to somehow compensate for what many believe is the nation’s overzealous diagnosis and treatment of the disease.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut, explains: While 10 percent of men 55 and older find out they have prostate cancer, the cancer is lethal in no more than 25 percent of them. So if finasteride reduced the prostate cancer’s incidence by 30 percent, about 7 percent of men would get a cancer diagnosis and approximately 1.8 percent instead of 2.5 percent would have a lethal cancer.

“Finasteride might make a difference but only in a very small subset of men,” Dr. Albertsen said.

And, he adds, the study did not look for a decline in death rates, and it is unlikely that any study ever will — it would take too long and be too expensive. Yet the ultimate goal of prevention is to save lives. It remains an assumption that finasteride would have much impact on the minority of prostate cancers that, despite early detection and treatment, still kill.

Finasteride blocks the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, a hormone active mostly in the prostate and the scalp, and that all prostate cancers need to grow.

The drug is available from Merck & Company, as Proscar, and from six companies as a generic to shrink the prostate in older men whose prostates can enlarge, making urination difficult.

Researchers say it turns out that shrinking the prostate also may be good for cancer detection by making it easier to find all tumors, including the most aggressive.

“The data are compelling,” said Dr. Peter Scardino, chairman of the department of surgery at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, a convert who originally thought the drug was dangerous. “Finasteride has to be recognized as the first clearly demonstrated way to prevent prostate cancer with any medication or any oral agent at all.”

Finasteride has had its ups and downs. Its chronicle began in 1993, with the start of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and involving 19,000 men. Half took finasteride pills; the rest a placebo. In March 2003, 15 months before the study’s scheduled end, its directors halted it abruptly. The reason was that the results were overwhelmingly compelling — men taking the drug were not getting prostate cancer.

Yet despite that note of triumph, a troubling finding emerged. The study was designed to look for a reduction in the overall prostate cancer rate. And that is what it found. But, as Dr. Scardino pointed out in an editorial five years ago in The New England Journal of Medicine that accompanied the study, it appeared that 6.4 percent of the men who took the drug got fast growing, ominous-looking tumors. In contrast, such tumors were found in 5.1 percent, of men who took the placebo.

The concern was that the drug might be preventing cancers that never spread. At the same time, finasteride might actually be causing aggressive cancers that can kill.

It would, of course, be the worse possible outcome. Dr. Scardino’s editorial warned healthy men not to take finasteride.

That seemed to leave the drug dead. The study researchers, though, wondered if that conclusion was correct. Maybe, they thought, by shrinking the prostate, the drug was just making it easier to find aggressive tumors.

When doctors do a biopsy for prostate cancer, they probe the gland with a needle, hoping to find cancer cells. But prostate cancer grows as little nests and an aggressive cancer will appear as dangerous-looking cells in some clusters and less dangerous in others. A smaller prostate means a doctor is more likely to hit upon cancer nests and more likely to find aggressive-looking cells.

The researchers had a way to learn if they were correct. Most of the men in the study who had cancer — aggressive or not — chose to be treated and many had their prostates removed. A pathologist could carefully examine every one of those 500 prostates and compare the kinds of cancers found at surgery to those initially diagnosed at biopsy.

It took years, but the analysis showed the hypothesis was right. Now, two groups of independent researchers conclude, in papers in the current issue of Cancer Prevention Research, that finasteride decreases the risk of having any tumor at all — large or small, fast growing or slow growing, by the same amount — nearly 30 percent.

With this new analysis, many prostate cancer specialists, including Dr. Scardino, say their view of the drug has completely changed. The study actually found that finasteride protects against both lethal and less dangerous tumors and could cut prostate cancer risk by nearly a third.

Even the effect on smaller tumors has important implications, said Dr. Ian M. Thompson, Jr., the study’s principal researcher and a urologist at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio.

“The cancers that were prevented were the ones men are having surgery and radiation for today,” Dr. Thompson said.

Now, though, prostate cancer specialists have a new problem: How can they change the drug’s image?

Drug companies are unlikely to be instrumental, Dr. Thompson and others say, because finasteride’s patent has expired, giving companies little incentive to apply to the Food and Drug Administration to market it as a cancer preventative. Without F.D.A. approval, finasteride cannot be advertised as preventing cancer and insurers may not pay for it.

But doctors can prescribe drugs for other purposes at their discretion and Dr. Parnes said that men and their doctors may be persuaded to try it.

In the meantime, GlaxoSmithKline, which has a patented drug, Avodart, to reduce the size of men’s prostates, has a study asking whether its drug can prevent prostate cancer. If it can, and the drug agency approves Avodart for cancer prevention, doctors and patients may have to decide between a generic drug used off-label or a more expensive brand-name drug that does much the same thing.

Some leading prostate specialists, like Dr. Scardino, say they are recommending that men who worry about prostate cancer take finasteride.

He also ponders taking it himself. “I regularly think, Why don’t I take it? Why wouldn’t every man take it?” Dr. Scardino said. He hasn’t done so yet, partly because those years of concern about the drug took a toll.

“I think it’s the difficulty of adjusting to something that originally had a bad reputation,” Dr. Scardino explained.

Dr. Thompson has no such fears.

He is at no particular risk for prostate cancer, but, he reasons, taking finasteride is not that different than taking a statin for a slightly elevated cholesterol level.

“Imagine the marathoner with no family history of heart disease, who’s skinny, doesn’t smoke and has normal blood pressure,” Dr. Thompson says. “Should he take a statin? The amount of benefit he’ll get is not much, but his risk reduction still is 25 or 30 percent.”

Dr. Thompson knows what he will do about finasteride.

“I’m 54,” he said. “The men in the study were 55 and older. So I’ll start taking it next year.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did raise an important question about harms:  "Should healthy men take a drug for the rest of their lives to avoid getting and being treated for a cancer that, most often, would be better off undiscovered and untreated?Is it worth risking a chance that unanticipated side effects may emerge years later if millions of men with no prostate problems take this drug…"  Although the balance of the story was out of whack – citing more proponents of using the drug than opponents – we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It’s the person who wakes up at the crack of dawn on the weekend, puts on shiny spandex and disappears with a mountain bike for hours at a time. It’s the guy who heads to the pool one night a week and endures a workout that might make Michael Phelps gasp for air. It’s the weekly rock climbers and double spin class-takers schvitzing their Sunday away. These weekend warriors cram the recommended amount of exercise into one or two days, while the rest of us faithfully head to the gym multiple times a week for a half-hour hamster run on the treadmill.

Related: Americans keep getting fatter, new report shows

A paper published January 9 in JAMA Internal Medicine suggests these warriors may be onto something. In a study based on nearly 64,000 adults, researchers in the U.K. found that weekend exercise appears to be just as effective at preventing heart disease and cancer as exercise done more frequently. This is great news for anyone who feels too busy on weekdays to work out but enjoys outdoor activity on the weekend.

“I think that the weekend warrior physical activity pattern is beneficial because they are actually doing a large proportion of vigorous intensity activity. And vigorous activity makes you fit, and fitness reduces your risk of disease and death,” says Gary O’Donovan, a researcher in physical activity and sedentary behavior at England’s Loughborough University and lead author of the paper.

O’Donovan and fellow researchers looked at data on middle-aged adults who responded to a government-sponsored household survey conducted from 1994 to 2012. The survey included questions about health history and fitness habits. The researchers then cross-referenced this information with health department death records.

They found the risk of death from all causes was about 30 percent lower for weekend warriors, compared with adults who maintained a sedentary lifestyle. And the warriors had a 40 percent lower risk of cardiovascular death and an 18 percent lower risk for cancer-related death. The mortality rates of weekend warriors were roughly the same as those who claimed to exercise more than two days a week but for shorter durations.

However, there are also some limitations to this study, the researchers say. More than 90 percent of the subjects were white. The information about physical activity was reported by the participants, and it’s likely that many were too generous in their estimates of how much time they spent at the gym. Unfortunately, taking 20 minutes in locker room to put on your sneakers doesn’t count as a workout.

Related: Severe childhood obesity is on the rise in the U.S.

It’s recommended that people get 150 minutes (or two and half hours) of exercise each week, based on guidelines from the American Heart Association, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other medical authorities. This could be something as simple as a brisk walk or other low-impact options for vigorous exercise about 20 minutes a day. (Experts often encourage recreational athletes to not exercise more than an hour a day.) “In theory, someone who did one bout of 150 minutes of moderate exercise is a weekend warrior,” says O’Donovan.

This study shows that it doesn’t matter how you decide to split up the recommended weekly amount of exercise. You just need to do it.

However, experts caution that it is possible to overdo it, and more exercise than two and a half hours a week can actually be unhelpful and even harmful. One study, published in 2014 in the journal Heart, suggests that in people with existing heart disease, the risk for cardiac arrest and stroke was the same for people who exercised more than an hour a day compared with those who didn’t exercise at all. The coronary heart disease patients who stuck with the recommended 150 minutes a week had the lowest risk for heart attack and stroke.

Related: Post-workout cold immersion likely won’t help you heal

There are risks that come with a weekend warrior exercise schedule, especially for people who aren’t used to being active. “I would be more concerned about what’s happening at the point of exercise—not the long-term benefits,” says Dr. Howard Andrew Selinger, chair of family medicine at Quinnipiac University. He says someone who is not in good shape is at risk for sudden cardiac arrest or acute injury, such as spraining muscles or putting too much stress on joints.

O’Donovan encourages aspiring weekend warriors to start slowly to avoid any health problems. He says middle-aged adults should exercise moderately during the first 12 weeks and then slowly build up to more vigorous activity.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job highlighting some of the potential harms associated with vigorous physical activity: “However, experts caution that it is possible to overdo it”  and “more exercise than two and a half hours a week can actually be unhelpful and even harmful.”
An expert in the field not associated with the study provides a bit of common sense to the discussion; “There are risks that come with a weekend warrior exercise schedule, especially for people who aren’t used to being active. “I would be more concerned about what’s happening at the point of exercise—not the long-term benefits,” says Dr. Howard Andrew Selinger, chair of family medicine at Quinnipiac University.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers, who published their findings in The New England Journal of Medicine, noted that the deck might have been stacked in favor of a hazardous outcome because study participants, especially the group that received testosterone, had high rates of high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity and elevated blood lipids. Then again, this may be a realistic population to study, given that many candidates for hormone therapy are likely to have such health issues.

A $45 million study financed by the National Institute on Aging is under way at 12 medical centers to see if a year of treatment with testosterone will help 800 men aged 65 and older with low levels of the hormone and problems with physical functioning, fatigue and sexual or cognitive performance. The study, in which the men are being randomly assigned to receive the hormone or a look-alike placebo, will also evaluate the hormone’s effects on cardiac risk factors.

Still, this study will not answer the question of whether it is safe to use the hormone for years, even decades, which would be necessary to maintain any benefits. A major concern is whether long-term use would promote the growth of prostate cancer, which is present but hidden in as many as half of older men.

“There are not many good studies of testosterone in older men,” Dr. William J. Bremner, a urologist at the University of Washington in Seattle, said in an interview. “The studies are small and the longest of them lasted only three years. We need the same kind of study for testosterone as the Women’s Health Initiative — several thousand men followed for maybe 10 years. Currently, we’re in limbo as to how to advise patients.”

He acknowledged that the need for such a study for men is “less compelling” because, in contrast to women, who experience an abrupt drop in estrogen at menopause, often with disruptive symptoms, hormone decline in aging men is far more gradual, and symptoms, when they occur, are commonly viewed as normal signs of aging, not hormone deficiency.

A large European study published in the same issue of the journal sought to better determine who, among middle-aged and elderly men, might be candidates for testosterone replacement. Among a sample of 3,369 men aged 40 to 79, researchers at eight European medical centers found that “limited physical vigor” and three sexual symptoms — diminished sexual thoughts and morning erections and erectile dysfunction — were most closely linked to low levels of testosterone.

Although low hormone levels are widely thought to increase a man’s risk of depression, the researchers found that “psychological symptoms had little or no association with the testosterone level.”

There are four main approaches to testosterone therapy available in this country: intramuscular injections every one to three weeks; skin applications through a patch or gel; and pellets implanted under the skin that last for months. The patch can cause skin irritation, and the gel can be transferred to others through skin contact unless care is taken to cover the area where it is applied. But oral administration is rarely used because of toxic effects on the liver.

The most common reason men seek testosterone therapy is waning sexual desire or performance, although the ability of the hormone to relieve sexual symptoms is unpredictable. More than one-quarter of men with normal testosterone levels have such symptoms, and many men with subnormal levels do not. Dr. Bremner said he typically suggests a trial of therapy for up to a year to see if sexual function or other symptoms improve.

Citing the results of many small studies, Dr. Bremner said, “There is good evidence that testosterone administration can improve muscle mass and strength and increase bone density” in men with subnormal levels. Dr. Abraham Morgentaler, a urologist at Harvard Medical School and author of “Testosterone for Life” (McGraw-Hill, 2009), said in an interview that other noted benefits include a decrease in body fat and total cholesterol and improved blood sugar metabolism.

In a report on the risks of testosterone therapy, written with Dr. Ernani Luis Rhoden and published in 2004 in The New England Journal of Medicine, Dr. Morgentaler noted that testosterone has widespread effects throughout the body, but he and Dr. Rhoden concluded that with proper monitoring, any looming hazards can be readily detected.

Before the most recent study, at doses considered normal, the testosterone gel showed little or no effect on cardiovascular risk, the two doctors reported. Injections could result in harmful thickening of the blood, however, especially if above-normal blood levels of the hormone result.

Although testosterone can cause overgrowth of the prostate, studies have not shown harm to urinary function, Dr. Morgentaler said. The risk of prostate cancer is of greater concern, given that suppressing the body’s natural production of testosterone can cause this cancer to regress. Men considering treatment should first undergo a full prostate exam and PSA measurement, with periodic prostate checkups during therapy, Dr. Bremner said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that a recent study was halted because of an unexpectedly high rate of cardiac problems in the testosterone group. It also mentions the possibility that testosterone therapy can result in thickening of the blood and may increase the risk of prostate cancer.
The story isn’t precise about how often these harms occur, and it also didn’t mention some of the "minor" side effects associated with testosterone use, including acne, hair loss on the scalp, hair growth on the face, increased breast size, and testicular atrophy.
A close one here. Overall, we felt the story called appropriate attention to the harms and did not try to minimize them — enough to earn a satisfactory.    
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But in many cases it is just not known whether what is seen on a scan is the cause of the pain. The problem is that all too often, no one knows what is normal.

“A patient comes in because he’s in pain,” said Dr. Nelda Wray, a senior research scientist at the Methodist Institute for Technology in Houston. “We see something in a scan, and we assume causation. But we have no idea of the prevalence of the abnormality in routine populations.”

Now, as more and more people have scans for everything from headaches to foot aches, more are left in a medical lurch, or with unnecessary or sometimes even harmful treatments, including surgery.

“Every time we get a new technology that provides insights into structures we didn’t encounter before, we end up saying, ‘Oh, my God, look at all those abnormalities.’ They might be dangerous,” said Dr. David Felson, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at Boston University Medical School. “Some are, some aren’t, but it ends up leading to a lot of care that’s unnecessary.”

That was what almost happened with Mrs. Weinstein, an active, athletic 64-year-old who lives in New London, N.H. And it was her great fortune to finally visit a surgeon who told her so. He told her bluntly that her pain was caused by arthritis, not the torn cartilage.

No one had told her that before, Mrs. Weinstein said, and looking back on her quest to get a scan and get the cartilage fixed, she shook her head in dismay. There’s no surgical procedure short of a knee replacement that will help, and she’s not ready for a knee replacement.

“I feel that I have come full circle,” she said. “I will cope on my own with this knee.”

In fact, Mrs. Weinstein was also lucky because her problem was with her knee. It’s one of only two body parts — the other is the back — where there are good data on abnormalities that turn up in people who feel just fine, indicating that the abnormalities may not be so abnormal after all.

But even the data on knees comes from just one study, and researchers say the problem is far from fixed. It is difficult to conduct scans on people who feel fine — most do not want to spend time in an M.R.I. machine, and CT scans require that people be exposed to radiation. But that leaves patients and doctors in an untenable situation.

“It’s a concern, isn’t it?” said Dr. Jeffrey Jarvik, a professor of radiology and neurosurgery at the University of Washington. “We are trying to fix things that shouldn’t be fixed.”

As a rheumatologist, Dr. Felson saw patient after patient with knee pain, many of whom had already had scans. And he was becoming concerned about their findings.

Often, a scan would show that a person with arthritis had a torn meniscus, cartilage that stabilizes the knee. And often the result was surgery — orthopedic surgeons do more meniscus surgery than any other operation. But, Dr. Felson wondered, was the torn cartilage an injury causing pain or was the arthritis causing pain and the tear a consequence of arthritis?

That led Dr. Felson and his colleagues to do the first and so far the only large study of knees, asking what is normal. It involved M.R.I. scans on 991 people ages 50 to 90. Some had knee pain, others did not.

On Sept. 11, Dr. Felson and his colleagues published their results in The New England Journal of Medicine: meniscal tears were just as common in people with knee arthritis who did not complain of pain as they were in people with knee arthritis who did have pain. They tended to occur along with arthritis and were a part of the disease process itself. And so repairing the tears would not eliminate the pain.

“The rule is, as you get older, you will get a meniscal tear,” Dr. Felson said. “It’s a function of aging and disease. If you are a 60-year-old guy, the chance that you have a meniscal tear is 40 percent.”

It is a result that paralleled what spine researchers found over the past decade in what is perhaps the best evidence on what shows up on scans of healthy people. “If you’re going to look at a spine, you need to know what that spine might look like in a normal patient,” said Dr. Michael Modic, chairman of the Neurological Institute at the Cleveland Clinic.

After Dr. Modic and others scanned hundreds of asymptomatic people, they learned abnormalities were common.

“Somewhere between 20 and 25 percent of people who climb into a scanner will have a herniated disk,” Dr. Modic said. As many as 60 percent of healthy adults with no back pain, he said, have degenerative changes in their spines.

Those findings made Dr. Modic ask: Why do a scan in the first place? There are some who may benefit from surgery, but does it make sense to routinely do scans for nearly everyone with back pain? After all, one-third of herniated disks disappear on their own in six weeks, and two-thirds in six months.

And surgeons use symptoms and a physical examination to identify patients who would be helped by operations. What extra medical help does a scan provide? So Dr. Modic did another study, this time with 250 patients. All had M.R.I. scans when they first arrived complaining of back pain or shooting pains down their leg, which can be caused by a herniated disc pressing on a nerve in the spine. And all had scans again six weeks later. Sixty percent had herniated disks, the scans showed.

Dr. Modic gave the results to only half of the patients and their doctors — the others had no idea what the M.R.I.’s revealed. Dr. Modic knew, though.

In 13 percent of the patients, the second scan showed that the herniated disk had become bigger or a new herniated disk had appeared. In 15 percent, the herniated disk had disappeared. But there was no relationship between the scan findings at six weeks and patients’ symptoms. Some continued to complain of pain even though their herniated disk had disappeared; others said they felt better even though their herniation had grown bigger.

The question, though, was whether it helped the patients and their doctors to know what the M.R.I.’s had found. And the answer, Dr. Modic reported, is that it did not. The patients who knew recovered no faster than those who did not know. However, Dr. Modic said, there was one effect of being told — patients felt worse about themselves when they knew they had a bulging disk.

“If I tell you that you have a degenerated disk, basically I’m telling you you’re ugly,” Dr. Modic said.

Scans, he said, are presurgical tools, not screening tools. A scan can help a surgeon before he or she operates, but it does not help with a diagnosis.

“If a patient has back or leg pain, they should be treated conservatively for at least eight weeks,” Dr. Modic said, meaning that they take pain relievers and go about their normal lives. “Then you should do imaging only if you are going to do surgery.”

That message can be a hard sell, he acknowledged. “A lot of people are driven by wanting to have imaging,” Dr. Modic said. “They are miserable as hell, they can’t work, they can’t sit. We look at you and say, ‘We think you have a herniated disk. We say the natural history is that you will get better. You should go through six to eight weeks of conservative management.’ ”

At the Partners Healthcare System in Boston, spine experts have the same struggle to convince patients that an M.R.I. scan is not necessarily desirable, said Dr. Scott Gazelle, director of radiology there.

“The consensus is that you are a surgical candidate or not based on your history and physical findings, not on imaging findings,” he said.

Dr. Gazelle had a chance last year to test his own convictions. He had the classic symptoms of a herniated disk — shooting pains down his left leg, a numb foot and difficulty walking.

Dr. Gazelle went to see his primary-care doctor but, he said, “I didn’t get an M.R.I.” That decision, he added, “was the right thing to do.”

About three months later, he had recovered on his own.

In 1998, two medical scientists, writing in The Lancet, proposed what sounded like a radical idea. Instead of simply providing patients and their doctors with the results of an X-ray or an M.R.I. scan, he said, radiologists should put the findings in context. For example, they wrote, if a scan showed advanced disk deterioration, the report should say, “Roughly 40 percent of patients with this finding do not have back pain so the finding may be unrelated.”

It is an idea that only would work for back pain, because that is the one area where radiologists have enough data. But it made eminent sense to Dr. Jarvik. “It gives referring physicians some sort of context,” he said.

So, a few years ago, with some trepidation, his radiology group starting including epidemiological data in their reports. “We thought, ‘What’s going to be the reaction among referring physicians?’ ” Dr. Jarvik said. Their fear was that doctors would start choosing other places for M.R.I.’s and that Dr. Jarvik’s group would lose business.

Because of the way the university’s records are kept, it’s hard to know whether the new reporting system had that effect, Dr. Jarvik said. But he was heartened by the responses of some doctors, like Dr. Sohail Mirza, who recently moved to Dartmouth Medical School.

“We often see patients who have already had M.R.I. scans,” Dr. Mirza said. “They are fixated on the abnormality and come to a surgeon to try to get the abnormality fixed. They’ll come in with the report in hand.”

The new sort of report, Dr. Mirza said, was “very helpful information to have when talking to patients and very helpful for patients to help them understand that the abnormalities were not catastrophic findings.”

Others, like Dr. Modic, are hesitant about reporting epidemiology along with a patient’s scan findings.

“It’s an interesting idea,” he said. But, he added: “The problem isn’t what happens after they get their imaging. It’s that they get the imaging in the first place.”

That was what happened with Mrs. Weinstein.

When she started looking up her symptoms on the Internet, she decided she probably had a meniscus tear. “I was very forceful in asking for an M.R.I.,” she said.

And when the scan showed that her meniscus was torn, she went to a surgeon expecting an operation.

He X-rayed her knee and told her she had arthritis. Then, Mrs. Weinstein said, the surgeon looked at her and said, “Let me get this straight. Are you here for a knee replacement?”

She said no, of course not. She skis, she does aerobics, she was nowhere near ready for something so drastic.

Then the surgeon told her that there was no point in repairing her meniscus because that was not her problem. And if he repaired the cartilage, her arthritic bones would just grind it down again.

For now, Mrs. Weinstein says she is finished with her medical odyssey.

“I continue to live with this, whatever they call it, this arthritic knee,” she said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions unnecessary surgery as the most serious harm of scanning, as well as needless worry and potentially, feeling worse about the diagnosis. The story could have mentioned more common problems with MRI (claustrophobia) and CT scans (radiation exposure), but the real concern is that the imaging test makes the patient and physician more likely to chose an invasive treatment such as surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Patients generally sit in front of the light box, which can be as small as 9 by 11 inches and 5 inches deep, with the bright light emanating from the square surface, in the morning. “With the natural dawn being later in winter, the body rhythms drift late,” Dr. Lewy said. “If you can fix the drift, you can fix the depression.”

Light therapy may even help with major nonseasonal depression, experts say, and with sleep disorders. And because it has few side effects, researchers are studying whether light therapy can help with depression during pregnancy and be used to treat elderly people with dementia. It is also being investigated for the treatment of bulimia nervosa, severe premenstrual syndrome and even attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and bipolar disorder.

Though randomized controlled clinical trials of bright light are difficult to do properly — one expert is fond of saying that it is difficult to “blind” studies of bright light — the American Psychiatric Association considers bright-light therapy an effective low-risk treatment for both S.A.D. and nonseasonal major depressive disorder.

A 2006 multicenter double-blind randomized controlled trial that compared bright-light therapy head to head with the popular antidepressant Prozac (fluoxetine) in 96 subjects found the two treatments equally effective for alleviating winter depression, though light produced results faster, usually within a week, and with fewer side effects.

Why, then, do so few doctors prescribe bright-light therapy? Some say their patients don’t have the patience to sit in front of a light for 30 to 45 minutes every morning. Moreover, “doctors are just more comfortable prescribing medication, because that’s what they do for everything,” Dr. Lewy said.

Some patients who suffer from chronic depression say they use light therapy in addition to their regular medication in the winter months.

“I’ve always seen a drastic change in my personality from spring and summer to fall and winter, and it got worse as I got older,” said Rick Bach, 54, a painter who owns a hair salon in West Hartford, Conn., and tries to spend every January in Puerto Rico.

But while bright-light treatment is helpful, he said, it is not sufficient for him. “It can help you from falling into a deep depression, but it won’t help you climb out of one,” he said.

No one knows exactly how light treatment works, but most experts seem to agree that the body has a master biological clock that responds to or is “set” by natural light fluctuations.

“Light does more than just enable us to see,” said Dr. Norman Rosenthal, author of the landmark book “Winter Blues,” who was among the first to identify and describe S.A.D. Light also has an effect on hormones, the body’s chemical messengers, affecting the brain’s hypothalamus, which is involved in regulating mood, energy and appetite.

“The hormone melatonin, which is secreted at night, can be suppressed by light,” Dr. Rosenthal said. “Studies have also shown that light influences serotonin and epinephrine pathways in the brain, the same neurotransmitter systems known to be affected in people with general depression.”

But while part of the appeal of light therapy is that it can be self-prescribed, using a light box is not as simple as it may appear. Experts recommend consulting with a knowledgeable health care provider before starting treatment to rule out other medical conditions and to help with monitoring and adjusting bright-light exposure.

Some patients may want to try simply getting more natural light to help with seasonal mood changes — getting out as much as possible during the brightest time of day in the winter, sitting near windows during the day or taking vacations to sunny locales in the winter.

If you choose to try light therapy, here are a few tips from experts.

COSTS Light boxes can be purchased for about $200 online; they are also available for rent. Some patients manage to get insurance reimbursement by having a doctor write a letter, but don’t count on your policy covering it.

PRECAUTIONS Side effects include headaches and hypomania, though experts say these are rare. Face the light but do not stare at the light. If you have an eye condition of any kind, clear light therapy with your ophthalmologist first.

MORE INFORMATION Check the Web sites of the Society for Light Therapy and Biological Rhythms at www.sltbr.org and Center for Environmental Therapeutics at www.cet.org.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story stated “Side effects include headaches and hypomania.” And it included the warning: “Using a light box is not as simple as it may appear. Experts recommend consulting with a knowledgeable health care provider.”
Another point the story could have raised is that a person with a disorder that does not respond to light may self-diagnose and fail to seek more effective therapy or advice.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
So should U.S. women continue to get routine mammograms? It's a "close call," says H. Gilbert Welch, MD, MPH, of the Dartmouth Institute in Lebanon, N.H.

"This is a test that women who want it should be able to have," Welch tells WebMD. "But it should not be jammed down people's throats. ... The system we are working in leads doctors to coax, scare, and coerce women into having this test."

Why would a woman at normal risk of breast cancer want to get routine mammograms? The obvious answer is that these tests save lives.

How many lives? If the full 10% drop in breast cancer deaths among screened women in the Norwegian study is totally due to mammograms themselves -- Welch calls this an optimistic assumption -- one life is saved for every 2,500 women who get regular mammograms.

But what's the harm of routine mammograms?

"The biggest harm is you are treated for breast cancer unnecessarily, for a cancer that was never going to cause problems," Welch says. "Because we don't know which cancers these are, all cancers are treated. This means some women will undergo needless surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy. On balance, this is about five to 15 of those 2,500 women screened."

Moreover, a large number of screened women will have worrisome mammogram results.

"Among the 2,500 women screened, at least 1,000 will be told something looks wrong on their mammogram, and they will have to worry that they have cancer," Welch says. "The vast majority will turn out not to have cancer, but all of them will worry."

Welch notes that many women may find that the benefits of routine mammograms outweigh these risks.

"Every woman has to make her own decision about how to weigh these very dissimilar things," Welch says. "Some will benefit in a very large way. But to achieve that benefit, a lot of others will have to go through something with very negative effects. It is not wrong to want a routine mammogram, and it is not wrong not to want one."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The idea that alcohol might be good for our hearts and blood vessels is a popular one, right up there with the notion that chocolate is a health food.

But before you pour your next cocktail, beer or glass of wine, you should know this: the science suggesting a benefit has never been conclusive. And some experts believe the evidence is getting thinner all the time.

"In health as elsewhere, if something looks too good to be true, it should be treated with great caution," says an editorial published this week in the medical journal BMJ. Mike Daube, professor of health policy at Curtin University in Australia, writes that the once-touted benefits of moderate drinking "are now evaporating."

His editorial accompanies a British study that finds death rates among moderate drinkers and non-drinkers are not different enough to suggest any real health benefits for drinkers. The only possible exception: women over age 65.

Also, a recent Swedish study found that middle-aged people having more than two drinks a day – just above the moderate level for men — had a markedly increased stroke risk.

Studies will continue, and not everyone has given up the idea that moderate drinking — up to two drinks a day for men and one day for women — might have some cardiovascular benefits.

Here's what U.S. experts say you need to know for now:
• Any benefits are unclear. "I cannot prove and I don't think anyone can prove that alcohol consumption can prevent anyone from dying or prevent heart attacks," says Kenneth Mukamal, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, Boston. But he says some studies show moderate drinking can boost levels of "good" HDL cholesterol and a hormone key to blood sugar control. Some studies following moderate drinkers and non-drinkers for decades find lower death rates and fewer heart attacks and strokes in the drinkers, he says. But those studies do not prove alcohol is the reason for the differences. One theory, backed by the new British study: the results are skewed by the fact that some non-drinkers are former drinkers with health problems.
• The risks are real. For some people, even moderate drinking is clearly risky. Those include people taking blood-thinning medicines and those with uncontrolled high blood pressure, says Curtis Rimmerman, a cardiologist at Cleveland Clinic. Alcohol raises blood pressure and thins blood, he say. It's also a source of "non-essential liquid calories," a big concern in an overweight nation, he says. And heavy drinking is not good for anyone: It has long been linked with stroke, heart failure and many non-cardiovascular hazards, including car crashes.
• Gender matters. Women are advised to drink less than men, partly because they tend to be smaller. But that's not the only reason, says Lori Mosca, a professor of medicine at Columbia University Medical Center and a spokesperson for the American Heart Association. "Our blood vessels have a different hormonal milieu," she says and women are more vulnerable to the anti-clotting effects of alcohol – something that could raise the risk of bleeding strokes. Another consideration: even light drinking is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, according the National Cancer Institute.
• Age matters too. There's no evidence drinking in your 20s or 30s has any health benefits. "At those ages, any benefit we get from moderate drinking is only to the extent that someone who is moderately drinking is not heavily drinking," Mukamal says.
• There's probably nothing special about wine. "About a decade ago, there was this myth that red wine was better than white wine and wine was better than beer and spirits," Mosca says. Studies have failed to prove any difference.

"I don't want to be a killjoy," Mosca says. "But I would never recommend alcohol as a preventative intervention."

"There may be some evidence that perhaps one glass with a meal is OK," says Demetrius Lopes, a neurological surgeon at Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, and another spokesperson the heart association. "But it's a slippery slope to saying 'OK, maybe two is better.' I do think people don't know the dangers."

No health agency or major medical group recommends drinking for health. But, if you do drink, groups including the American Heart Association and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend:
• No more than two drinks a day for men.
• No more than one drink a day for women (and none for pregnant women).
• 1.5 ounces of 80-proof spirits or 1 ounce of 100-proof spirits.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes a variety of potential harms associated with moderate drinking: excess calorie intake, increased blood pressure (among those with hypertension), and increased breast cancer risk in women.
The article also pointed out that heavy drinking is not good for anyone: “It has long been linked with stroke, heart failure and many non-cardiovascular hazards, including car crashes.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO (Reuters) - Pathway Genomics, a company known for pushing the boundaries of direct-to-consumer genetic testing, on Thursday will launch a cancer screening test designed to detect bits of cancer DNA in the blood of otherwise healthy people.

The test represents a first in the rapidly developing field of “liquid biopsies,” which use gene sequencing technology to screen blood samples for trace amounts of DNA associated with different cancers.

Several cancer diagnostic companies have been working on the tests, a field that has recently been joined by makers of DNA blood screening tests for fetal abnormalities after the tests detected early cancers in expectant mothers. Cowen & Co estimates that use of DNA blood tests for cancer screening will exceed $10 billion a year by the end of the decade.

But the move by Pathway, a privately owned maker of genetic tests ranging from cancer risk and heart health to drug response, underscores a growing debate over how much genetic information should be made available to healthy people if it is not yet clear how it can improve their health.

The company has already run into trouble on a similar issue. In 2010, Walgreens pulled Pathway’s genetic testing kits from its pharmacies after U.S. health regulators warned patients might take action without understanding the results.

Several oncology experts said liquid biopsy tests like Pathway’s, while exciting, still require large clinical studies proving they help people beat cancer through early detection. Doctors will also need a clear assessment of their accuracy.

“For any given test, the rate of false positives causing unnecessary alarm and false negatives that provide false security should be known,” said Dr. Keith Stewart, an oncologist who heads Mayo Clinic’s Center for Individualized Medicine.

Pathway’s screening test looks at 96 genetic markers associated with major cancer types such as breast, ovarian, lung, colon and melanoma. The company is focusing on mutations that are relatively well-understood, and for which there are specific treatments, said Chief Executive Jim Plante.

The cost to consumers begins at $299 to periodically check for DNA in their blood that could act as an early warning sign of cancer. The tests must be ordered by a doctor, based on a patient’s risk profile. A positive test will require additional checks to find where the cancer is growing.

Pathway also launched a blood test for patients already diagnosed with cancer to help determine whether a treatment is working, or whether the disease is likely to return.

Scientists have long known that cancers shed bits of genetic material into the blood. Privately held Guardant Health and Personal Genome Diagnostics Inc already offer blood tests for cancer patients. Roche-backed Foundation Medicine Inc, Genomic Health Inc, Illumina Inc and Sequenom Inc say they have similar tests in the works.

But cancer experts say there are major differences between using such tests to screen for cancer and monitoring patients who are already known to have it.

For example, some early cancers may not secrete DNA fragments into the bloodstream and require other types of detection. A colonoscopy can find and remove polyps before they pose a threat as colon cancer.

“If we are relying on a test that can only detect cancer after it has formed, we miss a huge opportunity to intervene,” said Dr. Scott Kopetz of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Patients might be attracted to a less-invasive test for colon cancer, but if it is less effective, it might result in more cases of colon cancer, not fewer.

Another concern is that the tests may pick up on markers that are never destined to be cancer, something already known to occur in blood tests for prostate cancer, Kopetz said.

Pathway says its test is more than 99 percent accurate in detecting mutations in blood samples that contain at least nine copies of a tested mutation.

“We do expect to detect cancer DNA when the tumors are small - much sooner than stage three or four,” Plante said.

Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a cancer geneticist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, said Pathway’s figure represents the test’s technical ability to detect DNA in the blood.

Doctors, however, need an indication of how many patients will get a false positive result, something that can only be determined in a very large clinical trial, said Vogelstein. He is advising two companies developing liquid biopsy tests for cancer screening: Sysmex and Personal Genome Diagnostics.

Plante said the company has started two clinical trials involving patients but has yet to publish any results on how the tests perform in people.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The competing Bloomberg story gave a nod to false positives and false negatives, but Reuters really explained why these tests could lead to harms. The story says, for example, “Patients might be attracted to a less-invasive test for colon cancer, but if it is less effective, it might result in more cases of colon cancer, not fewer. Another concern is that the tests may pick up on markers that are never destined to be cancer, something already known to occur in blood tests for prostate cancer”.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gone With A Shot? Hopeful New Signs Of Relief For Migraine Sufferers

Humans have suffered from migraines for millennia. Yet, despite decades of research, there isn't a drug on the market today that prevents them by targeting the underlying cause. All of that could change in a few months when the Food and Drug Administration is expected to announce its decision about new therapies that have the potential to turn migraine treatment on its head.

The new therapies are based on research begun in the 1980s showing that people in the throes of a migraine attack have high levels of a protein called calcitonin gene–related peptide, or CGRP, in their blood.

Step by step, researchers tracked and studied this neurochemical's effects. They found that injecting the peptide into the blood of people prone to migraines triggers migraine-like headaches, whereas people not prone to migraines experienced, at most, mild pain. Blocking transmission of CGRP in mice appeared to prevent migraine-like symptoms. And so a few companies started developing a pill that might do the same in humans.

Clinical trials of the first pills were effective against migraine but halted in 2011 over concerns about potential liver damage. So, four pharmaceutical companies rejiggered their approach. To bypass the liver, all four instead looked to an injectable therapy called monoclonal antibodies — tiny immune molecules most commonly used to treat cancer. Not only do these bypass the liver to block CGRP, but one injection appears to be effective for up to three months with almost no noticeable side effects.

Two manufacturers, Amgen (in collaboration with Novartis) and Teva Pharmaceuticals, have completed clinical trials and expect to hear from the FDA by June whether the therapies have been approved. Two more companies, Eli Lilly and Alder Biopharmaceuticals, plan to file for FDA approval later this year.

It's been a long time coming. Right now, the only available preventive treatments are accidental discoveries: A number of people prescribed medications for depression, high blood pressure and epilepsy discovered migraine relief, too. Now, many of those drugs, including propranolol and topiramate, have been tested and approved for migraine. But no one drug works for everyone, and side effects can prove intolerable or downright unpleasant.

Migraines are throbbing, one-sided headaches that can be accompanied by nausea as well as sensitivity to light, sound, smell, and movement. At their best, the headaches are an annoyance. At their worst, they can be completely debilitating. So for those of us who get numerous migraines each month, the prospect of a new approach feels almost life-changing.

According to one recent survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about 10 percent of men and 20 percent of women in the U.S. reported having had a migraine in the last three months. And up to 2 percent of all Americans has at least 15 migraine days every single month. The toll such pain can take on health, morale, and productivity is substantial.

My own migraines started when I was 13. They struck a few times a week and I thought they were normal headaches. For a while, I tried the usual over the counter pain relievers but, one by one, they stopped working. By age 25, I started to wonder if there was something seriously wrong with my head. My general practitioner diagnosed me with migraines, gave me my first preventive medication — an antidepressant — then sent me to see a specialist.

Since that day more than 17 years ago, I have tried six preventive prescription medications. Not one helped. I alternated among four different, neurologist-recommended supplements, all to no avail. I received bi-monthly injections of magnesium and participated in one of the first clinical trials of Botox. And while Botox seemed to decrease my migraines by one or two per month, it wasn't enough to bother fighting about it with a new insurance company. I exercised regularly. I experimented with an elimination diet that left me eating nothing but broccoli and white rice, but still the migraines came. I averaged about 15 to 20 each month.

Still, I considered myself lucky. The headaches almost never came with nausea, and I had medications that typically ousted them within an hour or two. All told, I usually lost only a few hours of productivity a week.

When I grew older and had two children, my body changed and my migraines changed, too. I get them less frequently now, but when they come, they can stick around for a few days or even a week. Abortive medications still work, except when they don't. So when I heard about a new approach that was making its way through a number of pharmaceutical company pipelines, I began combing through the national clinical trials database to find a trial near me. I found one about 80 miles away, which didn't seem too far a trek considering the tantalizing reward of a migraine-free life. I made an appointment.

Neurologist David Dodick, at the Mayo Clinic in Phoenix, has been involved in multiple clinical trials with each of the four anti-CGRP antibody treatments in development. And, he admits, he's optimistic. He has good reason to be: Each of the therapies decreases migraine frequency by at least one to two days per month. "In a field where, over time, the progress and pace of research in understanding the underlying biology and mechanism of disease has been slow, this was very exciting," he says.

Because migraines are not life-threatening, most drugs have to pass a pretty high bar to be approved. And so far, patients on the experimental treatments report limited side effects that consist mostly of pain at the injection site. Unlike the current preventive medications, there is no nausea, no fuzzy thinking, no nerve pain, no weight loss or gain. And instead of remembering to take a daily pill, there is just a once-monthly injection.

Neurologists already have patients eager to test these therapies, especially when everything else they've tried hasn't worked. "There's a big hole to fill, both in prevention and acute therapies," says Alexander Mauskop, director of the New York Headache Center in New York City. (Disclosure: He's my former neurologist.) "If I have someone who's really suffering and can't find a solution, I tell them that in June I might have something new for them to try." Right now, he says, he has a list of about two dozen such patients.

Even if the new therapies are approved, however, patients may still have to jump through a number of hoops to get them. Biologic therapies like these are expensive, and treatment could reportedly range anywhere from $8,000 to $18,000 a year. At that price, Mauskop and other neurologists expect insurance companies to require patients to have tried just about everything else first.

The other hitch at this stage is a lack of long-term safety data. "If someone is well-controlled with Botox or another drug, I'd not suggest they switch," Mauskop says. "With Vioxx, it took 10 years before they discovered that it increased the risk of heart problems."

Side effects are a potential concern. Elizabeth Loder, chief of headache at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, points out that because CGRP constricts blood vessels, there may be potential long-term effects on blood pressure or other cardiovascular function. In women of childbearing age, who are the ones most prone to frequent migraines, "you can imagine that might have effects on fertility or placental function."

Right now, the longest patients have been on one of these new therapies is one to two years.

I ask Mauskop whether he'd recommend I enroll in a clinical trial, given my failure to respond to most everything else. He pauses, noting that he's no longer my neurologist and that he can't really give me any suggestions. But then he says that, since I'd previously shown some response to Botox, perhaps I might want to give it another try. I think about my two young children and my risk tolerance. Perhaps in 10 years I'll feel differently. For now, however, I pick up the phone and cancel my clinical trial appointment.

Lauren Gravitz is a science writer and editor in Hershey, Penn. Her work has appeared in Nature, The Economist, Aeon, Discover, The Oprah Magazine, and more. Find her at www.laurengravitz.com and @lyrebard.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Initially the story says patients “report limited side effects that consist mostly of pain at the injection site. Unlike the current preventive medications, there is no nausea, no fuzzy thinking, no nerve pain, no weight loss or gain.”
But it also notes a lack of long-term safety data and “potential long-term effects on blood pressure or other cardiovascular function” as well as potential effects on fertility or placental function.
In the end, the reporter reflects on her own migraines and her own choices: “I think about my two young children and my risk tolerance. Perhaps in ten years I’ll feel differently. For now, however, I pick up the phone and cancel my clinical trial appointment.”
We also like this cautionary sentence: “Right now, the longest patients have been on one of these new therapies is one to two years.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is the first time we have been able to regenerate a cornea in humans,” researcher May Griffith, PhD, of the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and the University of Ottawa tells WebMD. “We are still in the prototype stage, but this shows that regenerating a human cornea is possible.”

Two years after having the corneas implanted, six of the 10 patients had improved vision . Nine of the 10 experienced cell and nerve regeneration, meaning that corneal cells and nerves grew into the implant.

In a newly released study, investigators from Canada and Sweden reported results from the first 10 people in the world treated with the biosynthetic corneas.

Aug. 25, 2010 -- Corneas made in the lab using genetically engineered human collagen could restore sight to millions of visually impaired people waiting for transplants from human donors, researchers say.

Too Few Corneas Available

Acting as the window to the eye, the cornea is made up largely of water and the fibrous protein collagen.

Worldwide, more than 10 million people have impaired vision or blindness as a result of corneal damage, but only a small fraction ever receive transplants from cadaver donors.

A shortage of human donor tissue coupled with the threat of graft rejection from donor corneal transplants has driven the search for other ways of treating corneal damage. Although synthetic corneal replacements made from plastic are available, they have many drawbacks and are considered an option for only a small percentage of people.

It has been 10 years since Griffith and colleagues first reported the development of a material with the potential to grow healthy new tissue in people with damaged corneas.

To make the material, the researchers placed a human gene that regulates the natural production of collagen into specially programmed yeast cells. They then molded the resulting material into the shape of a cornea.

After several years of testing in her lab, Griffith began collaborating with Swedish eye surgeon Per Fagerholm of Linkoping University, who implanted the engineered collagen corneas into the 10 patients in Sweden.

None of the patients experienced graft rejection or required long-term immune suppression -- two potential side effects with human donor corneal transplants. The corneas were sensitive to touch and produced normal tears.

The results were published in the journal Science Translational Medicine. The research was primarily funded by grants from the Canadian Stem Cell Network, the Swedish Research Council, and the Marie Curie International Fellowship. The human collagen used to develop the corneas was provided by biotechnology company FibroGen Inc.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that none of the patients "experienced graft rejection or required long term immune suppression — two potential side effects with human donor corneal transplants." It could have discussed what it might mean for these patients if these grafts ultimately fail. Does it prevent them from then undergoing a human corneal transplant, which has a more established record of long term success?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 14, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A weight-loss pill called lorcaserin not only helps people drop pounds but does so with few side effects, new industry-funded research reports.

A potential player in fighting the obesity epidemic, lorcaserin is a new type of weight-loss drug that works by acting on serotonin, a chemical associated with feelings of well-being and feeling full, and does not appear to increase blood pressure or cause any other heart problems, according to the researchers, whose work was sponsored by the drug manufacturer.

"In this long-term study of lorcaserin for treating patients for obesity, there was good weight loss, outstanding safety profile and the drug was extremely well-tolerated," said lead researcher Dr. Steven Smith from the Translational Research Institute for Metabolism and Diabetes in Winter Park, Fla.

"As patients are looking for additional options and physicians are looking for new tools, [lorcaserin] provides us with a look into the future for what's going to be available for helping patients lose weight," he added.

The report is published in the July 15 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, and was sponsored by Arena Pharmaceuticals, of San Diego, Calif., which used its own doctors as part of the study group.

The drug is one of three new anti-obesity drugs being considered for approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. On Thursday, an FDA advisory panel is expected to review Qnexa, made by Vivus, from a combination of phentermine and topiramate. It helped patients in clinical trials lose as much as 13 percent to 15 percent of body weight.

FDA briefing documents posted online Tuesday acknowledged Qnexa's effectiveness in helping patients lose weight, but said the review panel should take into account a number of potential nervous system and psychiatric side effects, the Associated Press reported.

The third new drug is Orexigen Therapeutic's Contrave, which is a combination of the antidepressant Wellbutrin and the addiction drug naltrexone.

For the lorcaserin study, Smith's team randomly assigned 3,182 obese or overweight people to lorcaserin or placebo. Patients took lorcaserin twice a day for a year and also took part in diet and exercise counseling.

After one year, 47.5 percent of those taking lorcaserin had lost 5 percent or more of their body weight. "That's about 20 pounds," Smith said.

Among those taking the placebo, only 20.3 percent had achieved that amount of weight loss, the researchers found.

After the first year, people taking lorcaserin were randomized to lorcaserin or placebo for an additional year. Among people who stayed on lorcaserin, 67.9 percent were able to maintain the weight loss they had seen in the first year. Among those who were switched to a placebo, 50.3 percent were able to maintain their weight loss, Smith's group reported.

Smith's team noted that for those taking lorcaserin, there was no increase in heart valve problems as had been seen with the discredited diet drug Fen-Phen. However, common side effects included headache, dizziness and nausea.

Dr. Arne Astrup, from the department of human nutrition at the University of Copenhagen in Denmark and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that "the trial on lorcaserin provides evidence of a safe weight-loss medication, that seems to provide benefits in terms of reducing risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease."

Also, it does not have the same problems as the previous weight-loss drugs, Fen-Phen (Phentermine), Acomplia (rimonabant) or Meridia (sibutramine), which had been associated with heart problems, he said.

"If weight-loss drugs are tailor-made to hit only the right receptor, based on physiological knowledge, it seems to be possible to develop weight-loss medications that do not possess any serious adverse effects," Astrup added.

However, one expert was not sold on this new drug.

"What's most impressive about this two-year clinical trial is how unimpressive it is," said Dr. David L. Katz, director of the Prevention Research Center at Yale University School of Medicine.

Nearly half of the people dropped out in the first year, he pointed out, and by year two, more than half the remainder had also dropped out.

"Among those who remained, lorcaserin produced relatively modest weight loss when combined with diet and exercise counseling, and that weight loss was maintained in over half of the participants only so long as they kept taking the drug. And the paper made no mention of the costs attached to long-term pharmacotherapy," Katz added.

"This close look at lorcaserin reaffirms that better daily use of feet and forks holds far greater promise for meaningful, sustainable and affordable weight control than pharmacotherapy," Katz said.

According to the Associated Press, lorcaserin will be reviewed by an FDA panel in September, and Contrave will be reviewed in December.

For more on losing weight, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag – but we’ll give this a barely satisfactory score. This story is the only one of the three that we reviewed on this study that buries the fen-phen connection. And none of them take the time to spell out how much damage fen-phen really caused. As with the other stories, it breezes past any side effects or other long-term problems by saying, "(the) team noted that for those taking lorcaserin, there was no increase in heart valve problems as had been seen with the discredited diet drug Fen-Phen. However, common side effects included headache, dizziness and nausea." Although, unlike the other stories, it points out about a competing drug, "FDA briefing documents posted online Tuesday acknowledged Qnexa’s effectiveness in helping patients lose weight, but said the review panel should take into account a number of potential nervous system and psychiatric side effects, the Associated Press reported." 
But, again, connected with our "Evidence" criterion comments above, was the study rigorous enough to answer tough questions about safety? We wish the story had explored this more deeply. Can we be sure this drug is safe, since so many prior weight loss drugs fell down on this point?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers analyzed data from nearly 170,000 women who had their first screening mammogram at age 40 to 59 years and almost 4,500 women with invasive breast cancer . Information about the women and their mammograms came from the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium, funded by the National Cancer Institute.

The task force says the decision to start regular, biennial mammograms before age 50 should be an individual choice based on each patient's situation. Meanwhile, the American Cancer Society continues to recommend that women get mammograms every year beginning at age 40.

The frequency of screening mammograms -- and the appropriate age to begin them -- has been debated since the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force in 2009 recommended that women routinely get screening mammograms every other year starting at age 50.

Oct. 17, 2011 -- Getting screening mammograms every two years instead of annually reduces the chance of a false alarm, a new study shows.

After 10 years of annual screening, more than half of women will be called back at least once for another mammogram. And 7% to 9% will be told they should have a biopsy because of something suspicious that turns out not to be cancer, the researchers concluded.

Those false-positives may cause inconvenience and anxiety, and biopsies can cause pain and scarring, the researchers note.

They found a small but not significant increase in the chance that women diagnosed with breast cancer had a more advanced case if they underwent screening every other year instead of every year.

The study wasn't really designed to answer the question of which screening regimen is best, study researcher Rebecca Hubbard, PhD, says. Its main message, Hubbard says, is that call-backs (or recalls) for false-positive results are common, so women shouldn't panic when they occur.

"In most cases, a recall doesn't mean you have cancer," says Hubbard, a biostatistician at the Group Health Research Institute in Seattle. "Hopefully, there will be less anxiety about getting a recall."

Women can halve their risk of a call-back for a false-positive if the interpreting radiologist has previous mammograms for comparison, the researchers found.

Ideally, Hubbard says, primary care doctors should talk to women about what to expect from annual and biennial screening before they get their first mammogram.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The piece states that the researchers noted that “…false positive recalls may cause inconvenience & anxiety and biopsies can cause pain and scarring.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a report on what is believed to be the first small clinical trial of its kind, researchers at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center say they have safely used immune cells grown from patients' own bone marrow to treat multiple myeloma, a cancer of white blood cells.

Results of the trial involving a particular type of tumor-targeting T cell, known as marrow-infiltrating lymphocytes (MILs), are described in the May 20 issue of Science Translational Medicine.

"What we learned in this small trial is that large numbers of activated MILs can selectively target and kill myeloma cells," says Johns Hopkins immunologist Ivan Borrello, M.D., who led the clinical trial.

MILs, he explains, are the foot soldiers of the immune system and attack foreign cells, such as bacteria or viruses. But in their normal state, they are inactive and too few in number to have a measurable effect on cancer.

Previous laboratory research by Borrello and his colleagues showed that activated MILs could selectively target and kill myeloma cells taken from patients and grown in laboratory culture flasks.

For the clinical trial, the Johns Hopkins team enrolled 25 patients with newly diagnosed or relapsed multiple myeloma, although three of the patients relapsed before they could receive the MILs therapy.

The scientists retrieved MILs from each patient's bone marrow, grew them in the laboratory to expand their numbers, activated them with microscopic beads coated with immune activating antibodies and intravenously injected each of the 22 patients with their own cells. Three days before the injections of expanded MILs, patients received high doses of chemotherapy and a stem cell transplant, standard treatments for multiple myeloma.

One year after receiving the MILs therapy, 13 of the 22 patients had at least a partial response to the therapy, meaning that their cancers had shrunk by at least 50 percent.

Seven patients experienced at least a 90 percent reduction in tumor cell volume and lived, on average, 25.1 months without cancer progression. The remaining 15 patients had an average of 11.8 progression-free months following MILs therapy. None of the participants had serious side effects from the MILs therapy. The overall survival was 31.5 months for those with less than 90 percent disease reduction, but this number has not yet been reached in those with better responses. The average follow-up time is currently more than six years.

Borrello notes that several U.S. cancer centers have conducted similar experimental treatments, known as adoptive T cell therapy, but says the Johns Hopkins team is believed to be the only one to use MILs. Other types of tumor-infiltrating cells can be used, but they are usually less plentiful in patients' tumors and may not grow as well outside the body, says Borrello.

In nonblood-based tumors, such as melanoma, only about one-half of patients have T cells in their tumors that can be harvested, and only about one-half of those harvested cells can be grown. "Typically, immune cells from solid tumors, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, can be harvested and grown in only about 25 percent of patients who could potentially be eligible for the therapy. But in our clinical trial, we were able to harvest and grow MILs from all 22 patients," says Kimberly Noonan, Ph.D., a research associate at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

Noonan says the small trial helped her and her colleagues learn more about which patients may benefit from MILs therapy. For example, they were able to determine how many of the MILs grown in the lab were specifically targeted to the patient's tumor and whether they continued to target the tumor after being infused.

Additionally, the scientists found that patients whose bone marrow before treatment contained a high number of certain immune cells, known as central memory cells, also had better response to MILs therapy. Patients who began treatment with signs of an overactive immune response did not respond as well.

Noonan says the research team has used these data to guide two other ongoing MILs clinical trials. Those studies, she says, are trying to extend anti-tumor response and tumor specificity by combining the MILs transplant with a Johns Hopkins-developed cancer vaccine called GVAX and the myeloma drug lenalidomide, which stimulates T cell responses.

The researchers say the trials also have shed light on new ways to grow the MILs. "In most of these trials, you see that the more cells you get, the better response you get in patients. Learning how to improve cell growth may therefore improve the therapy," says Noonan.

Kimmel Cancer Center scientists are also developing MILs to treat solid tumors such as lung, esophageal and gastric cancers, as well as the pediatric cancers neuroblastoma and Ewing's sarcoma.

Experts report there are more than 20,000 new cases of multiple myeloma and more than 10,000 deaths each year in United States. It is the second most common cancer originating in the blood.

Other Johns Hopkins scientists who contributed to the research include Carol Ann Huff, Janice Davis, M. Victor Lemas, Susan Fiorino, Jeffrey Bitzan, Anna Ferguson, Amy Emerling, Leo Luznik, William Matsui, Jonathan Powell, Ephraim Fuchs, Gary L. Rosner, C. Epstein, Lakshmi Rudraraju, Richard F. Ambinder, Richard J. Jones and Drew Pardoll.

Funding for the study was provided by the Commonwealth Fund (5P01 CA015396, P30 CA006973) and the Baca and Morisi Funds.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this criterion a satisfactory rating since the release specifically spells out, “None of the participants had serious side effects from the MILs therapy.” However, the study is really too small, and the time span too short, to comment substantively on the possible harms that might be seen if and when the treatment is more widely used. The research paper actually makes the point that the new procedure doesn’t require the “surgical removal of tissue,” and the procedure can be done at bedside rather than an operating suite. But the removal of cells from the bone marrow is still an invasive procedure that carries its own risk of infection or other problems. The release would have benefited from at least mentioning this aspect.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WALNUT CREEK, Calif., Jan. 15, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Child screams from the pain of earache; exhausted parent ventures to drugstore in wee hours to find…nothing. "Eardrops don't work," says Dr. Scott Morehouse, founder of ClearPop, "because the Eustachian tube, where the pain occurs, is connected to the mouth, not the outer ear."

The beleaguered parent now drags hollering kid to the doctor's office, only to find the pediatrician reluctant to prescribe antibiotics. Since 2013, the American Academy of Pediatrics endorses a wait-and-see approach, seeking to let more earaches heal on their own without antibiotics.

In light of this, Morehouse developed a lollipop with a patented shape optimized to pull congestion out of the middle ear and into the mouth. ClearPop for Rapid Earache Relief has been shelved by Raley's (CA, NV) select RiteAid locations, and is available at boutique drugstores and Amazon. Moms have flooded https://www.facebook.com/ClearPop with glowing testimonials for this simple drug-free solution that:

-can be given along with analgesics or antibiotics.

-is increasingly used by frequent flyers to deal with ear pain that afflicts children disproportionately during air travel.

CLINICAL TESTS

Children diagnosed with Acute Otitis Media, or ear infection, consumed the xylitol and Vitamin C-based product in pediatric offices. After 20 minutes, 88.5% reported their ear pain dramatically reduced or vanished. The earache episode was totally resolved for 80%. Full study report at http://clearpop.com 



EAR INFECTION AND ANTIBIOTICS

Ear infections are the Number One reason kids aged 5 and under receive oral antibiotics. Due to increasing concern about antibiotic overuse and its links to obesity, celiac disease, and Superbugs, the American Academy of Pediatrics now recommends against the use of antibiotics to treat routine ear infections in children over 2.

ABOUT CLEARPOP

ClearPop for Rapid Earache Relief represents a simple, safe, pediatrician recommended, clinically effective and fun way to treat earaches. ClearPop is made by Try This First, Inc. a physician-funded "small pharma" organization aimed at reducing the estimated 30 million antibiotics prescriptions written to children yearly for ear infection. Founder and Chairman: Dr. Scott Morehouse, scott@clearpop.com
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There were no risks mentioned for the lollipop device or for the ingredients but we give them a pass on this criteria since harms appear minimal. It’s worth noting that there can be a harm if persistent ear pain that is not resolved by use of the lollipop is not given medical attention.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
HOUSTON - For patients with advanced, inoperable stage 3 lung cancer, concurrent chemotherapy and the specialized radiation treatment, proton therapy, offers improved survival compared to historical data for standard of care, according to a new study from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

The research, published in JAMA Oncology, reported an overall survival (OS) of 26.5 months. In contrast, the historical OS rate with standard of care concurrent chemotherapy and traditional radiation was 16 months at the time when the study was designed.

The findings are the final results of the single institution, Phase II study and represent the longest follow-up to date of stage 3 lung cancer patients who have received proton therapy, said Joe Y. Chang, M.D., professor, Radiation Oncology and the study's corresponding author.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the U.S. According to the American Cancer Society, more than 222,500 people will be diagnosed and 155,870 will die from the disease in 2017, with the majority of patients still being diagnosed when the disease is in an advanced stage.

"Advanced lung cancer patients with inoperable disease traditionally have been treated with concurrent chemotherapy and conventional photon radiation therapy. However, the therapy can be very difficult for patients due to associated toxicities and because many patients are also dealing with comorbidities," explained Chang.

Proton therapy is an advanced type of radiation treatment that uses a beam of protons to deliver radiation directly to the tumor, destroying cancer cells while sparing healthy tissues. Protons enter the body with a low radiation dose and stop at the tumor, matching its shape and volume or depth. They deposit the bulk of their cancer-fighting energy right at the tumor, thereby reducing the dose to cardiopulmonary structures, which impacts the toxicity, functional status, quality of life and even survival for patients, explained Chang.

"With our study, we hypothesized that proton therapy would offer a survival benefit to patients and reduce treatment-associated toxicities, which can be very serious," he said.

The study opened at MD Anderson in 2006; in this research, Chang and his colleague report on the study's five-year results.

For the prospective Phase II trial, 64 patients with inoperable, Stage III non-small-cell lung cancer were enrolled. The study's primary endpoint was OS. The researchers hypothesized that the median OS would increase from historical data of 16 months on standard therapy to 24 months. Secondary endpoints included distant metastasis and local and regional recurrence rates. Toxic effects of treatment in both the acute and late settings also were analyzed.

Median follow up was 27.3 months for all patients, and 79.6 months for alive patients. At five years, the median OS was 26.5 months, and the corresponding five-year OS was 29 percent. Median progression-free survival was 12.9 months, with a five-year progression-free survival of 22 percent.

In sum, 39 patients experienced a relapse, with distant sites representing 62 percent of all recurrences. Local and regional recurrence rates were low, 16 percent and 14 percent, respectively.

Among the acute and late toxic effects diagnosed in patients were: esophagitis, pneumonitis and cardiac arrhythmia. Of note, said Chang, no patients developed the most severe, or grade five, toxicities, as seen in patients who receive standard of care.

Chang noted his study is not without limitations. Of greatest significance: the study was designed more than a decade ago. While the study's survival, recurrence rates and toxic effects are still favorable when compared to rates associated with the most advanced traditional photon radiation therapy, intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), technology to diagnose and stage the disease, as well all treatment modalities have significantly improved.

"When the study opened, PET imaging had just been approved for lung cancer staging. The image quality was poor and didn't include a CT component in most facilities across the country," said Chang. "Obviously, the technology has improved dramatically over the last decade and has made a significant impact on diagnosis and staging. Also, delivery of both the conventional intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and proton therapy (IMPT), have improved, thereby reducing side effects for both treatment modalities."

For example, MD Anderson proton therapy patients with advanced lung cancer now can receive IMPT. The technique uses an intricate network of magnets to aim a narrow proton beam at a tumor and "paint" the radiation dose onto it layer by layer. Healthy tissue surrounding the tumor is spared, and side effects are even more reduced than earlier proton delivery, said Chang.

Chang also noted the advancements in cancer biology and immunotherapy and that both are important areas of research focus in combination with proton therapy.

In addition to Chang, other authors on the all-MD Anderson study include: Stephen Hahn, M.D., Ritsuko Komaki, M.D., Pamela K. Allen, Ph.D., Zhongxing Liao, M.D., Steven H. Lin, M.D., Ph.D., Daniel Gomez, M.D., James Welsh, M.D., Melenda Jeter M.D., James Cox, M.D., Michael O'Reilly, M.D., Ming Li, M.D. and Wencheng Zhang, M.D., all of Radiation Oncology; John V. Heymach, M.D., Ph.D. and Charles Lu, M.D., both of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology; Ronald X. Zhu, Ph.D., Xiaodong Zhang, Ph.D., Heng Li, Ph.D., Radhe Mohan, Ph.D., all of Radiation Physics; and Ara A. Vaporciyan, M.D., Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. Vivek Verma, M.D., now at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, also contributed to the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release says:
“Among the acute and late toxic effects diagnosed in patients were: esophagitis, pneumonitis and cardiac arrhythmia. Of note, said Chang, no patients developed the most severe, or grade five, toxicities, as seen in patients who receive standard of care.”
So we give the release credit for talking about harms. Some numbers to show how many of the 64 people enrolled had side effects would have been helpful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
This news release is available in French.

Montreal, October 7, 2015 -- Millions of people suffer from asthma. Many report having poor control of their symptoms. Fortunately, new research shows there is a simple antidote: 30 minutes of exercise a day, year-round.

In a study recently published in BMJ Open Respiratory Research, experts from Concordia University, the Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal and several other institutions* analyzed the exercise habits of 643 participants who had been diagnosed with asthma.

Results were overwhelmingly clear: those who engaged in optimal levels of physical activity on a regular basis were nearly two-and-a-half times more likely to have good control of their symptoms, compared with those who did no exercise.

The workout doesn't have to be strenuous. "We're not talking about running marathons here," says Simon Bacon, the study's lead author and a professor in the Department of Exercise Science at Concordia. "Just 30 minutes a day of walking, riding a bike, doing yoga -- anything active, really -- can result in significant reduction of asthma symptoms."

Traditionally, people with the condition have been discouraged from exercising because of a belief that it triggers shortness of breath and attacks. Bacon explains that simple precautionary measures can be taken to avoid the discomforts that can be caused by physical activity.

"The issue of exercise-induced bronchospasm is real -- but if you use your releaver medication, blue puffer, before you exercise, and then take the time to cool down afterwards, you should be okay," he says. "Even if you have asthma, there's no good reason not to get out there and exercise."

That's a message Bacon hopes resonates. Within his sample group of 643 individuals, a whopping 245 reported doing no physical activity. Only 100 said they engaged in the optimal 30 minutes a day.

"Those numbers reflect the population in general," says Bacon, who is also director of the Centre de réadaptation Jean-Jacques-Gauthier at Hopital du Sacré-Coeur. Forty per cent of people don't exercise at all, he says.

"We need to keep in mind that doing something is better than nothing, and doing more is better than less. Even the smallest amount of activity is beneficial."

It's something to keep in mind during winter months, when fitness levels tend to drop along with the temperature, and cold air provides another trigger for asthma symptoms.

"Our study shows that those who were able to engage in physical activity on a regular basis year-round benefit most," says Bacon. If necessary, he suggests finding an indoor place to move, whether it's the gym, a staircase or a shopping mall.

"It's all about being creative and finding environments where the cold doesn't become an issue."

Could a prescription for exercise be the result of this study Bacon is hopeful. "It would be great to see physicians recommending physical activity to patients with asthma, alongside traditional pharmacological treatments," he says.

Partners in research: Funding support for this study was provided by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, Fonds de recherche du Quebec - Sante, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Michel Auger Foundation of Hopital du Sacre-Coeur de Montreal.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release points out some precautions people need to take before exercising. The study’s lead author explains that patients should use “releaver medication” (sic) before they exercise and adds they should take the time to cool down afterward. He also says people could exercise indoors during the winter months, since cold air provides another trigger for asthma symptoms. It would have also been helpful to note that any physical activity triggers asthma symptoms in some people. In these cases, patients may have to take medicines before they exercise. The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute recommends easing into physical activity with a warm-up period and also wearing a mask or scarf over the mouth when exercising in cold weather. More detail would have been appreciated here, but we feel the news release had enough for a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new, non-invasive knee procedure could bring some relief for patients suffering from debilitating chronic pain, for whom surgery is not an option.

The treatment, recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration, is called “cooled radio frequency ablation” and is a less drastic option for people with moderate to severe osteoarthritis pain who are not ready to have knee replacement surgery, or who have health conditions that don’t make them a good candidate for surgery.

Marketed as "Coolief", the procedure uses radio frequency to target and mute the nerves responsible for sending pain signals from the arthritic knee to the brain. Coolief doesn’t repair arthritis in the knee, but eases the pain, helping patients go back to activities without discomfort and fewer medications.

“What we're changing is the wiring of the knee — so we're taking away the pain signal and interrupting it," Dr. Amin Sandeep, a pain specialist at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago who performs the procedure, told NBC News.

One 2016 study compared Coolief to popular cortisone injections, with patients reporting greater, longer-lasting pain relief with the new treatment than injections. Coolief reduces pain for about to 6 to 12 months, depending on how fast the nerves in the knee regenerate.

Related: Common Knee Surgery May Not Help You

Osteoarthritis can affect any joint when the cartilage wears off over time, often striking big joints like the knee, causing pain, swelling and stiffness. According to the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, nearly 10 million Americans had osteoarthritis of the knee in 2010.

The three current recommended approaches for knee arthritis pain are physical therapy, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen, or the opioid painkiller tramadol.

But those didn't help Felicia McCloden, a 65-year-old grandmother from outside of Chicago. The excruciating pain in her right knee made simple tasks like grocery shopping impossible.

“I had inflammation, swelling, and my knee was like the size of a golf ball, McCloden told NBC News. "The arthritis was so bad that I could barely step down without severe pain.”

Because she wasn’t eligible for a knee replacement she tried cortisone injections, physical therapy, medications — nothing relieved her pain.

"I thought I was going to limp for the rest of my life," she said.

Related: What Really Helps Knee Pain? The Answer May Surprise You

In May, McCloden underwent the Coolief treatment and the result was instant.

“I couldn't even imagine first of all, not having the pain," she said. "It erased all of that.”

The outpatient procedure typically takes about 40 minutes, is performed with local anesthesia and doesn’t require an incision. Instead, doctors use specialized needles that emit radio frequencywaves into the knee. The cost of the treatment is between $2,000 and $4,000. Because it was just approved by the FDA in April, the treatment is not widely available yet, but pain centers across the country are beginning to offer it.

Some of the reported risks from the procedure include bleeding and infection. "Though patients have a risk of the physician hitting the wrong nerve, that is extremely rare in the hands of an experienced professional”, Amin said.

Recovery time is minimal, with most patients walking immediately after the procedure and resuming normal activities in a day or two.

For some patients with structural problems of the knee, the procedure won't help, said pain specialist Dr. Edgar Ross, associate professor of anesthesia at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

"But let’s say a patient is younger, instead of going for a total knee replacement early, which might have to be repeated later on, Coolief can postpone the need for the total knee replacement," Ross told NBC News.

Coolief can be repeated if necessary, but it's not a permanent solution. While it reduces pain, it can't stop the progression of osteoarthritis.

"While it can delay total knee replacement, knee replacement may still eventually be necessary in a big number of patients," said Dr. Dennis Cardone, associate professor of orthopedic surgery at NYU Langone Medical Center.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Risks are identified.
However, we think it would have been worth pointing out that there is little scientific literature about applying this old technology to a new part of the body. So, it’s unclear what the eventual risks are.
Also, the article is not quite clear what radiofrequency ablation is doing: killing nerves, for at least 6 months. There could be permanent loss of nerve sensation, or maybe the nerves will grow back years later, either normally or in an altered state (which has happened in some other medical and surgical situations).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Characterized by the World Health Organization as a "neglected tropical disease," leprosy (also known as Hansen's disease) is one of the most ancient diseases known to humankind and is caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium leprae. Nearly a quarter of a million people worldwide have leprosy, which causes disfiguration of the skin and mucous membranes as well as progressive and incurable nerve damage. While drug therapy exists for leprosy, it must be taken for many months, has many side effects and often is given too late to reverse the permanent damage caused by the bacterial infection. A viable vaccine to prevent and/or treat leprosy is the next step in the effort to bring this disease to an end.

Scientists at IDRI, along with national and international collaborators including the National Hansen's Disease Program and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, with financial support from American Leprosy Missions, have developed a promising leprosy vaccine candidate designed to help treat leprosy and prevent exposed individuals from developing disease and the resulting disabilities. Based on data generated in preclinical studies, the vaccine candidate, called LepVax, has progressed to Phase I clinical testing in the United States, the first stage of safety testing in human volunteers. The clinical trial is focused on safety, as well as evaluating the immune response to the vaccine.

"While previous attempts have used vaccines primarily developed for other diseases, this is the first totally defined vaccine candidate developed specifically for leprosy, using the latest technologies and offering no less than those exposed to leprosy deserve," said Steven Reed, Ph.D., IDRI President, CEO & Founder. "The leprosy vaccine program at IDRI has benefited greatly from what we've learned in the development of tuberculosis vaccine candidates over the past two decades. Although the bacteria that cause tuberculosis and leprosy are related, leprosy vaccine development posed great challenges. This vaccine represents a unique accomplishment, requiring the most advanced technologies in molecular biology and immunology, and American Leprosy Missions has been there from the beginning." IDRI scientists have also developed two vaccine candidates for tuberculosis, both in clinical stages of development.

"We are thrilled that after 15 years and an investment of over $5.1 million, made possible by our faithful donors and partners, a leprosy-specific vaccine is beginning a Phase I clinical trial," says Bill Simmons, President and CEO of American Leprosy Missions. "We believe this may be the most exciting breakthrough in leprosy treatment since multi-drug therapy, the current treatment for leprosy, was launched in the 1980s. We look forward to this vaccine improving the health outcomes of people diagnosed with leprosy. And, it may be that this vaccine can lead to interruption of the transmission of leprosy all together. What a tremendous legacy this would leave for millions of people worldwide."

The vaccine was developed through significant efforts in screening and identifying M. leprae proteins that trigger an effective immune response. IDRI scientists then produced a fusion of four leprosy proteins, which is combined with IDRI's proprietary immune-stimulating adjuvant (GLA-SE). With recent developments in vaccine technology, IDRI scientists can now induce protective responses even after infection, meaning it could be possible to prevent disease development in people already infected with the leprosy bacterium.

"This generation of a vaccine to prevent and possibly treat leprosy is the result of years of research. The development has been complicated by the fact that the organism that causes leprosy cannot be grown in culture in the laboratory," Reed explained. "This is a unique example of a vaccine produced by totally synthetic methods."

Reed added that, without the foresight and support of American Leprosy Missions, there would be no leprosy vaccine candidate. "The vision and support of American Leprosy Missions has been tremendous as we've worked with them throughout the years, moving from our work in developing a leprosy diagnostic to our current focus on a successful leprosy vaccine," he said. "The progress we've had to date would not have been possible without American Leprosy Missions' financial support and guidance." Early results from the Phase I study should be available in 2018, and the partners are currently exploring mechanisms to advance the vaccine through later-phase clinical trials should results from the Phase I study (clinical trial NCT03302897) support further evaluation.

The vaccine candidate will serve as part of an overall strategy to end leprosy, which will require detection, prevention and treatment. IDRI had developed technology to enable a rapid, affordable, point-of-care diagnostic test, which was funded by NIAID (grant numbers 1R43AI066613-01A1 and 2R44AI066613-02.)

In addition to IDRI and American Leprosy Missions, a variety of partners are taking part in efforts to eliminate leprosy, including Novartis and the Novartis Foundation. Reed, along with scientists from a variety of scientific organizations recently published "Innovative tools and approaches to end the transmission of Mycobacterium leprae" in , outlining what is needed to achieve this goal. Together with scientific, government and NGO partners, the Novartis Foundation develops and implements strategies to help interrupt leprosy transmission, while Novartis donates the treatment for leprosy free of charge.

About IDRI: As a nonprofit global health organization, IDRI (Infectious Disease Research Institute) takes a comprehensive approach to combat infectious diseases, combining the high-quality science of a research organization with the product development capabilities of a biotech company to create new diagnostics, drugs and vaccines. Founded in 1993, IDRI has 125 employees headquartered in Seattle with nearly 100 partners/collaborators around the world. For more information, visit www.idri.org.

About American Leprosy Missions: American Leprosy Missions, based in Greenville, South Carolina, is the oldest and largest Christian organization in the United States dedicated to curing and caring for people affected by leprosy and related diseases. It funds projects and partners in countries across Africa, Asia and the Americas. During its more than 100-year history, American Leprosy Missions has provided holistic care to four million people around the world including medical treatment and training, Christian outreach, community development and vaccine research. For more information, visit www.leprosy.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The whole goal of a phase 1 trial is to determine what, if any, potential harms are associated with a given treatment. The release makes note of this, which is why we give it a satisfactory rating. That said, if animal trials turned up any potential harms that may be relevant to human subjects, those should have been mentioned here. And even if animal trials didn’t turn up any potential harms, the release would have been stronger if it had mentioned that.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A modified version of the polio vaccine, infused straight into aggressive brain tumors, helped some patients live for years longer than they normally would have, doctors reported Tuesday.

It’s no miracle cure — only about 20 percent of patients with gliomas were helped — but some are alive six years later, the team reported in the New England Journal of Medicine.

It’s a hopeful enough finding to move forward and test the vaccine in more people, the team at the Duke University School of Medicine said.

“It’s very unusual, almost unprecedented to get this kind of long-term survival,” neurologist Dr. Darell Bigner, who led the study team, told NBC News.

The Duke team tested 61 glioma patients over five years. They all had grade IV gliomas, a group of brain tumors that includes glioblastoma.

These patients have a “dismal” prognosis, the Duke team wrote in the New England Journal of Medicine. “There is currently no effective therapy.”

Standard treatment of brain tumors includes surgery if the tumor is somewhere reachable; chemotherapy; and radiation. But if the tumor is aggressive, it’s usually fatal.

“These are people who failed everything,” Bigner said. “Virtually all patients, no matter what you treat them with, are dead within in two years.”

About a third of all brain tumors are gliomas, according to the National Brain Tumor Society. About 80,000 people a year are diagnosed with a brain tumor, and about 24,000 of those are malignant. “The average survival rate for all malignant brain tumor patients is only 34.7 percent,” the group says.

But there’s evidence that some viruses can home in on tumors and kill them. It’s not clear why, but viruses can also make tumors more visible to the immune system.

The team at Duke worked with the National Cancer Institute to design and manufacture a modified version of polio vaccine virus.

Polio viruses are attracted to nerve cells — that’s why they cause paralysis.

The medical team used polio viruses already weakened and altered for use in polio vaccines, and genetically engineered them to carry parts of a common cold virus, called a rhinovirus, known to be attracted to glioma cells.

They infused various doses into the tumors of the 61 glioma patients.

“We inject the virus directly into brain tumors and it kills all the tumor cells it comes in contact with,” Bigner said. “The most important thing is, it sets up a secondary immune response and really destroys the distant tumor cells.”

The very first patient was Stephanie Hopper, who was diagnosed with a glioblastoma when she was just 20.

“I was throwing up and I had a headache behind my eye. I didn’t even know I had cancer until after the surgery to remove the tumor,” Hopper told NBC News. “It was the size of a tennis ball.”

Hopper was a little wary of being infused with a polio virus, but was ready to try. It worked. She’s still alive, married and working as a nurse in Greenville, South Carolina, more than six years later.

“I’m amazed,” she said. “I never really felt like I was going die. I think my life was just put on hold.”

After three years, 21 percent of patients were still alive, the team reported. That compares to 20 months or less on average for similar patients.

One patient had a hemorrhage and 19 percent had a notable adverse event, the team reported. More than half had headaches and half had hemiparesis, weakness or paralysis on one side of the body. Another 45 percent had a seizure. More than a quarter had aphasia -- brain damage that makes speaking and communication difficult.

The patient who had the hemorrhage suffered aphasia but was still alive more nearly five years later. Two patients died during the trial.

“The nature of the treatment causes side-effects,” Bigner said. “The virus infection causes a very potent inflammation response and that response causes brain swelling.”

The cancer drug Avastin is used in low doses to control the swelling, the team said.

It’s not clear why just one in five patients benefits, said Dr. Annick Desjardins, who worked on the study team.

“Similar to many immunotherapies, it appears that some patients don’t respond for one reason or another, but if they respond, they often become long-term survivors,” Desjardins said. “The big question is, how can we make sure that everybody responds?”

The Duke team compared their 61 volunteers to similar past patients who did not get the treatment. All but one of those previous patients died after an average of 11 months. Just 14 percent were still alive two years after diagnosis and 4 percent were alive three years later.

But the 21 percent or so of patients helped by the vaccine all survived at least three years.

As of March of this year, eight patients had no evidence of the tumors growing any more and two had no evidence of a brain tumor at all.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Better than the NPR story that we also reviewed, NBC did a good job of spelling out harms, stating 19% of patients had “notable adverse events” and more than a quarter experienced brain damage affecting speech and communication. Again, though, we think it’s better to give readers the absolute number of adverse events – how many out of how many?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It sounds almost too good to be true — a two-step cream that tightens up baggy eyes and can keep dry legs from flaking.

A team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has developed the cream and licensed it to two companies with close ties to the lab — one called Living Proof, best known for spinning out MIT inventions to the hair care market, and a second one called Olivo Labs, which will develop it for medical uses, perhaps to deliver drugs to the skin.

The cream’s effects are detailed in a scientific report in the journal Nature Materials, but as part of the school’s close association with the companies, it’s being patented and produced at almost the same time.

First the science. The research was led by Robert Langer, a prolific inventor who heads a biological engineering lab at MIT.

Writing in the journal Nature Materials, the team said they searched databases for materials that were already on the market and recognized as safe that could take a whole new approach to skin care.

Betty Yu, the company’s principal scientist, earned her PhD in biochemistry and toxicology. She has studied how to deliver drugs into the skin and led efforts to develop hair care products. She wanted to move on to skin products.

They wanted something stretchy and strong that wouldn’t pucker up when it dried on the skin and that would be breathable.

“It has to have the right optical properties, otherwise it won’t look good, and it has to have the right mechanical properties, otherwise it won’t have the right strength and it won’t perform correctly,” Langer said.

“Creating a material that behaves like skin is very difficult,” added Dr. Barbara Gilchrest, a dermatologist at the Massachusetts General Hospital who worked on the study.

“Many people have tried to do this, and the materials that have been available up until this have not had the properties of being flexible, comfortable, nonirritating, and able to conform to the movement of the skin and return to its original shape.”

They screened about 100 compounds before settling on polysiloxane, a silicone-based gel. They call it a cross-linked polymer layer or XPL for short.

“It works in two parts,” Langer told NBC News. “You put on a primer layer, just kind of rub it in. Then you put on a second layer and rub that one in. There’s cross-linking and it tightens it up.”

Cross-linking is a well-understood process. Separate strands of material become stronger when they link up. “Vulcanization, used to make tires, is a cross-linking process,” Langer said. “Rubber alone would not be that strong.”

In this case, the catalyst is platinum-based and it turns the gel into a thin, stretchy sheet. There are hundreds of skin products that do this now, but this one sticks better and doesn’t pucker the skin, the team reports.

Light-scattering particles are added to the second layer, and they reflect light off the skin, making it look clearer and smoother.

Langer tried it on his arm. “It was almost like you couldn’t see it. After a minute, I didn’t know it was there,” he said.

They ran four experiments on the product. In one, they applied it to the skin under the eyes of 25 volunteers. It lasted for 16 hours before it started peeling off, and smoothed out the eye bags that become so common as people age, they wrote.

“Such a result has been previously achieved only by a lower lid blepharoplasty, an invasive surgical procedure,” they wrote.

They demonstrate it in this video.

They also put tested at against petroleum jelly and regular moisturizer on 22 people with dry, flaky legs. The XPL lasted longer and helped keep the skin from losing moisture better than the petroleum jelly, which lasted better than moisturizer.

“The results confirmed the XPL as a ‘second skin’ barrier that protects the skin from excessive moisture loss to the environment,” they wrote.

“Repeated daily wear resulted in no report of irritation or other adverse events resulting from the XPL use. Furthermore, the XPL remained intact following activities such as swimming, running and exposure to rain,” they added.

The stuff can just be peeled off, or taken off with makeup remover, the researchers said.

Dermatologist Dr. Jennifer Lucas of the Cleveland Clinic, who was not involved in the study, said she’d have to see long-term results to make a judgment. “Conceptually, it’s a great and novel idea,” she said.

“For now, there is no magical cream that can make you look younger.”

Olivo will work first to develop the product to deliver drugs to the skin –perhaps allergy or eczema medication, or long-lasting sunscreen, MIT said. Langer said it might also be used to help burn patients.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story tells us that “Repeated daily wear resulted in no report of irritation or other adverse events resulting from the XPL use.” That’s at least a nod toward discussing potential harms, so we’ll consider this Satisfactory.
But, we think the story would be stronger if it had been more specific about what “repeated” meant. We’re also wondering about things that could inevitably occur with regular use, like the product getting into the eyes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The biggest reason why the United States has higher infant mortality than other developed countries is that American women are more likely to deliver prematurely – before 37 weeks. And, for unknown reasons, the U.S. rate of preterm delivery has been going up in recent years.

That's why it's a pretty big deal that the Food and Drug Administration has OK'd a drug, called 17-HP, that experts say could make a dent in the preemie problem.

Not a huge dent, but a significant one. The March of Dimes calculates that if all the women eligible to get the newly approved drug actually did, there would be 10,000 fewer preemies a year – out of more than half-a-million born that way.

"Although that may seem like a small percent, it's really a very extraordinary ability to impact on what is really a major public health problem," Dr. Alan Fleischman, the March of Dimes medical director, told Shots.

According to the best research, the drug reduces the risk of premature birth by one-third among women who are at high risk because they had a previous preterm birth.

The drug is not for women whose prior premature births were of twins or other multiple births, or who are carrying more than one fetus in their current pregnancy. Nor is it for women who have other conditions that raise their risk of preterm birth, such as high blood pressure or infection.

And even for the 30,000 or so women who are eligible, 17-HP, which will be marketed as Makena, isn't a magic bullet. The study showed that 37 percent of women who got weekly injections of it delivered prematurely, compared to 55 percent of women who got injections of a placebo.

Interestingly, the drug is not new — it's just taken a long and circuitous route to approval.

In 1956, the FDA approved 17-HP for the treatment of certain cancers and other hormonal disorders, under the brand name Delalutin. But its manufacturer withdrew it from the market in 2000 "for reasons unrelated to safety," as the FDA puts it.

In fact, as a Federal Register posting last year chronicled, there have been questions raised about whether 17-HP caused birth defects of various kinds. In the 1970s, the FDA required warnings on drugs containing progesterone, as 17-HP does, because of an increased risk of birth defects. They later revoked them.

The FDA is apparently satisfied that 17-HP is safe, but it's requiring its sponsors KV Pharmaceuticals and TherRx to conduct further studies of women who have taken it and children exposed during pregnancy.

Everyone in this field is mindful of the long-running tragedy of vaginal and other cancers and male urinary disorders that resulted from the last drug thought to prevent premature birth – a synthetic estrogen called diethylstilbesterol, or DES. In 1971 researchers realized children exposed to DES in utero had a higher incidence of vaginal and breast cancers, and males were subsequently found to have urinary-tract problems.

Fleischman, the March of Dimes official, says there's no such risk from 17-HP, partly because it's not used before the 16th week of pregnancy, when fetal organs have already formed.

"We have been very aggressively tracking all the data," Fleischman says, "and we have no reason to believe that this drug will increase birth defects."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good discussion of concerns and ongoing monitoring of the drug’s safety.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - A urine test can help doctors better spot prostate cancer than either the current blood test or a rectal exam alone, U.S. researchers reported on Tuesday.

They said Gen-Probe’s Progensa PCA3 test caught about half the actual cases of prostate cancer in men who had abnormal PSA levels or digital rectal exams, and had about a 20 percent “false positive” rate.

“That’s pretty good, actually,” said Dr. David Crawford of the University of Colorado School of Medicine, who helped lead the study.

Trying to diagnose prostate cancer is one of the most maddening tasks a doctor has. The prostate is a walnut-shaped gland that produces semen and it is hard to get to.

Digital rectal exams can tell a specialist that the prostate is getting bigger, but that happens with normal aging as well as with cancer. A blood test for prostate specific antigen or PSA shows when PSA rises, but PSA goes up with either cancer or just normal enlargement of the prostate — or even if the gland is inflamed, such as from an infection.

Biopsies are difficult and painful to do and may take a portion of healthy prostate, missing any tumors entirely.

And prostate tumors can grow slowly. A study last year estimated that more than 1 million men in the United States alone had been needlessly treated for prostate tumors that likely would never have killed them.

The Progensa test looks for a genetic material called PCA3. It is a string of RNA that does not appear to have any function but that is overexpressed, or overactive, in prostate cancer.

Lightly touching the prostate can cause its release and it can then be detected in the urine using the test.

Crawford and colleagues tested Progensa in about 1,900 men who had high PSA readings, an abnormal digital rectal exam or both and who were scheduled to have biopsies.

“It reflects on the aggressiveness of the cancer,” Crawford said. “If you had no cancer your PCA3 was at 25 or 20. If you had precursors such as high grade PIN (prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia) your score was about 38 to 40 and men who had cancer scored about 50 to 55.”

The test had a specificity of 78 percent, meaning that 78 percent of the men who had cancer indicated by the test actually did. This compares to just 21 percent for PSA alone, the researchers told a meeting of the American Urological Association in San Francisco.

“If the PCA3 is abnormal, above about 35, you have got an 80 percent chance of having cancer,” Crawford said.

The test had a sensitivity of 49 percent, meaning it correctly identified 49 percent of cancers. This is far less sensitive than PSA, which catches 87 percent of tumors, but if the two tests are used together they can help rule out the need for unnecessary surgery or radiation.

Among the 1,946 men studied, 42 percent turned out to have prostate cancer.

The test was approved for use in Europe in 2006 but is not yet approved in the United States.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The story did include sufficient information to conclude that with this test, there were still both false positive and false negative results.  There was, however, no discussion about whether this test had any role in helping men who really didn’t require treatment to avoid such treatment. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Before Starting A Statin, Talk It Over With Your Doctor

A study published Monday is pushing back against the notion that up to 40 percent of Americans should be taking statin drugs to reduce the risk of heart disease. The study, in the Annals of Internal Medicine, argues that current medical guidelines haven't adequately considered the risks from these widely used drugs.

"Some harms are mentioned, but it's entirely unclear how they were considered when coming up with the recommendations," says Milo Puhan, a physician and epidemiologist at the University of Zurich and senior author of the new study. "In our approach we very explicitly considered the harms."

It's important to note that statin drugs are generally safe, and harms are uncommon. On the other hand, the benefits aren't that great, either. Anywhere from 50 to 200 healthy people need to take a statin daily to prevent a single heart attack for five years, so even small harms may outweigh the potential benefits, the Swiss scientists say.

The most common side effect of these drugs is muscle pain, which usually goes away if patients stop taking the medicines. People taking statins are also at a higher risk of developing diabetes, which is harder to reverse.

Puhan also found that some statins were more effective than others, with atorvastatin (the generic name for Lipitor) being the best of the bunch. He notes that physician guidelines don't generally compare the relative value of these drugs, which are all available as inexpensive generics.

He also finds that benefits fade compared with harms as people get older. "The elderly do not benefit as much as previous studies might have thought," he says.

"One size doesn't fit it all," he concludes. "That's a very important message."

Puhan says, based on his assessment, perhaps 15 to 20 percent of older adults should be taking statins – far less than the 30 or 40 percent suggested by current medical guidelines.

"I think for me, as a physician," says Ilana Richman, an internist at the Yale School of Medicine, "this kind of data suggests that if we give more weight to the potential for adverse events, then maybe it's reasonable to hold off for lower-risk patients."

She co-wrote an editorial about the paper and came away from it thinking that doctors need to spend more time talking about the plusses and minuses of statin treatment, personalizing their recommendations more than they do now. She says it's a challenge to convey these sophisticated concepts in the short amount of time doctors have to spend with their patients.

Yet that kind of dialog is increasingly the expectation. In mid-November, the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology published new guidelines calling for more nuanced conversations around who would most benefit from statins.

Scott Grundy, a physician at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center who chaired the guidelines committee, says the new recommendations urge people in this gray area to get a special kind of CT scan that looks for calcium deposits in heart arteries, a signal for clogs that could cause trouble.

"If you have no coronary calcium, then your chances of having a heart attack over the next 10 years are very low," he says.

And it turns out that perhaps 40 percent of people who are identified as candidates based on their risk factors such as cholesterol levels and age actually have clear heart arteries, Grundy says. "That means a lot of people are going to be treated unnecessarily if they don't have the calcium scan."

But that test, which Grundy says is available for about $100, is controversial among some physicians. They worry that it will trigger overtreatment of conditions that the scan will pick up, but which don't require urgent attention.

And it is only useful as a screening test for people who haven't had heart disease. Statins are routinely prescribed for people who have already had a heart attack or stroke. For those patients (who weren't included in the Swiss analysis), the benefits are so clear "it's almost mandatory to be on a statin drug," Grundy says.

He disagrees with a lot of the particulars in the Swiss study. So does cardiologist Roger Blumenthal, who heads the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at Johns Hopkins. "The harms [analyzed in the paper] can be dealt with by a smart clinician," he says.

Yet both the new guidelines and the latest study agree on an important point: Doctors and patients should spend more time reviewing the benefits and risks of statins, with attention paid to each person's particular circumstances.

You can contact NPR science correspondent Richard Harris at rharris@npr.org.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does a service by highlighting the harms of statins. It explains: “The most common side effect of these drugs is muscle pain, which usually goes away if patients stop taking the medicines. People taking statins are also at a higher risk of developing diabetes, which is harder to reverse.”
It also mentions the potential for overtreatment with the use of coronary calcium scans.
However, we wish it had included absolute numbers. The story says harms are “uncommon,” but provides no data to back that up.
Rates of adverse effects with statins have been measured at 1 to 10%, which makes them “common” in the definition of the European Medicines Agency. Also noteworthy is that some contend that adverse effects of statins have not been reliably reported.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Men who have a certain genetic variations that put them at higher risk of prostate cancer may benefit from regular screening for the disease, a study by British scientists found Friday.

The findings suggest that by narrowing the focus of prostate cancer screening to those whose genes put them at most risk, doctors would catch more cancers early as well as reducing the potential for costly and damaging overdiagnosis.

“Although these are early results, it appears that (prostate cancer) screening is reasonably accurate at predicting potentially aggressive prostate cancer among men at higher risk of the disease due to a genetic predisposition,” said Ros Eeles, who led a research team from Britain’s Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) and Royal Marsden hospital.

The study found that the predictive value of screening these men — expressed as the number of cancers detected relative to the number of tissue samples taken — was 48 percent, far higher than the 24 percent achieved in population-wide screening.

Screening for prostate cancer is controversial because the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) tests used cannot differentiate between men with aggressive cancer and men who would never have symptoms or need treatment, and this can lead to overdiagnosis.

A study in the United States last year found that routine prostate cancer screening had resulted in more than a million being diagnosed with tumors who might otherwise have suffered no ill effects from them.

The ICR-led study is aiming to find out whether screening men who have genetic variants that increase their prostate cancer risk could lead to earlier diagnosis. It aims to screen 1,700 men for five years, but results from the first 300 men were published in the British Journal of Urology International.

Genetic factors that increase prostate cancer risk include inheritable variations in genes known as BRCA1 and BRCA2.

Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men worldwide and kills 254,000 men a year. U.S. doctors routinely recommend PSA screening in men over 50 on the assumption that early diagnosis and treatment is better than doing nothing.

But fears about overdiagnosis, which can lead to treatments such as surgery, radiation or hormone therapy that can cause serious side-effects such as impotence and incontinence, have so far dissuaded many European countries from nationwide screening.

The men in this study — 205 with confirmed BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations and 95 who had tested negative for the mutations — were all offered annual PSA blood testing, and 24 who had raised PSA levels were given a follow-up biopsy.

Eeles said the findings added to the increasing evidence that BRCA gene variation carriers develop more aggressive disease and supported the idea that men with genetic risks should be routinely screened for prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions several important potential drawbacks of PSA screening and correctly points out that many European countries do not routinely screen for prostate cancer. It also includes some important context, noting "a study in the United States last year found that routine prostate cancer screening had resulted in more than a million being diagnosed with tumors who might otherwise have suffered no ill effects from them."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Australian researchers have completed the world's first randomised control trial (RCT) assessing the efficacy and safety of ketamine as a treatment for depression in elderly patients.

The results, published in the latest American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, provide preliminary evidence suggesting ketamine's effectiveness as an antidepressant when delivered in repeated intravenous doses.

Led by a team of researchers from UNSW Sydney and Black Dog Institute, the trial tested different doses of ketamine amongst 16 older age participants (aged over 60 years) who had treatment-resistant depression, administered at Wesley Hospital.

"These findings take us a big step forward as we begin to fully understand the potential and limitations of ketamine's antidepressant qualities," said lead author UNSW Professor Colleen Loo, who is based at Black Dog Institute.

"Not only was ketamine well-tolerated by participants, with none experiencing severe or problematic side effects, but giving the treatment by a simple subcutaneous injection (a small injection under the skin) was also shown to be an acceptable method for administering the drug in a safe and effective way."

Participants received increasing doses of ketamine over a period of five weeks, with doses optimised for each individual participant using a new dose-titration approach developed by Professor Loo's Sydney research team and collaborators.

As part of the double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, an active control treatment which causes sedation similar to ketamine, was used to substitute for one of the treatment sessions. Researchers monitored for mood and other side-effects after each treatment session.

Following the RCT, participants also received 12 ketamine treatments in an open-label phase to investigate the effectiveness of multiple doses of ketamine.

By the six-month follow up, 43 percent of participants (7 of 14) who completed the RCT had remitted, with five remitting at amounts below the commonly-used dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Repeated treatments also resulted in a higher likelihood of remission or a longer time to relapse, with an overall response and remission rate of 68.8 percent for the patients receiving ketamine treatment.

"Elderly patients with severe depression face additional barriers when seeking treatment for the condition. Many medications may cause more side effects or have lower efficacy as the brain ages," said co-author Dr Duncan George from UNSW Sydney. "Older people are also more likely to have co-morbidities like neurodegenerative disorders and chronic pain, which can cause further complications due to ketamine's reported side effects. "Our results indicate a dose-titration method may be particularly useful for older patients, as the best dose was selected for each individual person to maximise ketamine's benefits while minimising its adverse side effects."

Previous studies into ketamine treatments for older people with depression - which are limited to just five case reports - show mixed success, with findings limited by small sample sizes.

More broadly, little is known about ketamine's potential side effects at different doses, which include cognitive and dissociative effects, elevated blood pressure and heart rate, liver inflammation and urinary problems.

"These results are a promising early piece of the puzzle, but the risks of ketamine use are still not wholly understood. Future studies with greater sample sizes are needed to formally assess ketamine's side effects, such as its impact on liver function," Professor Loo added.

The study was a collaboration between UNSW Sydney, Black Dog Institute, Royal North Shore Hospital, The Wesley Hospital Kogarah, the Dementia Collaborative Research Centre and the University of Otago.

Professor Loo will build on these promising results as part of her current work directing the world's largest trial of ketamine to treat depression, which is now recruiting participants. For more information about the study contact ket.study@unsw.edu.au or call 02 9382 9509.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Although the release doesn’t say how widespread side effects were in the study population, it does mention some of the side effects and it’s clear to readers that ketamine is not a trouble-free drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An international team of researchers has developed a simple laboratory score that is safer and faster at diagnosing patients who visit the emergency department with heart attack symptoms. The score, published in CMAJ (Canadian Medical Association Journal), can also identify patients at risk of subsequent heart issues after discharge.

"We have developed a simple lab score that is superior to using cardiac troponin alone for the identification of patients at low and high risk for heart attack or death at emergency department presentation," say Dr. Peter Kavsak, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario. According to Professor Andrew Worster, also from McMaster University, "This lab score may reduce both the number of blood tests and time spent in the emergency department for chest pain patients."

Patients with chest pain symptoms require multiple blood tests over several hours before a diagnosis is reached. Previous studies using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin alone to rule out and rule in heart attacks have not consistently demonstrated sufficient safety to use in clinical practice.

In this international study, researchers from Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Germany combined common laboratory blood tests available at many hospitals around the world to create a single laboratory score, or clinical chemistry score, to diagnose heart attack. These blood tests are part of the World Health Organization's list of essential in vitro diagnostics tests for health care facilities with clinical laboratories.

The researchers validated the clinical chemistry score as a predictor of heart attack or death within 30 days using data on 4245 patients from emergency department studies in the four countries. Within one month of the emergency department visits, 727 heart attacks or death in patients occurred. A negative (or low-risk) clinical chemistry score at emergency department presentation missed only one of these events compared with up to 25 missed heart attacks/death when using a high-sensitivity cardiac troponin test alone. A positive (or high-risk) clinical chemistry score also identified about 75% of patients at high risk of heart attack or death when positive compared with a low of 40% detected when the high-sensitivity cardiac troponin test alone was positive. The clinical chemistry score worked equally well in men and women.

The authors suggest the score can be useful for standardizing diagnoses and improving safety.

"Adoption of the clinical chemistry score algorithm would standardize reporting of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin test results, how the tests are interpreted in the normal range, and represent an option less susceptible to both analytical and preanalytical errors. This could result in the safest laboratory approach for physicians to use at presentation in the emergency department," says Dr. Kavsak.

The Canadian Institutes of Health Research funded the study with reagent support from Abbott Laboratories and Roche Diagnostics.

"Clinical chemistry score versus high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I and T tests alone to identify patients at low or high risk for myocardial infarction or death at presentation to the emergency department" is published August 20, 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The text is specific about the number of heart attacks that would have been missed by the scoring system (1 out of 727) in this population of 4000+ patients who went to emergency rooms with possible symptoms.
This indicates a high sensitivity, which is good because it means that the test is not missing people likely to have a heart attack or die within 30 days.  However, the other potential harm from a diagnostic test is from false positive results — which could lead to unnecessary hospitalizations and treatments.  This statistic is not addressed in the release, though it is presented in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 13, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Acupuncture may be an effective way to treat older children struggling with a certain form of lazy eye, new research from China suggests, although experts say more studies are needed.

Lazy eye (amblyopia) is essentially a state of miscommunication between the brain and the eyes, resulting in the favoring of one eye over the other, according to the National Eye Institute.

The study authors noted that anywhere from less than 1 percent to 5 percent of people worldwide are affected with the condition. Of those, between one third and one half have a type of lazy eye known as anisometropia, which is caused by a difference in the degree of nearsightedness or farsightedness between the two eyes.

Standard treatment for children involves eyeglasses or contact lens designed to correct focus issues. However, while this approach is often successful in younger children (between the ages of 3 and 7), it is successful among only about a third of older children (between the ages of 7 and 12).

For the latter group, doctors will often place a patch over the "good" eye temporarily in addition to eyeglasses, and treatment success is typically achieved in two-thirds of cases.

Children, however, often have trouble adhering to patch therapy, the treatment can bring emotional issues for some and a reverse form of lazy eye can also take root, the researchers said.

Study author Dr. Dennis S.C. Lam, from the department of ophthalmology and visual sciences and Institute of Chinese Medicine at the Joint Shantou International Eye Center of Shantou University and Chinese University of Hong Kong, and his colleagues report their observations in the December issue of the Archives of Ophthalmology.

In the search for a better option than patch therapy, Lam and his associates set out to explore the potential benefits of acupuncture, noting that it has been used to treat dry eye and myopia.

Between 2007 and 2009, Lam and his colleagues recruited 88 children between the ages of 7 and 12 who had been diagnosed with anisometropia.

About half the children were treated five times a week with acupuncture, targeting five specific acupuncture needle insertion points (located at the top of the head and the eyebrow region, as well as the legs and hands). The other half were given two hours a day of patch therapy, combined with a minimum of one hour per day of near-vision exercises such as reading.

After about four months of treatment, the research team found that overall visual acuity improved markedly more among the acupuncture group relative to the patch group. In fact, they noted that while lazy eye was successfully treated in nearly 42 percent of the acupuncture patients, that figure dropped to less than 17 percent among the patch patients.

Neither treatment prompted significant side effects, the authors said.

The team nonetheless pointed out that their study's tracking period was relatively short, and that acupuncture is a complicated system that may lend itself to different success rates, depending on the skills of the particular acupuncturist.

And while theorizing that the apparent success of this alternative approach may have something to do with stimulating blood flow, retinal nerve growth and visual cortex activity, the authors acknowledged that the exact mechanism by which it works remains poorly understood.

Dr. Richard Bensinger, a Seattle-based ophthalmologist and spokesman for the American Academy of Ophthalmology, said that the finding is "certainly suggestive and worth following up."

"This is kind of cool," he said. "But I will say that I don't know of any study looking at acupuncture and vision. There are studies based on symptomatic things such as pain, and I think there's pretty good evidence that it does have benefit in that respect. But for vision therapy this is the first I've heard of it, and I don't know that anyone has ever tried this before. So this is like a teaser."

"Of course people in those parts of the country, like where I live, where there's fairly wide acceptance of alternative medicine might receive this type of treatment better than others," Bensinger cautioned. "And no question patients will gravitate towards treatments that are covered by their insurance even if it's not the best treatment. And as an alternative approach, this may not be covered."

"But if it works," he added, "people will certainly be excited -- although it certainly needs further testing and further studies to decide if it's really beneficial or not."

For his part, Dr. Stanley Chang, chairman of the ophthalmology department at Columbia University in New York City, did not seem to hold out much promise for acupuncture's potential as an alternative lazy eye therapy.

"Acupuncture I think definitely works for pain amelioration, but I'm not sure it works for some of these other things," he cautioned. "They've tried it for the treatment of myopia and glaucoma, without much success. And so although there haven't been any really good trials comparing acupuncture with conventional therapies, my guess is that it's probably not going to do much for the treatment of lazy eye."

"However, I think it's worth considering or trying," Chang added, "because nothing else seems to work very well for patients of that age, including patch therapy. But what will need is a very carefully controlled study that accounts for all the variables that might have an impact on the outcome of this approach."

For more on amblyopia, visit the National Eye Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that neither treatment produced significant side effects in the study, which is accurate. It also goes into some detail about the potential adverse effects reported previously with patch treatment, but it doesn’t mention any of the drawbacks of acupuncture that patients might encounter outside of a study. Notably, the frequent treatments required by the study protocol might require taking children out of school and cause disruption to their education as well as the parent’s employment. The researchers were able to avoid this by scheduling all appointments after school, but parents outside of a study might not have this much flexibility. We’ll call this a satisfactory, but more detail would have been useful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: Lumpectomy plus radiation was associated with a small clinical benefit in reduced risk of breast cancer death compared with lumpectomy or mastectomy alone in women with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), a noninvasive early form of breast cancer.

Why The Research Is Interesting: Patients with DCIS are often treated with radiation after lumpectomy, although it has remained unclear whether this can reduce the risk of dying from breast cancer.

Who and When: More than 140,000 U.S. women who had DCIS between 1998 and 2014; this study compared lumpectomy plus radiation vs. lumpectomy alone, lumpectomy vs. mastectomy, and lumpectomy plus radiation vs. mastectomy

What (Study Measures and Outcomes): Use of radiation and/or extent of surgery (exposures); breast cancer mortality rates within 15 years (outcomes)

How (Study Design): This was an observational study. Researchers were not intervening for purposes of the study and cannot control all the natural differences that could explain the study findings.

Authors: Steven A. Narod, M.D., of Women's College Research Institute, in Ontario, Canada, and co-authors

Results: A small improvement in breast cancer survival was associated with radiation plus lumpectomy for DCIS. The absolute risk reduction was 0.27 percent, making it necessary to treat 370 women to save one life. Patients who had lumpectomy plus radiation had more local recurrences than the mastectomy patients but had fewer deaths.

Study Limitations: Some data were missing; investigators didn't have information on tamoxifen use; treatments in the study population weren't randomly assigned; and the possibility remains that the decision to undergo radiotherapy was associated with other favorable prognostic factors.

Related Material: The invited commentary, "Systemic Effects of Radiotherapy in Ductal Carcinoma In Situ," by Mira Goldberg, M.D., and Timothy J. Whelan, B.M., B.Ch., of McMaster University, Ontario, Canada, also is available on the For The Media website.

To Learn More: The full study is available on the For The Media website.

The article contains conflict of interest disclosures. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Links will be live at the embargo time http://jamanetwork.

About JAMA Network Open: JAMA Network Open is the new online-only open access general medical journal from the JAMA Network. Every Friday, the journal publishes peer-reviewed clinical research and commentary in more than 40 medical and health subject areas. Every article is free online from the day of publication.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release briefly discusses harms. The release says patients who received radiation and lumpectomy had more “local” recurrences of the cancer, but their overall survival was modestly better than patients who did not have radiation (a 0.27% reduction over 15 years).
The release should have given some mention to the harms of radiation treatment, particularly since the potential benefit of radiotherapy was very small.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 7, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Feeding children lots of fatty, sugary and processed foods may lower their IQ, while a diet rich in vitamins and nutrients appears to boost it, British researchers say.

This is particularly true during the first three years of life when the brain is developing rapidly, the study authors explained. They speculate that good nutrition may promote brain growth and cognitive development.

"We have found some evidence to suggest that a diet associated with increasing consumption of foods that are high in fat, sugar and processed foods in early childhood is associated with small reductions in IQ in later childhood," said lead researcher Kate Northstone, a research fellow in the department of social medicine at the University of Bristol.

A more health-conscious diet was associated with small increases in IQ, she said.

Children should be encouraged to eat healthy foods from an early age, she said. "We know this is important for physical growth and development, but it may also be important for mental ability," she added.

For the study, published online Feb. 7 in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Northstone's team collected data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children on 3,966 children born in 1991 and 1992.

The children's parents had answered questions about their kids' diets at age 3, 4, 7 and 8.5 years. The children's IQs were measured using the standard Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children when they were 8.5 years old.

The researchers identified three basic diets: "processed," crammed with fats, sugar and convenience foods; a "traditional" diet high in meats and vegetables; and a "health conscious" diet with lots of fruit, vegetables, salads, fish, rice and pasta.

Children who ate a diet high in processed foods at age 3 had a lower IQ at 8.5 years than kids with a healthy diet. For every one point increase in processed foods consumption, they lost 1.67 points in IQ. Conversely, every one point increase in healthy eating translated into a 1.2 point increase in IQ, the researchers found.

The key seemed to be the diet at age 3, since diet at 4 and 7 seemed to have no effect on IQ, the research team noted. However, to truly understand the effect of diet on children's intelligence, further studies are needed, they said.

Commenting on the study, Samantha Heller, a dietitian, nutritionist and exercise physiologist in Fairfield, Conn., said that "most of us do not realize that the foods we eat have direct consequences on brain growth, function and performance."

When a child's diet consists primarily of high-calorie foods that are low in the nutrients they need (such as healthy fats, vitamins and minerals), their brains don't get the compounds necessary to develop and function properly, Heller said. "This can have a series of deleterious effects, including decreased cognitive ability, poor behavior and social skills," she said.

"Fast and junk food seem like an easy and affordable option for busy parents, but defaulting to high-fat, high-sugar, high-calorie foods is putting their children's health and future at risk," Heller said.

Cooking easy, healthy meals for the family will give "children's brains a boost in essential nutrients needed for healthy development and improved cognitive skills," she added.

For more information on healthful eating for kids, visit the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: In a sense, this story is all about the potential developmental harms of a high-calorie, nutrient poor diet.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Still, the findings could help smooth the way for regulatory approval, wider use of the drugs by doctors and possibly reimbursement by insurers.

The drugs, evolocumab from Amgen and alirocumab from Sanofi and Regeneron, inhibit a protein in the body called PCSK9 that helps regulate cholesterol. In the studies detailed on Sunday, both drugs reduced the bad cholesterol by about 60 percent, to about 50 milligrams per deciliter from about 120 at the start of the studies. In many cases such big reductions were achieved even though the patients were already taking statins.

Both drugs could win approval from the Food and Drug Administration by this summer. Analysts say the drugs will have billions of dollars in annual sales and will be taken by millions of people who cannot lower their cholesterol enough using statins alone or cannot tolerate statins. (However, the PCSK9 drugs are taken by injection every two weeks or four weeks, which could deter some users.)

Statins reduce cardiovascular risk and scientists believe it is because they decrease low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, the so-called bad cholesterol. But merely looking at cholesterol levels can be misleading. The drug niacin did not protect against heart attacks and strokes even though it raised so-called good cholesterol and modestly lowered bad cholesterol.

Insurers in particular might demand proof that the PCSK9 drugs stave off heart attacks, strokes, deaths from coronary disease and procedures to open arteries before agreeing to pay for them for many patients. Executives at CVS Health, a leading pharmacy benefits manager, recently said that PCSK9 inhibitors might cost $7,000 to $12,000 a year and would strain health care budgets because so many people might use them.

“Managed care pharmacy, indeed the health care system, has never seen a challenge like this to our resilience in absorbing costs,” they wrote in the Health Affairs blog.

Whether the results from these two small studies will be persuasive enough remains to be seen.

The study of Amgen’s evolocumab involved 4,465 patients with various degrees of risk, two-thirds of whom were randomly chosen to get the drug in addition to the medication they were already taking. After one year, 0.95 percent of those in the group that received the drug had suffered a heart attack, stroke or other cardiovascular problem, compared with 2.18 percent in the group that did not take the drug. By a measure known as the hazard ratio, the risk of cardiovascular events was reduced by 53 percent.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article mentioned the drugs could cause memory problems and that long-term safety must still be assessed. The story would have been stronger if it had mentioned the actual rates of memory problems found in the studies. Some mention of the side effects seen with monoclonal antibodies used for other purposes would also have been useful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“These people are worried about lung cancer, and now there is an opportunity to offer them something,” said Dr. Mary Reid, an associate professor of oncology at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo.

But health officials involved in the study refused to endorse widespread screening of current or former smokers, saying more analysis of the study’s results is needed to further identify who benefited most. Such an analysis is months away. And they pointed out that the study offers no reassurance about the safety of smoking or the advisability of CT scans for younger smokers or nonsmokers.

“No one should come away from this thinking that it’s now safe to continue to smoke,” said Dr. Harold E. Varmus, director of the National Cancer Institute.

Patients wishing to get a CT lung screen will most likely have to pay the roughly $300 charge themselves, since few insurers pay for such scans unless an illness is suspected. The federal Medicare program will soon reconsider paying for such screens, a Medicare official said.

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, was conducted by the American College of Radiology Imaging Network and the cancer institute. It involved more than 53,000 people ages 55 to 74 who had smoked at least 30 pack-years — one pack a day for 30 years or two packs a day for 15 years. Ex-smokers who had quit within the previous 15 years were included in the group.

Each was given either a standard chest X-ray or a low-dose CT scan at the start of the trial and then twice more over the next two years. Participants were followed for up to five years. There were 354 lung cancer deaths among those who received CT scans and 442 among those who got X-rays. The $250 million study, which began in 2002, was paid for by the cancer institute and carried out at 33 sites.

Its preliminary results were announced days after an independent monitoring board determined that the benefits of CT scans were strong enough to stop the trial. The study will be published in the coming months.

The study found that for every 300 people who were screened, one person lived who would otherwise have died during the study. But one-quarter of those given CT scans were found to have anomalies, nearly all of which were benign. These false signals generally led to more worry, more CT scans and sometimes to lung biopsies and thoracic surgery.

“There are economic, medical and psychological consequences of finding these abnormalities,” Dr. Varmus said.

Deaths due to all causes declined by 7 percent among study participants who received CT scans, suggesting the tests helped to detect other life-threatening diseases besides lung cancer.

Dr. Claudia Henschke, a clinical professor of radiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center and a longtime advocate for use of CT to screen for lung cancer, said the study was likely to have underestimated the benefits of CT scans because participants were screened only three times. Had the screening continued for 10 years, as many as 80 percent of lung cancer deaths could have been averted, she said. Dr. Henschke’s research has been controversial because of its statistical methods and its financing, which included money from a tobacco company. She earns royalties from makers of CT machines.

“What we also have found is that low-dose CT scan gives information on cardiovascular disease, emphysema” and other pulmonary diseases, Dr. Henschke said. “Those are the three big killers of older people. There is just tremendous potential.”

But Dr. Edward F. Patz Jr., professor of radiology at Duke who helped devise the study, said he was far from convinced that a thorough analysis would show that widespread CT screening would prove beneficial in preventing most lung cancer deaths. Dr. Patz said that the biology of lung cancer has long suggested that the size of cancerous lung tumors tells little about the stage of the disease.

“If we look at this study carefully, we may suggest that there is some benefit in high-risk individuals, but I’m not there yet,” Dr. Patz said.

Since 46 million people in the United States smoke and tens of millions more once smoked, a widespread screening program could cost billions annually. Any further refinement of those most at risk could reduce those costs. Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms. Little is known about how the cumulative risks of years of such scans would balance the benefits.

The study’s results could have both legal and political consequences. Suits against tobacco companies have sought to force cigarette makers to pay for annual CT screens of former smokers. But with the science uncertain, those claims have so far been rebuffed. Congress has diverted some research money to create pilot CT lung screening programs, diversions that may gain momentum now.

Some Obama administration officials argued during the debate on the health care law that patients’ health was often harmed by getting too many tests and procedures that, if reduced, would improve health while reducing costs. This study suggests that, at least in lung cancer, spending more on tests saves lives.

Laurie Fenton, president of the Lung Cancer Alliance, which has lobbied for widespread CT lung screening, said the debate about the advisability of such scans is now over.

“The challenge now shifts from proving the efficacy of the method to developing the proper quality standards, infrastructure and guidelines to bring this needed benefit to those at high risk for the disease — now,” Ms. Fenton said.

But Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said no one should rush out and get a CT scan yet because further analysis will better define whom the screening helped.

“Very soon we’ll have an answer about who should be screened and how frequently,” Dr. Bach said, “but we don’t have that answer today.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


The final paragraph of the story points out that there is a risk of harms from the radiation used for the CT scans and that the scans cause false positives and may lead to tests and treatments done on people who actually don’t have dangerous tumors. We wish some attempt had been made to quantify these harms – even if it meant drawing from past research – but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Sept. 30, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- It's a perfect case of the enemy of my enemy is my friend.

A potentially dangerous bacteria appears to target malignant cells and could provide a new means of fighting cancer, a small, preliminary study reports.

The bacteria, Clostridium novyi-NT, can cause gas gangrene and sepsis if infection is allowed to run amok in a wound.

But when injected into a tumor, Clostridium novyi-NT appears to both attack the cancer directly and encourage the body's immune response against the cancer cells, said lead researcher Dr. Filip Janku. He is an associate professor at the department of investigational cancer therapeutics at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston.

"Patients only had one week of exposure to the bacteria, but even with that limited exposure we saw quite interesting and, in some patients, clinically meaningful activity," Janku said.

Clostridium novyi has been linked to human illness. In 2000, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that a handful of drug users in the United Kingdom fell ill or died after their injection sites became infected with the bacteria.

The strain used in this clinical trial, Clostridium novyi-NT, had been weakened to prevent it from producing its toxin, which can be lethal in humans, Janku said. The NT stands for "non-toxic."

Clostridium novyi flourishes in low-oxygen environments. Researchers thought this might make the bacteria a prime candidate for cancer fighting, by keeping the infection focused on the tumor site.

"Normal tissues, even if they are low on oxygen, they always have enough oxygen to not allow this bacteria to germinate and proliferate," Janku explained. "Cancerous tissue is low in oxygen, most often in the center of the cancers."

To test whether the bacteria could help fight cancer, researchers injected the tumors of 24 patients with a single dose of Clostridium novyi-NT, ranging from 10,000 to 3 million spores.

Fifteen of the patients had sarcoma, two patients had melanoma, and seven had a variety of cancers, the researchers said.

The scientists expected Clostridium novyi-NT to help fight the tumor in two ways.

First, the bacterial infection itself could cause direct destruction of the tumor cells, Janku said.

"If that happens, it actually helps to increase the presence of tumor-specific antigens, which are proteins that make a tumor more obvious to the immune system," Janku said. "It can prime the immune system to attack the cancer."

The bacteria also could activate the immune system to fight the cancer even if the infection didn't kill off tumor cells, Janku added.

Patients in this clinical trial were left with the bacterial infection for one week, and then everyone was given antibiotics to kill off the Clostridium novyi-NT, Janku said.

"Clostridium is actually quite susceptible to antibiotics," Janku noted.

The bacteria germinated in the cancers of 11 out of the 24 patients, with tumor cells dying off as a result.

Tumor shrinkage of greater than 10 percent was observed in 23 percent of patients. However, Janku said this could be an underestimate since the infection causes surrounding tissue to become inflamed, making the lesion appear larger than it actually is.

Following bacterial therapy, cancer stabilized in 21 patients. When both injected and uninjected lesions were included, the stable disease rate was 86 percent, the researchers reported.

The potential for Clostridium novyi-NT to prompt an immune response against cancer is intriguing, said Sacha Gnjatic, who is associate director of the Human Immune Monitoring Center at Mount Sinai in New York City.

"That's where the promise of this type of therapy lies. You would expect that the injected lesion would have some type of response because you're disrupting the tumor cells," Gnjatic said. "What would be interesting is if this could prime an immune response that would eventually also take care of the non-injected tumors. That's the holy grail of immunotherapy."

Janku said he's particularly excited by the ability of the bacteria to battle sarcomas, which are cancers that occur in bone, muscle and soft tissues.

"Classic immunotherapy which is now approved or being heavily investigated doesn't seem to be working for a majority of sarcomas," Janku explained.

Researchers have moved on to the next phase, in which patients taking the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab (Keytruda) will also be treated with a single injection of Clostridium novyi-NT, Janku said. The researchers suspect the two therapies used in combination will create a strong immune response against cancers.

However, they will have to keep an eye on potential side effects from Clostridium novyi-NT, Janku added.

Two patients treated with the heaviest dose of 3 million spores of Clostridium novyi-NT fell ill with sepsis and/or gas gangrene, leading researchers to set the maximum tolerated dose at 1 million spores.

Researchers also found the bacteria in the bloodstream of a couple of patients, meaning that the infection will need to be carefully tracked, Janku said.

"That didn't result in clostridium seeding anywhere else outside the injected region, but it's a theoretical possibility since we were able to detect it in the blood culture of one or two patients," Janku said.

Patients also could be susceptible to immune response side effects, such as low blood pressure or fever, he added.

The trial results were to be presented Sunday at the International Cancer Immunotherapy Conference, in New York City. The meeting is jointly sponsored by the Cancer Research Institute, the Association for Cancer Immunotherapy, the European Academy of Tumor Immunology, and the American Association for Cancer Research.

Research presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about cancer treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned that two patients in the trial who received the highest doses fell ill with sepsis and gangrene. It also mentioned a need to “keep an eye on potential side effects” in future trials.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A daily vitamin D supplement may help young men enjoy more sick-free days during cold and flu season, a small study suggests.

Vitamin D has been the subject of much research of late, with studies linking low vitamin D levels in the blood to higher risks of type 1 diabetes and severe asthma attacks in children and, in adults, heart disease, certain cancers and depression.

But whether vitamin D is the reason for the excess risks — and whether taking supplements can curb those risks — has yet to be shown.

The body naturally synthesizes vitamin D when the skin is exposed to sunlight. Because rates of vitamin D insufficiency rise during the winter in many parts of the world, researchers have been interested in whether the vitamin might play a role in people’s susceptibility to colds, flu and other respiratory infections.

Some past research has indeed found that people with relatively lower vitamin D levels in their blood tend to have higher rates of respiratory infections than those with higher levels of the vitamin, said Dr. Ilkka Laaksi of the University of Tampere in Finland, the lead researcher on the new study.

Along with that evidence, recent lab research has shown that vitamin D may play an “important role” in the body’s immune defenses against respiratory pathogens, Laaksi wrote in an email to Reuters Health.

“However,” the researcher said, “there is a lack of clinical studies of the effect of vitamin D supplementation for preventing respiratory infections.”

For the current study, Laaksi’s team randomly assigned 164 male military recruits to take either 400 international units (IU) of vitamin D or inactive placebo pills every day for six months — from October to March, covering the months when people’s vitamin D stores typically decline and when respiratory infections typically peak.

At the end of the study, the researchers found no clear difference between the two groups in the average number of days missed from duty due to a respiratory infection — which included bronchitis, sinus infections, pneumonia, ear infections and sore throat.

On average, men who took vitamin D missed about two days from duty because of a respiratory infection, compared with three days in the placebo group. That difference was not significant in statistical terms.

However, men in the vitamin D group were more likely to have no days missed from work due to a respiratory illness.

Overall, 51 percent remained “healthy” throughout the six-month study, versus 36 percent of the placebo group, the researchers report.

The findings, Laaksi said, offer “some evidence” of a benefit from vitamin D against respiratory infections.

Still, the extent of the benefit was not clear. While recruits in the vitamin group were more likely to have no days missed from duty, they were no less likely to report having cold-like symptoms at some point during the study period.

Moreover, recent studies on the usefulness of vitamin D for warding off respiratory ills have come to conflicting conclusions.

A study of Japanese schoolchildren published earlier this year found that those given 1,200 IU of vitamin D each day during cold and flu season were less likely to contract influenza A. Of 167 children given the supplement, 18 developed the flu, compared with 31 of 167 children given placebo pills.

On the other hand, a recent study of 162 adults found that those who took 2,000 IU of vitamin D everyday for 12 weeks were no less likely to develop respiratory infections than those given placebo pills.

Laaksi said that larger clinical trials looking at different doses of vitamin D are still needed before the vitamin can be recommended for curbing the risk of respiratory infections.

In the U.S., health officials recommend that adults up to the age of 50 get 200 IU of vitamin D each day, while older adults should get 400 to 600 IU. The upper limit is currently set at 2,000 IU per day; higher intakes may raise the risks of side effects.

Symptoms of vitamin D toxicity are often vague and include nausea, vomiting, constipation, poor appetite and weight loss. Excessive vitamin D in the blood can also raise blood pressure or trigger heart rhythm abnormalities.

Some researchers believe that people need more vitamin D than is currently recommended, and that intakes above 2,000 IU per day are safe. However, exactly what the optimal vitamin D intake might be remains under debate.

Food sources of vitamin D include milk, breakfast cereals and orange juice fortified with vitamin D, as well as some fatty fish, like salmon and mackerel. Experts generally recommend vitamin pills for people who do not get enough of the vitamin from food.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story cautions that vitamin D can cause problems including nausea, vomiting, constipation, poor appetite, weight loss and even higher blood pressure or heart rhythm abnormalities.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Both tests would be less expensive than colonoscopy, and potentially more effective. Compliance with colonoscopy is low, since people don’t want to have one, and the overall cost per detection is high because most people are healthy, and even colonoscopy misses many tumors in the upper part of the intestine.

Exact Sciences now plans to enlist several thousand patients in a prospective trial designed to win the Food and Drug Administration’s approval. The trial will be completed in 2012 and the test, if approved, should be available shortly thereafter.

“If widely used, and regularly, this test really does have the opportunity to eliminate colon cancer,” said Dr. David A. Ahlquist, a colon cancer expert at the Mayo Clinic and an adviser to Exact Sciences.

The practical value of the tests depends critically on details like their sensitivity, meaning the proportion of tumors that are detected, and their specificity, meaning how many of the positive results are in fact false alarms.

Exact Sciences reported in July that its test was highly sensitive and specific when applied directly to cells taken from tumors. But in the real world, the tumor DNA must be detected in stool samples, even though almost all the DNA comes from the bacteria of the gut. Just 0.01 percent of the DNA is human, and most of this is normal DNA, not the altered DNA of tumors.

The company reported Thursday at a meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research that in a trial of 1,100 patients, the test had detected 64 percent of adenomas, or polyps, larger than one centimeter in diameter, and 85 percent of cancers, as judged by the colonoscopies also given to the patients.

Dr. Ahlquist said he was very pleased with the new results, especially the 64 percent detection rate for precancerous polyps, since these are best targets for intervention.

Although such a detection rate sounds far from perfect, it can be effective if the test is given on a regular schedule. “The Pap smear detects only 50 percent of cervical cancers, but applied over time it virtually eliminates the disease,” Dr. Ahlquist said.

The specificity of the Exact Sciences test is 88 percent, meaning that 12 percent of the time the patient will be given a false alarm. This may be acceptable, given that the worst that will happen is that the patient will get an unnecessary colonoscopy.

“With stool tests, you need a 90 percent specificity,” said Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a cancer expert at Johns Hopkins University who is also an adviser to the company. “Exact Sciences has gotten close to that. There’s a lot of hope for getting a stool-based test.”

Promising results for the blood-based tests were reported this week at a meeting in Barcelona, Spain. Epigenomics said its test had a sensitivity of 86 percent and a specificity of 93 percent.

Proponents of each test note possible weaknesses of the other. Dr. Achim Plum, a vice president for Epigenomics, said that 30 to 40 percent of people have small polyps, but less than 10 percent of these ever become cancerous. The colon-based test may pick up too many of these, sending far too many people in for colonoscopy.

“The health economics of such a test make no sense,” he said.

But the blood-based test may have a similar problem, since a positive signal could come from cancers anywhere in the body. If the patient is advised to take a whole body imaging scan, more false positives could be generated “so you end up doing more harm than good,” Dr. Vogelstein said.

Dr. Plum said that Epigenomics did not see its test as being necessarily in competition with the Exact Sciences test, because the blood-based test would be good alternative for people put off by stool testing.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The two tests the Times reported on were done on blood and on stool, which, in theory, should not harm anyone during the screening. But there is potential for harms as a result of screening. The story states that with the Exact Sciences DNA test “12 percent of the time the patient will be given a false alarm.”  And, regarding the Epigenomics blood test, the story states that “more false positives could be generated so you could end up doing more harm than good.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, July 19, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- It's still very early, but scientists say a test based on a patient's saliva might someday help detect Alzheimer's disease.

"Saliva is easily obtained, safe and affordable, and has promising potential for predicting and tracking cognitive decline, but we're in the very early stages of this work and much more research is needed," study author Shraddha Sapkota, a neuroscience graduate student at the University of Alberta in Canada, said in a news release from the Alzheimer's Association.

The study was to be presented Sunday at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference in Washington, D.C. Experts note that studies presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

In the study, Sapkota's team tested the saliva of 22 people with Alzheimer's disease, 25 people with what's known as mild cognitive impairment (a decline in memory and thinking that's sometimes a precursor to dementia), as well as 35 people whose mental skills were normal for their age.

They found that the saliva of people with Alzheimer's had different levels of certain substances compared to the saliva of healthy people or those with mild cognitive impairment.

Experts agreed that the findings held promise, but much more research will be needed.

"This is a very preliminary study with a small number of subjects and the results are far from conclusive," said Dr. Allison Reiss, head of the Inflammation Section at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y.

She believes the current study lacks information on possible confounding factors -- things such as "coexisting illnesses, medications, hydration state, tobacco use and multiple other variables" that could influence what's found in the saliva samples.

"There are many gaps in the evidence," Reiss said. "It is uncertain whether the strength and consistency of the relationship between these metabolites [in saliva] and Alzheimer's risk will be maintained in a large multicenter study."

Still, Dr. Paul Wright, chair of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., said the research "is still in its infancy but very promising."

If a saliva test lives up to its promise, one advantage is "the ease of obtaining a sample," he said.

But that convenience also brings its own problems, Wright added. People might ask for a test even when they don't show any signs of dementia, and "this may result in anxiety and depression if there is a false positive result," he said.

For that reason, "larger studies are needed to corroborate and validate their findings," Wright said.

The U.S. National Institute on Aging has more about Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While it’s hard to imagine harms from spitting in a cup, the story does bring up the possibility that patients might request the test even though they show no signs of being at risk for Alzheimer’s, and as with any tests, the risk of false positives is always present. The story meets our standard here. Another issue that could have been raised pertains to screening for a disease for which we do not have great treatments, and the harm that can occur when one is told they will get Alzheimer’s disease and can’t do much about it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every year, many U.S. women get the grim news that they have breast cancer. In 2013 alone, according to the American Cancer Society, more than 230,000 were given that diagnosis. Each one very likely came as a devastating blow, both to the patient and to her family.

But what if some of these cases are preventable? What if there was a medication that could at least reduce a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer?

The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial published results in 1998 indicating that women who took one of those drugs, tamoxifen, were half as likely to develop breast cancer as similar women who did not take the drug.

Other medications, including raloxifene and a class of drugs called aromatese inhibitors, do much the same thing, though the Food and Drug Administration has not yet approved aromatese inhibitors for this use. Studies estimate that more than 2 million American women at high risk for breast cancer could benefit from taking a preventive drug.

But few women are opting for this protection, which goes by the name chemoprevention. A 2010 study found “exceptionally low” rates of usage.

In part this may be because many doctors are not even discussing this option with their patients. A small 2014 study in the Journal of Women’s Health found that only 13 percent of internal medicine, family medicine and gynecology physicians reported having recommended or prescribed these medications to women who might benefit from them.

The “low uptake of these medications is a missed opportunity,” says Heidi Nelson, a professor of medical informatics and clinical epidemiology at the Oregon Health & Science University in Portland. “Many high-risk women . . . could reduce their risks for invasive cancer by approximately 30 to 50 percent.” On the other hand, these drugs don’t suit everyone, and they are not without risks of their own. Because some of the side effects are serious — such as blood clots in the legs and in the lungs, and, in the case of tamoxifen, uterine cancer — only women who are deemed to be at high risk for the disease should consider them. But there are conflicting views on who meets that “high risk” definition

Chemoprevention should not be confused with chemotherapy. Although both involve taking drugs, chemoprevention medications are taken with the goal of avoiding breast cancer altogether and the subsequent need for chemotherapy later.

And they work on the body differently. Chemotherapy kills off cells, healthy ones as well as cancercous ones. The chemoprevention drugs, by contrast, work by blocking estrogen, a hormone known to promote the growth of cancer cells in breast tissue. Chemoprevention drugs are called SERMs, or selective estrogen receptor modulators, and two have been approved specifically for breast cancer prevention: tamoxifen, which was developed to treat breast cancer after its onset and only later was found to have a preventive benefit, and raloxifene, which was designed to treat osteoporosis.

A 2013 study in the Lancet analyzed data for more than 80,000 women taking tamoxifen or other SERM drugs. The researchers found an overall 38 percent reduction in new cases of breast cancer 10 years after women took these drugs compared with women who took a placebo. The effect was even larger during the first five years of the study.

Investigators working for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent group of scientists and clinicians funded by the government, echoed these results. After looking at multiple trials of tamoxifen and raloxifene, the task force noted that these drugs reduced new cases of breast cancer significantly: from 23 cases per 1,000 women in the control groups to 16 cases per 1,000 women in the treatment groups.

Nelson, one of the lead authors of the analysis, is “confident” that these results show a true benefit. Others are more cautious.

Kenneth Lin, a family physician at Georgetown University who worked on developing the task force’s SERM guidelines, notes that while SERMs may have reduced new cases, they “have not been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality in any study or meta-analysis.” One possible explanation, he says, is that “these drugs are effective at preventing nonlethal cancers rather than the more serious ones.”

Not used enough?

Given that these drugs seem to offer some protection, why are they not in widespread use? Serious side effects is one reason. Beyond blood clots and uterine cancer, other known reactions to the drugs include strokes, cataracts, bone pain, hot flashes, nausea and vaginal dryness.

For some women, the risk of such side effects may be worth taking, depending on their particular odds of developing breast cancer. Those odds can be figured by using a commonly used calculator, often called the Gail model, that estimates a woman’s chances of having breast cancer in a five-year period and over a lifetime.

But this is where it gets more complicated. While many experts agree that women at high risk should consider the medications, they do not agree on what Gail score should trigger that consideration.

The studies that served as the basis for the FDA approval of the drugs, along with recently released guidelines from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), set the threshold at a five-year Gail score of 1.67 percent.

The Preventive Services Task Force, however, recommended a threshold of 3 percent. At that point, the panel said, women “are likely to have more benefit than harm from using tamoxifen or raloxifene.”

ASCO’s lower cutoff worries some experts. “At the 1.67 percent high-risk threshold,” Georgetown’s Lin says, “every woman age 62 and older would be [considered] high-risk.” That might lead to a situation in which millions of women would be encouraged, unnecessarily,to consider this therapy, along with its potential harmful effects.

Kala Visvanathan, the lead author of the ASCO recommendations and a faculty member at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said the cutoffs provide only a rough estimate of risk.

It is important to realize, she adds, that “as the risk increases, the benefits tend to be greater. This is an evolving field, and our goal is to better discern who is at high and low risk of breast cancer and develop a greater range of prevention strategies.”

An individual risk analysis should prompt conversation between doctor and patient about the potential benefits and the risk of the therapy.

Both the ASCO and the task force guidelines recommend such a conversation. “The discussion should include the specific risks and benefits associated with each chemopreventive agent,” according to ASCO.

The task force similarly recommends that “clinicians engage in a shared, informed decision making” with women and said that clinicians “should offer to prescribe” these drugs. Many risk factors increase a woman’s chances of having side effects. These factors include older age, obesity, having a history of a blood clot, history of any cancer, immobility, history of certain autoimmune conditions, history of using estrogen or oral contraceptives and history of some form of heart disease.

Insured women with a high risk for breast cancer and a low risk for side effects who try this therapy will not incur out-of-pocket costs, because this treatment was included in the Affordable Care Act as mandated, no-charge preventive care.

So what should a woman do?

Most important, become familiar with your family history, know your risk factors and discuss them with your primary-care physician. Age and family history cannot be controlled, but lifestyle changes — including eating a healthful diet, exercising, not smoking and not overconsuming alcohol — are eminently doable and can reduce your risk. These basic tenets of leading a healthy lifestyle have been shown to be important factors in breast cancer prevention.

Visvanathan and her colleagues are hopeful that more women will be aware of this option.

“A discussion on the use of preventive agents needs to become part of routine care in women at high risk,” she says. “We should begin to implement preventive strategies based on what we already know.”

Mishori is an associate professor of family medicine at the Georgetown University School of Medicine and director of the Health & Media fellowship. Seliby is a family physician and the Health & Media fellow at Georgetown University School of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We grant a passing grade for the inclusion of statements about increased risk of uterine cancer and other serious side effects. But we have to wish for some discussion of sexual side effects in more common language. Not everyone knows that “hot flashes” and “vaginal dryness” are part of the menopause-like state that chemoprevention creates in some women. We suspect those potential side effects influence women’s decisions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The new study only included national data through 2005, the most recent year they were available, but, said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate and colorectal cancers for the American Cancer Society, “there is no reason to believe it has changed significantly since 2005.” Doctors said there are several reasons screening seems to continue indefinitely as men age. They range from patient demands to malpractice fears to financial incentives and doctors’ own lack of understanding of the risks and benefits of screening.

“There are a lot of pressures,“ said Dr. Gerald L. Andriole, a urologic surgeon at Washington University. “It is not all pure data that is promoting aggressive screening.” Dr. Andriole is directing a National Cancer Institute study of 76,000 men that failed to find a screening benefit after 10 years. The men were aged 55 to 74 when the study began. P.S.A. screening is controversial at any age. Screening proponents say the cancer institute study was flawed and point to a European study of 162,000 men aged 55 to 69 that showed a 20 percent drop in the prostate cancer death rate with screening.

Screening critics say the European study was flawed and add that there is a logical reason it has been hard to show a screening benefit.

They note that prostate cancer is a common cancer, found in most men’s prostates on autopsy, although often the men had no idea they had it. The cancer can be lethal, but it usually grows so slowly that men die with it, not because of it.

For most men, screening only has harms because it leads to biopsies and treatments with unpleasant side effects. And, they say, it might not help cure many deadly prostate cancers because those cancers may have already spread outside the prostate, microscopically seeding other organs, long before a P.S.A. test indicates a possible problem.

A positive P.S.A. test usually leads to a biopsy and then, if cancer is found, to a decision about whether to treat it. Nearly all men opt for treatment, which includes surgery to remove the prostate or radiation to destroy the cancer. Side effects can include impotence and incontinence.

Even younger men should weigh the harms of screening, says Dr. Lisa Schwartz of Dartmouth Medical School. “You also have the potential to wreck their lives,” she said.

One reason treatment is the most common choice is that it is hard to know if a cancer is lethal. Pathologists can distinguish between cancers that look particularly aggressive and those that do not, but there is a real possibility that even if tissue obtained at a biopsy has only less aggressive tumor cells, more aggressive cells might still be lurking in the prostate.

But even with this uncertainty, prostate cancer specialists say, most men who are treated would not have died of prostate cancer, and that is especially true for elderly men, in particular those who are frail and have a limited life expectancy. Yet changing medical practice can be difficult.

“Anytime a practice becomes ingrained, it is difficult to eradicate,” says Dr. Brooks. “It is harder to get rid of an aberrant behavior than to adopt a new one.”

Dr. Andriole said the very concept of not screening is difficult.

“It is the hardest thing in the world not to look for a cancer and not to treat it,” he says. And doctors, he added, have many inducements to screen. They often are afraid they could be sued if they do not screen and a man is found to have a lethal cancer. And there are financial incentives.

“Urologists make money by finding ways to biopsy men and administer treatments,” Dr. Andriole said. Screening, he added, “is promoted by hospitals and industry.” And, he added, “many patients demand it.”

Dr. Brooks of the cancer society says he travels the country and talks to primary care doctors about screening, and has learned that many have misconceptions about the test’s benefits.

“They often don’t appreciate the downside of screening,” Dr. Brooks said, “and they don’t appreciate the delay in benefit.” In addition, Dr. Brooks said, primary care doctors often “overestimate the likelihood that early detection of prostate cancer will lead to survival benefits.”

Added to that, Dr. Brooks said, is the length of time it takes to discuss the pros and cons of screening with patients. Often it is easier to just order the test.

Dr. Bruce Roth, a professor of medicine at Washington University in St. Louis, said that ideally, a doctor should take a man’s overall health into account and not just go by age in ordering P.S.A. tests. But if a man has been screened year after year, it can be hard to suggest he stop because he may not live much longer.

Some men say the cautions just do not apply to them.

J. Allen Wheeler, who is 82 and lives in Portland, Ore., said he had his most recent P.S.A. test in January. His doctor orders it routinely, he says, adding, “In all honestly, it’s part of my physical.” His doctor “just does it — that’s the understanding between us.”

Mr. Wheeler, who says his health is “fairly good,” said he could not foresee a time when he would stop having the test. He would like to know if he has cancer, he says, although he may decide not to be treated.

A 75-year-old Connecticut man said he had the test because he was healthy and wanted to stay that way.

“I think I am going to live to be 100,” he said, asking that his name be withheld to protect his privacy. A recent P.S.A. test found a small cancer, and he does not want to take a chance that it will grow slowly and not cause him problems.

“I am thinking seriously of having the whole thing taken out,” he says. “Hasta la vista.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article does address the harms of overdiagnosis and treatment, though does not provide quantitative data. We’ll give it the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Necator americanus, the New World hookworm, is as long and thin as a vermicelli noodle. It will slip under your skin and travel through the blood to your trachea, where you will swallow it and give it a free ride to your small intestine. Upon arrival, it will open its tiny jaw, dig its teeth into your intestinal wall and begin to drink your blood.

And it could be the key to making millions of people healthier.

Writing in the journal Science Translational Medicine on Wednesday, scientists report that a protein produced by hookworms eases the symptoms of asthma in mice — and could one day be made into a pill to treat humans.

The study is the latest from a surprising field of research into the potentially positive sides of parasites, one of the most maligned groups in the animal kingdom. It began years ago, when a gastroenterology surgeon approached parasitologist Alex Loukas, one of the senior authors on the new study. The doctor wanted to know whether there might be a connection between the dramatic success of deworming programs around the world and the rise of immune system problems like asthma and celiac disease.

“If you look at the data that comes in from immunological studies . . . where you remove the parasites [that's] where you see the highest incidence of autoimmune diseases and allergies,” said Severine Navarro, the paper's lead author and a senior research fellow in Loukas's lab at James Cook University in Australia.

[Dear Science: Why do we get allergies? What's the point of a runny nose?]

Many parasites have evolved the ability to hide from their host's immune systems. When a hookworm crawls into a human, it secretes chemicals that turn off the immune alarm bells and repair the tissue around it. It limits its consumption of blood to a few drops a day and doesn't leave its offspring scattered all over its host's gut. (Instead, it thoughtfully plants them in the host's poop to ensure an orderly exit from the body.) Like a very conscientious cat burglar, the hookworm knows it's best served by not making a mess.

“It's almost symbiotic,” Navarro said, “because in order for it to survive and thrive, it needs its host to be happy and healthy.”

Perhaps the adaptations that help the parasites stay hidden also benefit their host by reining in overactive immune systems.

Thinking that they might be onto something, the researchers found 12 adults with celiac disease — a serious genetic disorder that causes an autoimmune response to gluten — who volunteered to have doctors infect them with a slimy, slithery hookworm. It was important that the participants be adults, because even relatively benign parasites can cause serious problems for children, pregnant women and others. Navarro also warned people with autoimmune disorders that they should not attempt to infect themselves with a hookworm, no matter how debilitating their illness might be. Parasites are no joke.

For the dozen trial participants, the hookworm did improve their tolerance of gluten.

It was an intriguing result, but it's difficult to scale that kind of study. Only so many people are willing to have a parasite put inside them for science. And because of the risks associated with parasites, going around infecting people isn't a viable treatment option.

[Dear Science: How many germs are actually on a toilet seat — and should I care?]

So Navarro and her colleagues isolated the active ingredient in hookworm spit — a compound called AIP-2 — and injected it into asthmatic mice on a daily basis for five days. The animals' asthma systems substantially declined, and their airways became measurably less inflamed. These benefits persisted for 10 weeks after the mice stopped getting the treatment — “I don't even know how much that is in mouse years,” Navarro said.

The researchers also noticed that AIP-2 seemed to have a calming effect on the body's dendritic cells — a part of the immune system responsible for processing threats.

“It is basically rewiring the cells in that tissue into promoting very efficient regulatory T cells,” Navarro said, describing the cells that help modulate the immune system.

This suggests that AIP-2 might also help humans, since dendritic cells have the same function in us that they do in mice. Navarro said their next step is a phase one clinical trial, which would test the effectiveness of an AIP-2 pill.

Should that work, it has the potential to help the 235 million people around the world who suffer from asthma. The compound might also be used to treat other autoimmune disorders, like celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease and multiple sclerosis.

This study would also suggest that humans lost something when we rid ourselves of the microbes and parasites that had evolved alongside us for tens of thousands of years. “There’s a major school of thought that says that these parasites should be encountered early in life to contribute to the education of the immune system,” Navarro said.

She wouldn't go so far as to call parasites good. Deworming campaigns and other public health efforts unquestionably have protected countless people from anemia, malnutrition, developmental disorders and potentially deadly infections.

“But what we need is to find what's good in them,” she said, “and try to restore that missing component.”

The vocal tricks political candidates use to sound like leaders

This lab can re-create the sounds of any space

These monkeys are creating tools thought to be unique to humans — by accident

The tiny genetic tweak that helped snakes lose their legs

The mysterious ‘Planet Nine’ might be causing the whole solar system to wobble
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article provides some explanation of the potential harms of ingesting live hookworms for therapeutic purposes. It warns against readers “trying this at home,” especially in the cases of young children and pregnant women. No statement is made about the potential harms of treatments derived from hookworm spit or similar compounds, but at least most readers probably won’t leave this article with the impression that buying hookworms overseas and self-infecting is a great idea.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Sept. 11, 2015) -- The largest nationwide clinical trial to study high-dose resveratrol long-term in people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease found that a biomarker that declines when the disease progresses was stabilized in people who took the purified form of resveratrol.

Resveratrol is a naturally occurring compound found in foods such as red grapes, raspberries, dark chocolate and some red wines.

The results, published online today in Neurology, "are very interesting," says the study's principal investigator, R. Scott Turner, MD, PhD, director of the Memory Disorders Program at Georgetown University Medical Center. Turner, who treats patients at MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, cautions that the findings cannot be used to recommend resveratrol. "This is a single, small study with findings that call for further research to interpret properly."

The resveratrol clinical trial was a randomized, phase II, placebo-controlled, double blind study in patients with mild to moderate dementia due to Alzheimer's disease. An "investigational new drug" application was required by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to test the pure synthetic (pharmaceutical-grade) resveratrol in the study. It is not available commercially in this form.

The study enrolled 119 participants. The highest dose of resveratrol tested was one gram by mouth twice daily -- equivalent to the amount found in about 1,000 bottles of red wine.

John Bozza, 80, participated in the study. Five years ago, his wife, Diana, began noticing "something wasn't quite right." He was diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment, but only a year later, his condition progressed to mild Alzheimer's.

Diana, whose twin sister died from the same disease, says there are multiple reasons she and John decided to participate in the resveratrol study, and they now know he was assigned to take the active drug.

"I definitely want the medical community to find a cure," she says. "And of course I thought there's always a chance that John could have been helped, and who knows, maybe he was."

Patients, like John, who were treated with increasing doses of resveratrol over 12 months showed little or no change in amyloid-beta40 (Abeta40) levels in blood and cerebrospinal fluid. In contrast, those taking a placebo had a decrease in the levels of Abeta40 compared with their levels at the beginning of the study.

"A decrease in Abeta40 is seen as dementia worsens and Alzheimer's disease progresses; still, we can't conclude from this study that the effects of resveratrol treatment are beneficial," Turner explains. "It does appear that resveratrol was able to penetrate the blood brain barrier, which is an important observation. Resveratrol was measured in both blood and cerebrospinal fluid."

The researchers studied resveratrol because it activates proteins called sirtuins, the same proteins activated by caloric restriction. The biggest risk factor for developing Alzheimer's is aging, and studies with animals found that most age-related diseases--including Alzheimer's--can be prevented or delayed by long-term caloric restriction (consuming two-thirds the normal caloric intake).

Turner says the study also found that resveratrol was safe and well tolerated. The most common side effects experienced by participants were gastrointestinal-related, including nausea and diarrhea. Also, patients taking resveratrol experienced weight loss while those on placebo gained weight.

One outcome in particular was confounding, Turner notes. The researchers obtained brain MRI scans on participants before and after the study, and found that resveratrol-treated patients lost more brain volume than the placebo-treated group.

"We're not sure how to interpret this finding. A similar decrease in brain volume was found with some anti-amyloid immunotherapy trials," Turner adds. A working hypothesis is that the treatments may reduce inflammation (or brain swelling) found with Alzheimer's.

The study, funded by the National Institute on Aging and conducted with the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study, began in 2012 and ended in 2014. GUMC was one of 21 participating medical centers across the U.S.

Further studies, including analysis of frozen blood and cerebrospinal fluid taken from patients, are underway to test possible drug mechanisms.

"Given safety and positive trends toward effectiveness in this phase 2 study, a larger phase 3 study is warranted to test whether resveratrol is effective for individuals with Alzheimer's -- or at risk for Alzheimer's," Turner says.

Resveratrol and similar compounds are being tested in many age-related disorders including cancer, diabetes and neurodegenerative disorders. The study Turner led, however, is the largest, longest and highest dose trial of resveratrol in humans to date.

The research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging (U01 AG010483). Turner reports no personal financial interests related to the study.

Georgetown University Medical Center (GUMC) is an internationally recognized academic medical center with a three-part mission of research, teaching and patient care (through MedStar Health). GUMC's mission is carried out with a strong emphasis on public service and a dedication to the Catholic, Jesuit principle of cura personalis -- or "care of the whole person." The Medical Center includes the School of Medicine and the School of Nursing & Health Studies, both nationally ranked; Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, designated as a comprehensive cancer center by the National Cancer Institute; and the Biomedical Graduate Research Organization, which accounts for the majority of externally funded research at GUMC including a Clinical and Translational Science Award from the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release mentions resveratrol’s most common side effects, which include nausea, diarrhea and weight loss. It would have been helpful to know how commonly these effects occurred. It also lists loss of brain volume as an effect, but states it could interpreted as either a benefit (since it could have reduced inflammation) or harm.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
That, said Dr. Leon of Columbia, who was the trial’s principal investigator, was remarkable. “If we treat five patients, we would save a life in the first year,” he said. “There are very few treatments in all of cardiovascular medicine that could claim that — I can think of heart transplant, and that’s it.”

The results were even more notable, he said, because the early versions of the devices were clunky, stiff and difficult to use.

The F.D.A. approved the method with the Edwards device for patients at extremely high risk in 2011.

That year, Dr. Mack, who was then the president of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and other leaders met with the F.D.A. and Medicare to devise a plan to restrict the device’s spread to places where doctors had sufficient skill to implant them safely. The result was a requirement that a hospital should be doing at least 50 surgical aortic valve replacements a year to have access to the technology. It was written into the Medicare coverage decision, a first for a medical device.

“This technology is expensive and high risk,” Dr. Mack said. The consensus of the group, he said, was that “not every one of the 1,150 cardiac surgery programs or the 1,600 cath labs in the U.S. should be able to do it.”

In June 2014, after another company, Medtronic, did similar studies, its device was approved, too, for high-risk patients.

Former skeptics like Dr. Cohn now recommend the procedure for high-risk patients.

More recent 2015 data from Medtronic indicates that its valve is better than surgery for high-risk patients, resulting in fewer deaths, at least in the first two years. And new data from another large study by Edwards found that patients at intermediate risk did better with the newest version of its valve than would be expected with surgery in the first 30 days, when most deaths occur. “Truly phenomenal early results,” Dr. Herrmann said.

Last Wednesday, the F.D.A. approved the new Edwards valve for high-risk patients; it had been available only in clinical trials. Medtronic also has a new version of its valve that cardiologists expect will soon be approved.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The article mentions several risks of the procedure such as stroke risk and paravalvular leak, but hard numbers are missing. How many patients undergoing TAVR or conventional valve surgery suffer strokes? How common is leakage? All the story provides are generalizations: “There is some question about whether the process of inserting the new valves loosens debris that can cause strokes. One large study found a higher stroke rate in patients receiving valves without surgery compared with those receiving valves with surgery. Another large study did not find this effect. The valves also tend to leak slightly around the edges. New designs are ameliorating this problem, but not solving it.”
We’ll reward the story here for at least mentioning some potential risks. But it is disappointing that such a lengthy report includes only one-sided, glowing patient reviews of TAVR. Why is there not a single account of any patient who suffered a stroke or other serious complication?
To the article’s credit, it also raises the issue of limited evidence about the valves’ durability: “For now, evidence of the procedure’s effectiveness exists only for the sickest patients and there are only five years of data on how long the valves last.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finding a ‘silent killer'

A new strategy involving a simple blood test is a ‘step forward’ in detecting ovarian cancer early

Houston researchers have demonstrated a promising new way to detect ovarian cancer early, a long-sought tool in the battle against the disease known as “the silent killer” because it's usually not diagnosed until it's difficult to treat.

University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center researchers Thursday reported the results of a study that showed a simple blood test, tracked over time and followed by an ultrasound if needed, accurately picks up the disease in early, more curable stages. There is no such screening tool currently in use.

“This is an important step forward in the effort to develop an early detection system for this very lethal disease,” said Dr. Karen Lu, a professor in M.D. Anderson's department of gynecologic oncology and the study's principal investigator. “If the study's findings are confirmed in larger studies, I think this new strategy will be practice-changing.”

The method used in the nine-year study of 3,252 initially healthy postmenopausal women caught five ovarian cancers, three of them invasive. There were only a few false positives.

Lu said the study isn't large enough to justify recommending yet. But she added that an ongoing study in the United Kingdom involving 200,000 women should more definitively determine the test's value. That study is due to show results in 2015.

Ovarian cancer, though rare, is the fourth-leading cancer killer among U.S. women. In 2009, according to the American Cancer Society, it was diagnosed in 21,550 women and killed 14,600. More than 75 percent of women are diagnosed when the disease has already become advanced.

The new strategy involves an existing blood test for a protein discovered in the 1980s by an M.D. Anderson researcher and long used for predicting ovarian cancer recurrence. The protein, known as CA-125, has not been good at identifying new early-stage ovarian cancer because it can become elevated for other reasons, leading to false positives.

In the last decade, hopeful of finding a better test, ovarian cancer researchers have invested much time in the investigation of other biomarkers and technologies. But none proved as accurate as CA-125 after a Harvard scientist developed a mathematical model combining trends in test results and a patient's age.

One expert said the study is an important step but definitely needs follow-up work.

“It's a well-done study about which its authors are appropriately careful in their conclusions,” said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy medical director at the American Cancer Society. “But more research and refining needs to be done before it should be implemented. I can remember when doctors all rushed to adopt the Prostate Specific Antigen test, and we still don't know how to use it.”

Lu acknowledged there are comparisons to the PSA test, which has come under fire in recent years for being better at detecting prostate cancer than improving survival. But Lu said that if the UK study replicates her results, the ovarian cancer test would have the advantage of producing much fewer false positives and being able to spot aggressive cancers.

Study participants were grouped as low, medium or high risk based on how much their CA-125 levels changed over time. Low-risk women repeated the blood test in a year, medium-risk women were referred for an ultrasound, and high-risk women had exploratory surgery.

Over the study's nine years, 85 women had ultrasounds and eight had surgery. Three of the eight turned out to have benign tumors.

Among the study participants was Liz Stegall, who enrolled at the request of the family of Linda Nelson Taylor, a friend who died of ovarian cancer that wasn't diagnosed until it was advanced. Stegall had no family cancer history, but six years into the study last year, she was diagnosed with early stage disease after a blood test showed a spike in her CA-125 levels.

“I would say I'm ecstatic,” said Stegall, 59, of Sugar Land, who finished treatment at the end of December and is cancer free. “This new test came too late to save Linda, but thanks to her and it, I should be alive for some time still. And if I can be saved, so can other people.”

The study results were unveiled Thursday in advance of a major cancer conference next month.

More than half of the women in the study came from Houston. Besides M.D. Anderson, the participating institutions were The Woman's Hospital of Texas, Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, Women and Infants Hospital in Providence, R.I., and John Stoddard Cancer Center in Des Moines, Iowa.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions false positive results and unnecessary exploratory surgery as potential harms of the test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Vitamin D, in combination with calcium, is good for your bones. You should consume modest amounts in your diet, if possible (and for most people that is quite possible), or in the form of supplements if you can't get enough via food and drink.

We know this. But somehow we've arrived at a point when some physicians are prescribing large doses of Vitamin D supplements for their patients in the hope of preventing cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, autoimmune disorders and other maladies, despite a lack of evidence that this works, according to a new commentary in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Other people are loading up on Vitamin D on their own.

"Clinical enthusiasm for supplemental vitamin D has outpaced available evidence on its effectiveness," JoAnn E. Manson and Shari S. Bassuk of the Division of Preventive Medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston wrote last week in the journal's online version.

This practice isn't totally harmless. You should be consuming 600 international units daily if you're between the ages of 1 and 70, and 800 IU each day if you're 71 or older, according to the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academcy of Sciences. (For a chart with a little more detail, see here.) These amounts are enough for 97.5 percent of U.S. and Canadian residents, according to the IOM. (Sunlight stimulates production of vitamin D for people in sunnier climes.)

Go above 4,000 IUs, unless there's a specific reason that you need that amount, and you risk kidney stones, calcification of blood vessels and possibly the very cardiovascular disease you were seeking to prevent, Manson said in an interview.

So how did we get here? "I think there's been a disconnect between the observational studies and the randomized clinical trials to date," Manson said. Over the past 15 years, those studies "have looked promising, and very often they've been reported by the media as suggesting that vitamin D has these benefits. I think there's a general perception that if some is good, more is better. I think it's important to understand that more is not necessarily better."

Manson is leading the most extensive clinical trial of vitamin D use ever, an examination of 25,875 people across the United States to determine whether vitamin D is helpful against cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, depression, infection, autoimmune disorders and other conditions. The results are expected in late 2017 or early 2018.

In the meantime, how much vitamin D should you be consuming? The recommended dietary allowance works out to three or four servings each day of "fortified" foods such as milk, yogurt, soy beverages, orange juice or cereal, plus fatty fish twice a week, according to Manson's commentary.

She also called on physicians not to overscreen patients for vitamin D deficiencies, a practice that can lead to overprescribing it.

"Large trials of other widely used supplements have sometimes found benefits," Manson wrote, "but in other cases--such as with high doses of beta carotene, vitamin E and selenium--have disproven some health claims for these supplements and identified health risks that may not have otherwise been detected."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story tells readers that taking large doses of supplements (above 4,000 IUs) can increase your risk of kidney stones, calcification of blood vessels and cardiovascular disease. Vitamin D toxicity is rare, but given the current enthusiasm for supplementation, it’s good for stories to voice some caution.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New clinical trial results provide evidence that high-dose immunosuppressive therapy followed by transplantation of a person's own blood-forming stem cells can induce sustained remission of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune disease in which the immune system attacks the central nervous system.

Five years after receiving the treatment, called high-dose immunosuppressive therapy and autologous hematopoietic cell transplant (HDIT/HCT), 69 percent of trial participants had survived without experiencing progression of disability, relapse of MS symptoms or new brain lesions. Notably, participants did not take any MS medications after receiving HDIT/HCT. Other studies have indicated that currently available MS drugs have lower success rates.

The trial, called HALT-MS, was sponsored by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), part of the National Institutes of Health, and conducted by the NIAID-funded Immune Tolerance Network (ITN). The researchers published three-year results from the study in December 2014, and the final five-year results appear online Feb. 1 in Neurology, the medical journal of the American Academy of Neurology.

“These extended findings suggest that one-time treatment with HDIT/HCT may be substantially more effective than long-term treatment with the best available medications for people with a certain type of MS,” said NIAID Director Anthony S. Fauci, M.D. “These encouraging results support the development of a large, randomized trial to directly compare HDIT/HCT to standard of care for this often-debilitating disease.”

MS symptoms vary widely and may include motor and speech difficulties, weakness, fatigue and chronic pain. The most common form of MS is relapsing-remitting MS, which is characterized by periods of mild or no symptoms interspersed with symptom flare-ups or relapses. Over years, the disease can worsen and shift to a progressive form.

In HALT-MS, researchers tested the safety, efficacy and durability of HDIT/HCT in 24 volunteers aged 26 to 52 years with relapsing-remitting MS who, despite taking clinically available medications, experienced active inflammation, evidenced by frequent severe relapses, and worsened neurological disability.

The experimental treatment aims to suppress active disease and prevent further disability by removing disease-causing cells and resetting the immune system. During the procedure, doctors collect a participant’s blood-forming stem cells, give the participant high-dose chemotherapy to deplete the immune system, and return the participant’s own stem cells to rebuild the immune system. The treatment carries some risks, and many participants experienced the expected side effects of HDIT/HCT, such as infections. Three participants died during the study; none of the deaths were related to the study treatment.

Five years after HDIT/HCT, most trial participants remained in remission, and their MS had stabilized. In addition, some participants showed improvements, such as recovery of mobility or other physical capabilities.

“Although further evaluation of the benefits and risks of HDIT/HCT is needed, these five-year results suggest the promise of this treatment for inducing long-term, sustained remissions of poor-prognosis relapsing-remitting MS,” said Richard Nash, M.D., of Colorado Blood Cancer Institute and Presbyterian-St. Luke’s Hospital. Dr. Nash served as principal investigator of the HALT-MS study.

“If these findings are confirmed in larger studies, HDIT/HCT may become a potential therapeutic option for patients with active relapsing-remitting MS, particularly those who do not respond to existing therapies,” said Daniel Rotrosen, M.D., director of NIAID’s Division of Allergy, Immunology and Transplantation.

This work was sponsored by NIAID, NIH, and conducted by the ITN under award number AI109565 and NIAID-funded statistical and clinical coordinating centers under award number AI117870. The ClinicalTrials.gov identifier for the Phase 2 study High-Dose Immunosuppression and Autologous Transplantation for Multiple Sclerosis (HALT-MS) is NCT00288626.

NIAID conducts and supports research — at NIH, throughout the United States, and worldwide — to study the causes of infectious and immune-mediated diseases, and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing and treating these illnesses. News releases, fact sheets and other NIAID-related materials are available on the NIAID website.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.

RA Nash et al. High-dose immunosuppressive therapy and autologous HCT for relapsing-remitting MS. Neurology DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003660 (2017).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release does the bare minimum here, stating:
“The treatment carries some risks, and many participants experienced the expected side effects of HDIT/HCT, such as infections. Three participants died during the study; none of the deaths were related to the study treatment.”
Still, we think more could have been said about the side effects of chemotherapy. For example, How many patients experienced them and how bad were they? And the news release does not say how long treatment and recovery takes. The process by which the deaths were categorized is not given and leads to uncertainty about whether these patients may have died as a result of the immuno-suppression of their bone marrow.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philippe Autier is willing to bet that taking vitamin D supplements will never be proved to do anything beyond helping to build strong bones — and certainly not to prevent heart disease, cancer, diabetes, depression, multiple sclerosis or the common cold, as many claim. In fact, the physician has wagered a few good bottles of champagne that none of three large randomized trials now underway will find proof of positive effects.

To Autier, a researcher at the Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences in Glasgow, Scotland, the widespread faith in vitamin D’s benefits is like a religion. “People want to have a simple story they can believe in,” he says.

Cedric Garland, meanwhile, hews just as strongly to the opposite view — that vitamin D supplements confer a slew of benefits, including warding off colon cancer, breast cancer, even Type 1 diabetes.

“The science is, in my opinion, unassailable,” says Garland, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at the University of California at San Diego. “It’s just preposterous to say it’s not proven.”

In January 2014, Autier published a statistical analysis of results from hundreds of studies of vitamin D. He concluded: “Unfortunately, there is probably no benefit to expect from vitamin D supplementation in normally healthy people.”

Garland, on the other hand, is the co-author of dozens of studies showing a strong, inverse association between vitamin D levels and seemingly every disease under the sun. Indeed, sun exposure is Garland’s explanation for why rates of cancer, Type 1 diabetes and other diseases tend to be higher the farther people live from the equator. Vitamin D, after all, is the “sunshine vitamin,” synthesized from cholesterol in the skin in response to sunlight.

“It’s a mathematical relationship,” he said in a telephone interview. “The higher your latitude and the greater your area’s average cloud cover, the higher your rates of cancer.” Since he and his late brother, Frank Garland, published the first study, in 1980, revealing that relationship, hundreds of other studies have explored the link between vitamin D, including supplements, and health — but none were large enough, long enough or designed well enough to convince the skeptics.

Now three nationally recognized researchers are leading landmark studies designed to settle at least some of the questions about vitamin D once and for all. The one thing the research leaders are certain of is that the public’s faith in vitamin D as a modern panacea has far outpaced what the scientific evidence proves.

“There’s been a rush to judgment on vitamin D,” says JoAnn E. Manson, chief of the division of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. “Everyone has gotten on the bandwagon. Unfortunately, the lessons of history have shown repeatedly that many of these supplements that appeared to be very promising did not pan out in more rigorous testing.”

Manson should know. She has led or collaborated on more than a dozen large, randomized, placebo-controlled studies, dating back more than two decades, which found none of the expected protection against cancer, heart disease, dementia or other diseases that scientists once attributed to beta carotene, vitamin E or vitamin C supplements. (She did find, however, that supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 offered modest protection against age-related macular degeneration and, for those with a diet low in B vitamins to begin with, a hint of protection against the loss of cognitive abilities.)

Now Manson is co-directing the Vitamin D and Omega-3 Trial (VITAL), testing whether, compared with placebo, a daily supplement of either 2,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D or one gram of fish oil (another widely touted substance) reduces the risk of stroke, cancer, heart disease and other health problems. The five-year study, involving 25,874 men and women, is scheduled to end in October 2017.

Another trial is testing whether a daily supplement of 4,000 IU of vitamin D will prevent Type 2 diabetes. The so-called D2d study, which will run for four years, is seeking to enroll 2,382 people older than 30 who are at high risk of developing diabetes due to weight or blood-sugar levels but who have not yet been diagnosed with the disease.

“I would call myself an optimistic skeptic,” says Anastasios Pittas, principal investigator of the D2d study and a professor of medicine at Tufts School of Medicine in Boston. “The indirect evidence is very strong. People with higher levels of vitamin D in their blood have been shown again and again to have a lower risk of developing diabetes in the future. These studies are as consistent as we have ever seen with any nutrient.”

But, he adds, “those studies do not prove cause and effect. Before we make a blanket recommendation for the 86 million people in the United States who are at risk for Type 2 diabetes to go out and buy vitamin D supplements, we need to know for sure if they help.”

A third trial, designed to test whether 5,000 IU of vitamin D per day will slow the progression of multiple sclerosis in 172 patients, is being led by Ellen Mowry, an associate professor of neurology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

“I do discuss vitamin D with my patients,” Mowry says. “But I point out that we don’t yet have randomized, controlled-trials data to back it up. That’s why there are no official recommendations yet from any medical organizations. We have to be sure.”

So what are people to do in the meantime? Four years ago, Manson sat on a committee established by the Institute of Medicine to review how much vitamin D and calcium Americans need each day to maintain health and prevent disease. The report concluded that both are necessary for bone health but that as for preventing cancer, heart disease, diabetes and autoiummune disorders, the evidence was “inconsistent, inconclusive as to causality, and insufficient to inform nutritional requirements.” Even so, the committee recommended that children and adults up to age 70 get 600 IU of vitamin D daily — from food and, if necessary, supplements — and that adults age 71 and older get 800 IU.

Some studies have found no ill effects from taking far higher amounts, and many of the prospective but not proven benefits against cancer and other diseases are believed to require doses ranging from 2,000 to 5,000 IU. Manson urges people to rely on the Institute of Medicine report, which set a safe upper limit of 4,000 IU of vitamin D per day.

“It’s fine to take that amount,” Manson said. “But keep in mind, there isn’t yet evidence that taking those higher amounts will confer any benefits beyond the recommended daily allotment of 600 to 800 IU.”

Some studies, she noted, have even found evidence that very high levels of vitamin D circulating in the blood might be just as unhealthful as very low levels. A 2014 study, for instance, found that people with the highest levels of vitamin D in their blood (more than 60 nanograms per milliliter) were significantly more likely to die in the three months following a hospitalization as were people whose levels were between 30 and 49.9 ng/mL. Such findings are why she, Mowry and Pittas strongly advise people against taking more than the currently recommended upper daily limit of 4,000 IU, even though doses as high as 10,000 IU are available online and at many stores.

Frustrated by the uncertainty? Pittas takes it in stride.

“This is the beauty of medical research,” he says, “where you have some people convinced that vitamin D does nothing and others who believe it’s already proved to work. There is such controversy now that the only way to convince people who sit on those sides of the equation is to complete rigorous, randomized trials. We’ll see what happens. I have a hypothesis that vitamin D will work, but we have to test it. At the end of the studies, one of us will be right. I just don’t know which one.”

Hurley is a science journalist and author of “Natural Causes: Death, Lies and Politics in America’s Vitamin and Herbal Supplement Industry” (Broadway Books, 2007).
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Research has shown risks from high levels of vitamin D. We were glad the story included the following:
“A 2014 study, for instance, found that people with the highest levels of vitamin D in their blood (more than 60 nanograms per milliliter) were significantly more likely to die in the three months following a hospitalization as were people whose levels were between 30 and 49.9 ng/mL.”
Another possible harm that the story could have examined is people downing pills and thinking they have “prevented” some future problem. Does taking a vitamin pill reassure them and delay or forestall established preventive measures such as diet and exercise, known to help prevent type 2 diabetes and heart disease?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Tens of thousands of kids may benefit from cholesterol-lowering medication, but no one would know because screening guidelines exclude too many children, U.S. doctors said Monday.

In a report published in the journal Pediatrics, they call for screening of all children, expanding one set of current recommendations that target only those whose parents or grandparents have heart disease or high cholesterol. Another existing set of guidelines doesn’t call for screening in any children.

Screening all children would “identify a number of children who are of very significant risk of premature heart disease,” said Dr. William Neal of West Virginia University in Morgantown, who led the new study.

Neal said treating youth with cholesterol-lowering drugs, the so-called statins, would curb the risk that they went on to develop heart problems in middle age. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Western world.

Based on data from West Virginia, Neal and colleagues found that more than one percent of all fifth-graders had cholesterol levels that warranted drug treatment. But a third of those children didn’t have relatives with heart disease or high cholesterol, and so wouldn’t have been screened under the current guidelines, issued by the government’s National Cholesterol Education Program.

“I have gradually become convinced that universal screening in children is not only preferable, but necessary,” said Neal. He added that although universal screening would be expensive, it would save a lot of money later on if heart disease could be prevented.

But not all scientists agree that screening is a good idea. For example, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, currently doesn’t recommend routine cholesterol screening in any children.

“Unfortunately, there is no evidence that starting a ten-year-old on cholesterol-lowering drugs will prevent heart disease 40 years later,” said Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, a member of the task force.

He said statin treatment in children was still controversial, and that no long-term safety data existed.

The new study tapped into data from more than 20,000 children who had been screened at public schools in West Virginia over five years.

More than seven in 10 school kids had first-degree relatives with heart disease, and about one percent of those had “bad” cholesterol (LDL cholesterol) levels that might require drug treatment in addition to diet changes and exercise, according to the researchers.

Yet among the kids without heart disease in their family, the percentage of children who might benefit from treatment was closer to two percent than to one, meaning that family history didn’t seem to make a difference.

“It is therefore prudent to implement universal screening in the pediatric population independent of family history,” the researchers conclude.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story points out that cholesterol-lowering drug treatment in children is controversial and the safety of such treatment has not been studied in children. However, the story does not mention any of the specific harms of statin treatment that have been identified in studies of adults.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Aug. 10, 2011 -- Two of three patients dying of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) appear cured and a third is in partial remission after infusions of genetically engineered T cells.

The treatment success came in a pilot study that was only meant to find out whether the treatment was safe, and to determine the right dose to use in later studies. But the therapy worked vastly better than University of Pennsylvania researchers David L. Porter, MD, Carl H. June, MD, and colleagues had dared to hope.

"Our results were absolutely dramatic. It is tremendously exciting," Porter tells WebMD. "These kinds of outcomes don't come around very often. We are really hopeful that we can now translate this into treatment for much larger numbers of patients and apply this technique to other diseases and to many more patients."

Excitement is spreading as oncologists learn about the findings. "I think it is a big deal," says Jacque Galipeau, MD, professor of hematology and medical oncology at Emory University Winship Cancer Center. Galipeau was not involved in the Porter study.

"Here's this guy, the handwriting is on the wall, any hematologist will tell you he is a goner -- this guy was essentially cured," Galipeau tells WebMD. "These genetically engineered cells did what everyone in the field has tried to do for 20 years. The man probably had kilograms of disease in his body, and the cells mopped it up completely."

The treatment uses a form of white blood cells called T cells harvested from each patient. A manmade virus-like vector is used to transfer special molecules to the T cells. One of the molecules, CD19, makes the T cells attack B lymphocytes -- the cells that become cancerous in CLL.

All this has been done before. These genetically engineered cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. They kill cancer in the test tube. But in humans, they die away before they do much damage to tumors.

What's new about the current treatment is the addition of a special signaling molecule called 4-1BB. This signal does several things: it gives CAR T cells more potent anti-tumor activity, and it somehow allows the cells to persist and multiply in patients' bodies. Moreover, the signal does not call down the deadly all-out immune attack -- the feared "cytokine storm" -- that can do more harm than good.

This may be why relatively small infusions of the CAR T cells had such a profound effect. Each of the cells killed thousands of cancer cells and destroyed more than 2 pounds of tumor in each patient.

"Within three weeks, the tumors had been blown away, in a way that was much more violent than we ever expected,"June says in a news release. 'It worked much better than we thought it would."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: In a three-person study, it’s difficult to quantify harms or benefits beyond just describing what happened to each patient. The WebMD story, though, did a better job of presenting the very real side effects of the study, even showing that the treatments for the side effects may have hampered the effectiveness of the cancer therapy. “The treatment was not a walk in the park for patients. One of the three patients became so ill from the treatment that steroids were needed to relieve his symptoms. The steroid rescue may be why this patient had only a partial remission.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It’s common for people who suffer from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) to also struggle with depression. Now, a small study published in the journal suggests that taking a probiotic supplement may provide relief from both conditions.

The randomized, placebo-controlled trial shows a connection between probiotics and mood improvement in people with IBS and depression or anxiety, as well as changes in brain regions related to emotional processing. Most previous research on this topic has been on healthy people without mood disorders.

For the new research, scientists from McMaster University in Canada recruited 44 adults with IBS as well as mild to moderate anxiety or depression. They were followed for 10 weeks; half took a daily dose of the probiotic , and half took a placebo. The probiotics were manufactured and provided by Nestle, which also funded the study. (Nestle was not involved in collection, analysis or interpretation of study data.)

After six weeks, twice as many people who took the probiotic had decreased depression scores compared to those who took the placebo: 64% versus 32%. Results were similar after 10 weeks, as well. When people in the study were given functional MRI scans, the researchers found that improved depression scores were associated with changes in activity of several brain areas involved in mood regulation.

Those changes in brain activity “support the notion that this probiotic has anti-depressive properties,” the authors wrote in their paper. While their data did not show significant independent changes in anxiety, constipation, diarrhea or pain, people who took the probiotic did report improvements in overall symptoms of IBS and in quality of life.

One explanation for the improved mood in the group taking probiotics could be that because their physical symptoms feel better, their mood gets better too. That’s why Dr. Roger McIntyre, professor of psychiatry and pharmacology at the University of Toronto, thinks the fMRI findings are the most interesting and important aspect of the new study: they signal that the probiotics may really be working on the brain itself.

MORE: You Asked: Should I Take Probiotics?

“We know that one part of the brain, the amygdala, tends to be red hot in people with depression, and it seemed to cool down with this intervention,” says McIntyre, who was not involved in the new research. “It provides more scientific believability that something in the brain, at a very biological level, seems to be affected by this probiotic.”

No serious side effects related to the probiotic were reported, suggesting that such a supplement could be a safe way to treat both stomach- and mood-related symptoms. Studies have looked at various types of probiotics for IBS patients, the authors wrote, and a recent review found that seemed to work better for gastrointestinal symptoms than another common probiotic, .

Some experts believe that gut bacteria influence the brain (and vice versa) mainly through systemic inflammation. But in this study, the researchers found no difference in inflammatory markers between the probiotic and the placebo group. McIntyre points out that the bowel communicates with the brain through other pathways as well, including the metabolic and nervous systems.

The study’s findings need to be confirmed in larger independent trials, and McIntyre says he wouldn’t yet recommend taking a probiotic for symptoms associated with mental disorders like depression or anxiety. (Study co-author Premysl Bercik, associate professor of medicine at McMaster University, says the formula used in the new research isn’t commercially available, anyway.) “The evidence at this point is promising,” says McIntyre, “but it is not sufficient to justify recommending to patients as a viable treatment strategy.”

But McIntyre says the results are encouraging. “They seem credible to me, and they might hint that there are other mechanisms, besides just inflammation, linking the GI tract to the brain,” he says.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story states that no serious side effects of the probiotic were reported, and this is sufficient for Satisfactory rating.
Ideally it would have provided additional information about what would constitute a “serious” side effect. With the way the story is worded, it’s possible that other side effects were reported by study participants. This is important information to have in order to compare to other treatments for depression or IBS.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK -- Debbie Spina is a supervisor for the radiology department at the Hospital for Joint Diseases at the NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City. But when CBS News met her this spring, she was a patient who was about to undergo same-day hip replacement surgery.

The 61-year-old had been having hip pain for the past two years because of arthritis. She had heard a lot of positive feedback from people who had undergone hip replacement surgery at her hospital. A big attraction for her was the possibility of going home right after the surgery.

"The option to go home the same day and have that family around me was something that I wanted to do," said Spina.

She believed she would be able to recuperate more comfortably at home and get back on her feet faster.

At most hospitals, hip replacement patients can expect a one- to three-night hospital stay. Total hip replacement surgery is increasingly common, with more than 300,000 procedures done every year in the U.S. The surgery is meant to restore range of motion and help relieve arthritic pain. The procedure consists of removing the patient's worn out ball and socket joint and inserting an artificial socket. On the femur side, a stem is inserted into the bone and a ball is on the tip of it.

NYU Langone Medical Center said it became the first academic medical center in New York City to implement a same-day hip replacement program, in 2015.

Dr. Roy Davidovitch, director of NYU Langone's Hip Center, said he performs around 400 hip replacements a year and approximately 40 percent of those patients will go home the same day.

Davidovitch said patients are happier going home sooner. "Nothing beats the comfort of your own home for recovery. And to be quite honest, if the pain is controlled and the patient is healthy and medically completely stable there is no reason for them to be in the hospital. It really doesn't make sense."

There are two common surgical approaches for a total hip replacement: anterior, which involves entering surgically through the front of the hip, and posterior, or entering surgically through the side or buttocks.

According to research done by the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, there are no significant differences between either approach in recovery outcomes six months after surgery.

Davidovitch favors the anterior approach, which he believes has a faster and less painful recovery period in the short term because doctors don't have to cut through muscles or tendons to get to the hip like in the posterior approach. He does agree that in the long term, both procedures have the same outcomes for patients.

But it's not the surgical approach alone that allows some of his patients to go home the same day -- it's a combination of what happens before, during and after surgery.

At NYU Langone patients have to do what's called pre-hab. Before the surgery they work with an occupational and physical therapist to learn information on the procedure, learn exercises to do after the surgery and how to properly move around while they are recovering.

During the surgery, Davidovitch uses a short-acting spinal anesthetic that lasts about 2 ½ hours, and when closing the wound he injects "a cocktail of medications" to help with the inflammation and pain.

Patients can be up and walking usually within three hours after the surgery.

But they must have someone around the first night they are spending at home post-surgery.

"The people who are against the whole idea for same-day discharge for hip replacement are concerned about the very rare instances where somebody could develop a blood clot that goes to the lung, or a fracture of some sort," said Davidovitch. "The rates of blood clots or pulmonary emboli is exceedingly low. And in general, if a patient is identified as a high risk or a higher risk we don't send them home the same day."

Davidovitch makes it clear that this kind of surgery is not one-size-fits-all. Patients are screened first to make sure they don't have risk factors like obesity, chronic liver disease or cardiac problems. Those who have risk factors must plan on staying overnight in the hospital, not going right home.

However, not every surgeon is embracing the same-day trend. Douglas E. Padgett, M.D., chief of the joint replacement service at Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, is a lot more conservative about who he believes is the optimal patient for going home the same day.

"The number of patients that are going home at this point in time in our institution is somewhere between one and two percent. So it's a relatively small percentage of patients that are going directly home," said Padgett.

Padgett has seen an increase in the number of hip replacement patients and a decrease in their age -- some are as young as their 40s and 50s. He said his department performs the most hip replacements of any institution in the U.S., doing about 5,000 a year. While he is not against patients going home the same day, he cautions that total joint replacement is a major procedure and doctors need to be careful to avoid sending patients home too soon.

"While I recognize there is no place like home, should there be the need for urgent or medical care the question is will that be available to the patient when they're in the setting of their own home," Padgett said.

Debbie Spina met all the requirements to go home the same day. Her surgery lasted about an hour, which is the average time for her type of procedure. After the the operation she was able to move around but felt dizzy and nauseous. The occupational and physical therapists waited until evening to try and get her to go up and down steps and walk around, which patients must be able to do before they are discharged. But Spina didn't feel well enough, so she actually ended up spending the night.

Even though her same-day discharge didn't go as planned, Spina felt good the following morning and was able to do her exercises and leave the hospital.

After her recovery is complete, she has a few goals she'd like to reach. "I had walked prior to this four miles every morning -- I'd like to do that. And I'd like to improve my golf game if possible," Spina said while smiling.

Davidovitch's goal is for patients to return to their normal level of activity as quickly as possible. And with many people wanting to maintain active lifestyles well into their 70s and beyond, he expects to see even greater demand for hip replacement surgery and the same-day option. "In general I see this growing to about 60 percent of my practice," he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We will give the story a Satisfactory rating on this criterion because it includes comments from a surgeon who warns about the risk of serious complications during the first night after surgery.
However, the most prominent voice in the story is a surgeon who dismisses those concerns by saying, “if the pain is controlled and the patient is healthy and medically completely stable there is no reason for them to be in the hospital. It really doesn’t make sense.”
We’re not given any information or data that proves this “doesn’t make sense,” though.
We also think potential harms that could have been included are falling at home due to dizziness, or otherwise not being adequately prepared for managing under major surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using data from a national study, Johns Hopkins researchers determined that using heart CT scans can help personalize treatment in patients whose blood pressure falls in the gray zone of just above normal or mild high blood pressure. Previously, the appropriate blood pressure treatment for these patients used risk calculations and some guesswork, potentially leaving many vulnerable to heart disease or taking drugs they don't need. Nearly one in three adults in the U.S. has prehypertension, blood pressure higher than normal but not considered high yet.

The scans detect levels of calcium in the heart's arteries, and the physicians suggest those people with the highest calcium levels would benefit most from aggressive blood pressure treatment, whereas those with little or no calcium may not need to be treated as intensively, depending on their other heart disease risk factors.

In the study, published on Jan. 10 in Circulation, the researchers say these calcium scores allow physicians to go beyond the traditionally calculated risk factors to determine which blood pressure treatment strategy may be most appropriate for a particular patient.

"If a health care provider wants to target blood pressure in a patient with traditional heart disease risk factors and above-normal blood pressure, he or she can look at coronary artery calcium to help with tiebreakerlike decisions," says J. William McEvoy, M.B.B.Ch., M.H.S., assistant professor of medicine and member of the Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. "Our study, along with others, such as SPRINT and HOPE, positions cardiac risk and coronary artery calcium as helpful ways to determine if a given patient would either benefit from more intensive blood pressure control or do just fine with a more traditional blood pressure target."

In late 2015, the SPRINT trial showed improved outcomes for participants with increased risk for heart disease whose physicians targeted their systolic (the top number) blood pressures to 120 millimeters of mercury, rather than the traditional 140 millimeters of mercury. But not all people deemed "higher risk" by traditional methods may need to be aggressively treated, McEvoy says. Some people react poorly to higher doses of blood pressure medicines and experience side effects, such as sexual dysfunction, dizziness, falls, weakness and more. And the risk factor equations that determine whether certain people are at higher risk and should be treated more intensively with blood pressure medications may have inaccuracies on the individual level, says McEvoy. "We can predict that about 15 out of every 100 people with a particular risk score will die of a heart attack, but the equations don't tell us which of those people will be one of the actual 15; they don't give us personalized information," says McEvoy.

Conventionally, coronary artery calcium scores have informed physicians' decisions of whether to put a patient on statins, but the researchers say they haven't been evaluated before for their potential ability to determine blood pressure treatment. To determine if coronary artery calcium scores could inform blood pressure recommendations too, the researchers used data from 3,733 participants in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) who had systolic blood pressures between 120 and 179 millimeters of mercury. Participants were an average of 65 years old, and 48 percent were men. Thirty-five percent were white, 32 percent were African-American, 22 percent were Hispanic and 11 percent were Chinese-American. At the beginning of the study, investigators measured their blood pressure and performed a cardiac CT scan to determine coronary artery calcium scores. They also calculated each participant's heart disease risk with the Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Algorithm, which uses traditional risk factors, such as race, age, sex, cholesterol levels and family history of disease. About once a year for 10 years, an interviewer contacted each participant or a family member to determine heart disease diagnosis, hospitalizations or deaths. After about 10 years, the participants had 642 heart disease events, such as heart attack, heart failure, stroke and death.

The researchers divided the participants by their coronary artery calcium scores into one of three groups: those with a score of zero, those with a score of one to 100 and those with a score greater than 100. Then, they looked at the number of heart disease-related events in each calcium score category broken down by blood pressure range and calculated heart disease risk. Low heart disease risk was classified as a less than 15 percent chance of a heart disease event over the next 10 years, and high risk was 15 percent or greater risk of a heart disease event. To get the event rate, the investigators divided the number of events in each category by the amount of people in the study multiplied by the length of time they spent in the study, known as a person-year.

Participants with calcium scores of zero with a high calculated risk of heart disease had a relatively low actual event rate after the 10-year study. For example, according to the researchers, those with systolic blood pressures below 140 millimeters of mercury and no calcium had an event rate of 12.7 events per 1,000 person-years, and similar people with systolic blood pressures between 140 and 159 millimeters of mercury had an event rate of 13.6 events per 1,000 person-years.

In contrast, participants with systolic blood pressure under 140 millimeters of mercury -- below the current cutoff for treatment -- and rated with a low predicted risk of heart disease who had a calcium score over 100 had a high actual event rate of 19.7 events per 1,000 person-years. Thus, even though their calculated heart disease risk is relatively low and their blood pressure is below traditional cutoffs for treatment, the researchers say people in this category with calcium over 100 are high risk and may benefit from more aggressive blood pressure treatment.

Participants with high systolic blood pressure between 160 and 179 millimeters of mercury had high event rates ranging from 20 to 40 heart disease events per 1,000 person-years regardless of their calcium scores. The researchers say this demonstrates that calcium scores may only be useful in guiding more personalized blood pressure treatment for patients with mild high blood pressure -- the gray zone -- not those with high blood pressure.

"It may be that if patients are in that blood pressure treatment gray zone with a high risk score but their coronary artery calcium score is zero, then they don't need to be treated aggressively to 120 millimeters of mercury and can be treated to 140 instead," says McEvoy. "But if patients have a high calcium score and are in the gray zone, then it would make sense to go with 120 as a treatment goal."

The researchers caution that results are from an observational study, and a randomized trial would be needed to confirm the recommendations.

Coronary artery calcium scans aren't usually covered by insurance and can range in cost from $100 to $400. The scans use radiation, so there is a very small cancer risk for susceptible individuals.

About 70 million adults in the U.S. have high blood pressure -- a systolic blood pressure over 140 millimeters of mercury -- putting them at increased risk for heart attacks, stroke, heart failure and kidney disease, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Additional authors on the study included Seth Martin, Zeina Dardari, Wendy Post, Khurram Nasir and Michael Blaha of Johns Hopkins; Michael Miedema of the Minneapolis Heart Institute; Veit Sandfort of the National Institutes of Health; Joseph Yeboah of Wake Forest Baptist Health; Matthew Budoff of the University of California, Los Angeles; David Goff of the Colorado School of Public Health; and Bruce Psaty of the University of Washington.

The study was funded by the P.J. Schafer Cardiovascular Research Fund, the Johns Hopkins Magic That Matters Research Fund for Cardiovascular Research, grants from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (UL1-TR-000040 and UL1-TR-001079), and contracts from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (HHSN268201500003I, N01-HC-95159, N01-HC-95160, N01-HC-95161, N01-HC-95162, N01-HC-95163, N01-HC-95164, N01-HC-95165, N01-HC-95166, N01-HC-95167, N01-HC-95168 and N01-HC-95169).
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release states: “The scans use radiation, so there is a very small cancer risk for susceptible individuals.” While the mention of cancer risk is laudable, we aren’t clear what’s meant by “susceptible individuals.” Also, it does not mention that CT scans are not recommended for pregnant women due to possible risk to the fetus. In addition, harms can also arise from medications prescribed to treat these calcium scores.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two existing drugs, in combination, have shown significant promise in promoting weight loss, according to a new report.

The drugs, phentermine and Topamax, in combination with lifestyle and weight-loss counseling were associated with a 18-22 pound weight loss in trial participants, compared with a three-pound weight loss in patients who received counseling alone.



 The drug also appears to have reduced other obesity-related indicators, such as blood pressure, cholesterol and inflammation levels.

By comparison, the only approved long-term prescription weight loss medication available on the market today, Xenical, is associated with a seven-pound weight loss when combined with diet and exercise.

The study was funded by the pharmaceutical company Vivus, which combined the two drugs into one pill called Qnexa, and petitioned the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for approval in October 2010. The Food and Drug Administration denied the request, asking for more safety data from the company before moving forward.

According to the report, there were specific concerns about each drug's safety individually; specifically Topamax, which is reported to cause some psychiatric and cognitive side effects and may cause clef palate birth defects if taken while pregnant.

According to the manufacturer's study, the two drugs, when taken together, and at controlled-release doses, were very safe. Participants in the trial reported minor side effects such as dry mouth and constipation, however at higher doses, some participants did complain about some psychiatric side effects.

Among the 2,487 study participants, nine became pregnant, and none of their children were born with cleft palates, the report said.

The drug could be a good option for some people, but it's most likely not a silver bullet, said Dr. Melina Jampolis, CNNHealth's physician nutrition expert, who is not connected with the study.

"This might be a good tool in the short term to get someone motivated, and that's great," she said. "But unless it's paired with aggressive lifestyle changes, it may not be great in the long term."

Phentermine is commonly used as a short-term weight loss treatment, and was previously paired with fenfluramine to make the successful but now-discontinued weight loss drug Fen-phen. Fen-phen was removed from the market in 1997 amid concerns about the drug's heart risk, but phentermine has been used successfully for short-term appetite suppression since then with no major safety concerns.

Topamax is commonly used to treat migraines and seizures.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This story – while not quantifying harms – did a better job in discussing harms than the LA Times story, so we’ll give it a satisfactory score. It reported:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - Scientists in Canada and Sweden have used laboratory-made biosynthetic corneas to restore vision to patients in a small human trial, and shown for the first time that they can help to repair damaged eye tissue.

The scientists, whose work was published Wednesday in the Science Translational Medicine journal, said their findings offered hope for the millions of people who go blind each year because of a worldwide shortage of corneas for donation. “This study ... is the first to show that an artificially fabricated cornea can integrate with the human eye and stimulate regeneration,” said May Griffith of the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, who led the study.

“With further research, this approach could help restore sight to millions of people who are waiting for a donated human cornea for transplantation.”

The cornea is a tiny piece of transparent, film-like tissue that covers the surface of our eyes. Made from parallel strands of the protein collagen, it refracts light to focus images on the retina.

Although the fragile film is easily destroyed by trauma or infection, replacement human corneas can be used to restore vision, although this depends on a steady supply of donors.

A team led by Griffith and Per Fagerholm, an ophthalmology professor and eye surgeon at Linkoping University in Sweden, conducted the study by removing diseased tissue from the corneas of 10 patients and replacing them with biosynthetic implants designed to mimic a normal human cornea.

For the process they used recombinant human collagen, a substance synthesized in the laboratory to mimic human tissue and supplied by the San Francisco biotech firm FibroGen Inc.

The patients were monitored for two years after surgery. The researchers found that, eventually, the cells and nerves from nine of the 10 patients regrew completely and packed themselves into the implant, resulting in a kind of “regenerated” cornea that looked and functioned like normal, healthy eye tissue.

The biosynthetic corneas also became sensitive to touch and the treated eyes began producing normal tears, the researchers said. Vision improved in six of the 10 patients.

After the patients were also fitted with contact lenses, which is common after corneal transplants, their vision was comparable with that of patients who undergo regular human corneal tissue transplants.

“The results were pretty encouraging and there is great potential here,” Fagerholm said in a telephone interview.

Loss of vision due to corneal disease or trauma affects over 10 million people a year, but lack of access to donor tissue limits the number of transplants, particularly in poorer countries.

In the United States, an estimated 42,000 corneal grafts a year are performed using tissue from posthumous donors, but there are sometimes problems with rejection and experts say failure rates are significant.

Fagerholm said the patients in this trial had no problems with rejection and did not need long-term immune suppression drugs to help their bodies accept the corneas.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The last sentence of the story says, "Fagerholm said the patients in this trial had no problems with rejection and did not need long-term immune suppression drugs to help their bodies accept the corneas." This is about as much space as any of the stories devoted to the harms. It would have been nice to see a little more detail here, but, if after two years there were not any side effects, this is a satisfactory quantification.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A five week treatment with the synthetic hormone oxytocin significantly improved social, emotional and behavioral issues among young children with autism, according to University of Sydney research published today in Molecular Psychiatry.

The study, led by researchers at the University's Brain and Mind Centre, is thought to be the first evidence of a medical treatment for social impairments in children with autism. It is also the first clinical trial investigating the efficacy, tolerability and safety of intranasal-administered oxytocin in young children with autism.

Autism is a group of complex brain developmental disorders characterized by impairments in social interaction, communication, and stereotypical and repetitive behaviours. The diagnosed incidence is estimated to be one in 68 children and effective interventions remain limited.

Behavioural therapies can improve social, emotional and behavioural impairments but these are typically time consuming (40 hours per week), remain costly and show mixed outcomes. There is currently no medical treatment for these problems.

In this new study, 31 children aged three to eight years of age received a twice daily course of oxytocin in the form of a nasal spray.

"We used some of the most widely used assessments of social responsiveness for children with autism," said autism expert, Associate Professor Adam Guastella of the Brain and Mind Centre.

"We found that following oxytocin treatment, parents reported their child to be more socially responsive at home, and our own blind independent clinician ratings also supported improved social responsiveness in the therapy rooms of the Brain and Mind Centre," he said.

Overall, the nasal spray was well tolerated and the most common adverse events were thirst, urination and constipation.

This is the first time a medical treatment has shown this type of benefit for children with autism and findings reinforce outcomes from a longer sustained program of research by this team.

Over the last 10 years Brain and Mind Centre researchers have been documenting the benefits of oxytocin in humans, revealing that it enhances eye gaze, emotion recognition and memory across a range of populations.

Study co-author and co-director of the Brain and Mind Centre, Professor Ian Hickie noted the new results were a critical first advance in the development of medical treatments for the social deficits that characterize autism.

"The potential to use such simple treatments to enhance the longer-term benefits of other behavioural, educational and technology-based therapies is very exciting," he said.

Most recently the team has linked observed changes from treatment to brain changes associated with social circuitry. The next step in the research is to understand exactly how oxytocin changes brain circuitry to improve social behavior, and to document how related treatments might be used to boost established social learning interventions.

The researchers are seeking to further develop the potential of oxytocin-based interventions within the context of good multi-disciplinary care for autism.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The news release briefly describes the symptoms reported in the children taking part in the trial. The common side effects were thirst, urination and constipation.
Our reviewers thought it should be pointed out that the risks and long-term effects of treating children with oxytocin are unknown.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- The use of mammograms has dipped since a medical task force made controversial recommendations that women in their 40s may not need to get breast cancer screenings every year, according to one of three small studies to be presented Monday.

The studies related to this topic will be presented at the American Roentgen Ray Society annual meeting. They do not appear in peer-reviewed journals.

The studies suggest that fewer physicians are recommending annual mammograms for women in their 40s, fewer patients in that age group are getting screened and that tumors found through routine mammography are more likely to be detected in early stages of cancer.

The studies examined the impact of the controversial guidelines issued by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal advisory board.

Who decides about mammograms? Inside the task force

In November 2009, the group stated that yearly mammograms should not be automatic at age 40 and that physicians should discuss their risks and benefits with their patients. It recommended routine mammography screenings every two years for women ages 50 to 74.

"The benefit in 40- to 49-year-old women is pretty small," said Dr. Virginia Moyer, chair of the task force, about annual mammograms. "There is a real, but rather modest benefit. There are also risks, and they are greater in younger women than older women."

Mammograms are less effective in detecting growths in younger women, whose breasts may be denser. The screening gets better with older women because breast tissues change over time.

As a result, some women experience false positives, anxiety and unnecessary biopsies because of mammograms, according to data. Roughly 15% of women in their 40s detect breast cancer through mammography.

"The benefit is modest enough it needs to be an individual decision," Moyer said about mammograms for women in their 40s.

This contradicted advice from cancer groups such as the American Cancer Society and Susan G. Komen for the Cure, which told women 40 and older to get screened every year. It sparked immediate outcry from such groups and cancer survivors, who say routine mammograms for women younger than 50 can save lives.

Suspicious growths caught in regular-screening mammograms are more likely to be in early stages and therefore more treatable, said Dr. Donna Plecha, division chief of mammography at University Hospitals at Case Medical Center in Ohio.

She reviewed records of 524 biopsies (samples of suspicious growths in breasts) from women in their 40s during 2008 to 2009 at her hospital.

Of the 359 biopsies from screening mammography patients, 15% had cancer. These cancers were more treatable because they were caught in earlier stages, Plecha said.

Although 85% of those biopsies turned out to be noncancerous, some "may show us the patient is at higher risk of breast cancer," she said.

"I haven't met many patients who don't appreciate us being thorough, to trying to find the cancers at an early stage," Plecha said. "I would still recommend screening mammograms starting at age of 40," because cancers caught earlier would be more curable.

Breast cancer ID'd more accurately by docs who see more scans

Plecha's findings were not surprising to Moyer. It's obvious that annual screenings would catch cancers before they progress, she said.

The study presumes that catching earlier stages for women between the ages of 40-49 would translate into fewer breast cancer deaths.

"The data that we have suggests that 1 in a thousand will benefit from mammograms in the 40-49 age," she said. "There are whole lots of assumptions that are not supported by the data they presented."

The task force did not say don't get mammograms, Moyer said.

"It might make women not want to get the test," she said. "This is a decision that should belong to the woman with appropriate info on hand."

In another study, Dr. Lara Hardesty, section chief of breast imaging at the University of Colorado Hospital, examined survey results from fewer than 50 internists, gynecologists, family practitioners and nurse midwives.

She found that fewer clinicians were recommending annual mammograms after the task force's guidelines were issued.

Before the guidelines, 56% recommended yearly mammograms for women in the 40- to 49-year-old range. After the guidelines, that rate decreased to 20%, and 56% of the clinicians reported they were discussing the risks and benefits of screening with patients. That decrease, Hardesty said, "is a statistically significant difference," but it also showed more doctors were discussing mammograms with patients.

Hardesty also found that there were 205 fewer mammograms among women in their 40s after the guidelines were issued. Among patients 50 and older, mammograms increased slightly from 4,479 patients to 4,498.

It was unclear why mammograms in the 40s decreased while older women's mammograms increased slightly.

Hardesty offered this hypothesis: Older women are used to having annual mammograms because they've done it for years. Meanwhile, younger women may feel as though they don't have to get this screening.

Although the task force concluded that the net benefit of mammography in the 40s is small, Hardesty said: "If you're the one person we find your cancer, it's the world to you."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We wouid have like to have seen more discussion of the potential harms in 85% of biopsies being non-cancerous.  But since the story did actually quantify the number of false positives, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fasting diets have gained popularity in the past few years, but the scientific evidence proving that they keep us healthy while they help us lose weight is sparse. Now, researchers have shed light on what one type of time-restricted eating does to the body.

In a small, preliminary study, researchers put 23 obese volunteers on the 16:8 diet, a form of intermittent fasting. Followers of the popular regime eat during an eight-hour window, in this case between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. And for the 16 hours in between, they consume only calorie-free drinks, such as water.

For 12 weeks, the scientists measured various factors, including the participants' fat mass, blood pressure and cholesterol and glucose levels. The researchers compared the results to existing data from a separate weight loss trial carried out between 2011 and 2015.

Individuals who ate between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. consumed around 350 fewer calories, resulting in a loss of 3 percent body weight, and their blood pressure dropped by around 7mm Hg. However, their fat mass, insulin resistance and cholesterol levels were similar to the control group's.

Krista Varady, one of the study's authors and associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the University of Illinois at Chicago's School of Applied Health Sciences, said in a statement that the take-home message from the study is that cutting out certain foods or counting calories aren’t the only effective methods for losing weight.

The authors noted that the results mirror those from previous studies of other forms of intermittent fasting, including alternate day fasting, where an individual eats normally every other day.

"But one of the benefits of the 16:8 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain. We observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets,” said Varady.

Further research is now needed to uncover whether 16:8 works better than other fasting diets in terms of weight loss and health benefits.

The study's authors acknowledged that their preliminary data offers "promise for the use of time-restricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults, but longer-term, large-scale randomized controlled trials [are needed]."

Varady stressed that "when it comes to weight loss, people need to find what works for them, because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health."

Commenting broadly on fast-style diets, James Catterson of the Institute of Healthy Ageing at University College London, who was not involved in the study, previously told Newsweek the jury is still out on fasting diets.

He said that the data on the effects of fasting in animals are more convincing, probably because animals can be investigated in large sample sizes and in a highly controlled environment that is almost impossible to replicate in humans.

"There are also many studies that either report no overall effect or sometimes the opposite. And this is where it gets a bit murky, as it is very difficult to put proper controls in place when performing studies to do with nutrition," Catterson said.

He concluded, "So far, the consensus seems to be ‘let’s wait until more rigorous studies, with larger sample sizes that adjust for confounding lifestyle behaviors, have been performed before we conclude anything prematurely.'"
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Fasting for brief periods is pretty safe, although the story could have mentioned risks of dehydration, sleep problems, or headaches that might come from getting too hungry.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using a simple device for eight hours a night to treat sleep apnea can help people with prediabetes improve their blood sugar levels and may reduce the risk of progressing to diabetes, according to a new study published online in the April 21, 2015, issue of the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine.

About 57 million Americans have prediabetes, a disorder marked by blood sugar levels that are elevated but not sufficiently high to be considered diabetic. Prediabetics are at increased risk for developing diabetes, which can damage the eyes, kidneys, nerves and blood vessels and often leads to cardiovascular disease.

Many people with prediabetes also have untreated sleep apnea, although few of them are aware of it. The most widely accepted treatment for sleep apnea is continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), a device that blows a constant pressure of air into the lungs through a tube and face mask during the night. This helps people breathe better while they sleep by keeping the upper airway open.

"Our study showed that CPAP in patients with prediabetes can lower their risk of progressing to diabetes when CPAP is used for eight hours, a full night's sleep," said the study's lead author, Sushmita Pamidi, MD, a former fellow at the University of Chicago who is now on the faculty at McGill University in Montreal, Canada.

"Although eight hours of CPAP per night can be difficult to achieve in real-life, our results should provide a strong incentive for anyone with sleep apnea, especially prediabetic individuals, to improve adherence to their treatment for cardio-metabolic risk reduction," she said.

People with sleep apnea, which is common among overweight and obese individuals, have repeated episodes where their upper airway closes during sleep. This can disrupt sleep and temporarily lower oxygen levels. It has been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension and stroke, and may decrease their ability to regulate blood sugar levels. This increases the risk of diabetes.

For this study, the researchers recruited 39 middle-aged, overweight or obese volunteers with prediabetes and sleep apnea. Two-thirds of them (26) were randomly assigned to two weeks of CPAP treatment. The other 13 received a placebo -- a pill containing no medicine -- to be taken 30 minutes before bedtime. They were told the study would compare the two treatments.

All participants slept in the sleep laboratory and were closely monitored with all-night sleep recordings during the treatment period. Those assigned to CPAP wore the device for eight hours a night under continuous supervision by a technician. Before and after each treatment period, participants' glucose metabolism was assessed by oral and intravenous glucose-tolerance tests.

The researchers also measured the stress hormone noradrenaline in the blood and continuously monitored blood pressure for 24 hours at home. All participants were permitted to leave the laboratory during the day and engage in their routine activities.

After two weeks, blood sugar control, as measured by an oral glucose tolerance test, improved for those in the CPAP group compared to the oral placebo group. In addition, the ability of insulin to regulate their blood sugar, estimated by the intravenous glucose tolerance test, was improved in the CPAP group compared to the oral placebo group. The CPAP group had, on average, 27 percent lower levels of the stress hormone, norepinephrine, as well as lower blood pressure than the oral placebo group.

"Despite the demonstrated efficacy of lifestyle interventions and the availability of many drug treatments, the economic and public health burden of diabetes remains enormous," said Esra Tasali, MD, assistant professor of medicine at the University of Chicago and senior author of the study. "Assessment of sleep apnea should be considered in patients at high risk for diabetes and cardiovascular disease, since our study shows that treatment of sleep apnea can reduce these risks."

The National Institutes of Health, plus the Diabetes Research and Training Center and the Institute for Translational Medicine at the University of Chicago funded this study. Additional authors include Kristen Wroblewski, Magdalena Stepien, Khalid Sharif-Sidi, Jennifer Kilkus and Harry R. Whitmore from the University of Chicago.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: While the release does not mention any harms associated with CPAP, that is likely because there are no significant health risks associated with the use of CPAP devices. However, it would have been worth noting that CPAP devices can often cause significant discomfort for users (and their bedmates), particularly at first. Getting CPAP to work can also require a lot of tinkering with the device.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (AP) -- A medical implant that slowly dissolves into the body could be the answer to long-standing safety concerns with devices used to treat clogged arteries.

But not so fast, say experts.

Abbott Laboratories' newly approved Absorb stent comes with one important caveat: it hasn't yet been shown to be safer than older metal implants.

The Food and Drug Administration approved the device Tuesday for patients with coronary artery disease, the artery-narrowing condition that causes about 370,000 U.S. deaths each year, according to government figures. The new stent is designed to gradually dissolve over three years.

Currently-available stents are permanent, mesh-wire tubes that hold open arteries after a procedure used to clear fatty plaque.

Experts describe Abbott's device as an important step in finding a better approach to treating the leading cause of death in the U.S.

"This is presumably a better technology going forward, at least that's the theory, but it will take years to prove," said Dr. George Vetrovec, professor emeritus at Virginia Commonwealth University. Vetrovec was part of an FDA advisory panel of cardiologists who overwhelmingly endorsed the device in March.

The Absorb stent, already sold in Europe and Asia, is made of a degradable material that's designed to stay intact for one year then break down over the next two years.

Use of metallic stents surged in the early 2000s as a treatment for people who suffered a heart attack or experienced chest pain caused by clogged arteries that restrict blood flow. They are still implanted in about 850,000 U.S. patients annually.

But doctors have scaled back their use due to safety concerns, insurance cost-cutting and evidence that they are overused. Studies in 2007 and 2008 suggested that stented arteries faced a higher risk of blood clots, potentially triggering heart attack a year or more down the road. Results of another five-year study showed that patients who received stents to treat chest pain fared about as well as those treated with drugs.

Amid these concerns, Abbott and others began developing dissolving stents that would slowly melt away like stitches, presumably reducing complications.

In the company study submitted to the FDA, patients who got Absorb fared about as well as those receiving Abbott's older metal stent after one year. But heart-related complications were actually slightly higher with Absorb - 7.8 percent of patients, versus 6.1 percent of patients with the metal stent. That 1.7 percent difference is not considered statistically significant.

Other complications with the new device include allergic reactions, infections and internal bleeding.

Doctors who studied Absorb said it may take several years before its advantages become clear. Long-term safety results aren't expected until 2020.

"We have good theoretical reasons to believe that by getting rid of the stent, and allowing the coronary artery to restore its normal shape, that will prevent many of those late events," said Dr. Gregg Stone, of Columbia University Medical Center, who helped conduct the pivotal trial of Absorb. Stone was not paid by Abbott for his work on the trial.

Some Wall Street analysts are betting that products like Absorb will allow companies to raise prices and boost revenue.

"The key for the stent market will be whether pricing returns to rational levels and the success of the new bio-absorbable stent platforms," states Evercore ISI analyst Vijay Kumar, in an investment note. He says a "perfect storm of events," including safety concerns and the economic downturn led Abbott and competitors Medtronic Inc. and Boston Scientific Corp. to slash prices in recent years.

Stent sales fell roughly 30 percent to $4.1 billion in 2014 from 2006 levels, according to Evercore.

Abbott said it does not disclose the price of its stents. Hospitals often bill $30,000 for stenting procedures, which includes the costs of the stent, medical staff and other equipment and services.

Chicago-based Abbott controls a little more than a third of the U.S. stent market. More than a dozen medical device makers are working on their own dissolving stent technologies.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The text offers a list of complications found with the new device, apparently recorded in the clinical trial: allergic reactions, infections, internal bleeding. And it gives us quantified information on “heart-related complications” for both the dissolvable and metal stents.
But the story’s main message is that we simply do not know if these stents cause complications over the long term.  It does quote a source who helped conduct the clinical trial for Abbott and who describes the “theoretical” reason for the new stents as allowing arteries to return to their “normal” shapes after the stents dissolve and, thus, prevent the kinds of problems that afflict permanent mesh stents, including a higher risk of blood clots.  But the only study mentioned by the story, and by Abbot Labs in a news release, lasted a single year, while the stents are designed to completely dissolve over the course of three years.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have developed a score that predicts an individual's risk of dying within 5 years for people aged between 40 and 70 years old in the UK, according to new research published in The Lancet.

The score, which uses measures that can be obtained by simple questionnaires without any need for physical examination, such as self-rated health and usual walking speed, could be used by individuals to improve awareness of their health status, and by doctors to identify high-risk individuals for further treatment, say the authors.

Individuals can calculate their personalised 5-year mortality risk and what the study authors call an 'Ubble age' [1]?the age where the average mortality risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual?through an online questionnaire, using the dedicated interactive website [2]. The site was developed with Sense About Science [3], a UK charity that that equips people to make sense of scientific and medical claims in public discussion.

"The Ubble website allows anybody in the UK between forty and seventy years old to calculate their 'Ubble age' and their risk of dying within the next five years compared to the general population, using a simple set of a dozen or so questions," says study co-author Professor Erik Ingelsson from Uppsala University, Sweden. "This is the first study of its kind which is based on a very large study sample, and is not limited to specific populations, single types of risk, or requiring laboratory testing." [4]

To create the score, Professor Ingelsson and Dr Andrea Ganna, from the Karolinska Institutet in Sweden, analysed data collected between 2006 and 2010 from nearly half a million adults aged between 40 and 70 years from the UK Biobank [5]. They used a statistical survival model to assess the probability that 655 specific demographic, lifestyle, and health measurements could predict death from any cause and six specific causes, in men and women separately.

The results allow researchers to compare the predictive ability of a large number of health-related risk factors which were formerly studied separately and using different populations, although the predictive ability of risk factors does not necessarily imply they are causally related to the risk of dying.

For example, the research shows that self-reported information, such as usual walking pace and illness and injuries in the past 2 years, is generally a stronger predictor of death and survival than biological measurements, such as pulse rate and blood pressure. Surprisingly, self-reported walking pace is a stronger predictor of death risk in both men and women than smoking habits and other lifestyle measurements.

Self-rated overall health [6] emerged as the single most powerful predictor of death in men, and previous cancer diagnosis the strongest predictor in women (see figure 1 of the Article). When excluding individuals with serious diseases or disorders, smoking habits were the strongest predictors of mortality from any cause (figure 3).

Using these findings, the researchers then developed an easy-to-calculate risk score for an individual's risk of dying in the next 5 years, based on the most predictive self-reported information, including 13 questions for men and 11 for women. The performance of the score was validated in 35810 participants enrolled at two Scottish centres which were not used to develop the score, and was found to have around 80% accuracy in men and women (table 2). UK life tables and census information were used to calibrate the score for the overall UK population.

According to study co-author Dr Ganna, "The fact that the score can be measured online in a brief questionnaire, without any need for lab tests or physical examination, is an exciting development. We hope that our score might eventually enable doctors to quickly and easily identify their highest risk patients, although more research will be needed to determine whether it can be used in this way in a clinical setting. Of course, the score has a degree of uncertainty and shouldn't be seen as a deterministic prediction. For most people, a high risk of dying in the next five years can be reduced by increased physical activity, smoking cessation, and a healthy diet." [4]

Writing in a linked Comment, Simon Thompson and Peter Willeit from the University of Cambridge in the UK say, "One appealing aspect of the website is the representation of an individual's estimated 5 year mortality risk as what the authors call "Ubble age" (the age where the average risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual); this concept is similar to that of heart age developed for communicating cardiovascular risk. Whether this will help individuals improve self-awareness of their health status, however, or only lead to so-called cyberchondria, is a moot point. Moreover, 5 year mortality is easier to predict than long-term morbidity, or quality of life and life expectancy, all of which are more important to individuals and to society."

This study was funded by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council.

[2] For preview login details for the Ubble website, please email daisy.barton@lancet.com.

[3] See http://www. for more information.

[4] Quotes direct from author and cannot be found in text of Article.

[5] UK Biobank http://www. recruited half a million people aged between 40 and 69 years in 2006-10 from across the country. Information on sociodemographics, physical measures, health and lifestyle factors, medical history, and blood measurements were taken. All participants agreed to have their health followed. The resource has been open to bona fide health researchers for 18 months. So far more than 1800 scientists have registered with UK Biobank to study a wide range of diseases.

"UK Biobank will only be limited by the imagination of the researchers using it," said Professor Rory Collins, UK Biobank Principal Investigator. "As an open access resource, scientists will be able to scrutinise each other's work, build upon their results or undertake their own novel studies to improve the health of future generations."

[6] Assessed using the question: In general how would you rate your overall health? Excellent/Good/Fair/Poor.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The text does offer a brief cautionary note when it quotes from the commentary of a couple of UK scientists in The Lancet issue to the effect that “whether this will help individuals improve self-awareness of their health status…or only lead to so-called cyberchondria, is a moot point.” Cyberchondria refers to unfounded anxiety concerning the state of one’s health brought on by visiting health and medical websites, so that term seems apt here. And “moot” conveys the uncertainty surrounding outcomes as, again, the study can offer no evidence. We’ll give a Satisfactory rating, though we wonder if it would have been more effective to say, “it is unclear whether use of this information will lead to actions that will help or harm individuals.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"Cannabidiol should not be viewed as a panacea for epilepsy, but for patients with especially severe forms who have not responded to numerous medications, these results provide hope that we may soon have another treatment option," says lead investigator Orrin Devinsky, MD, professor of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry and director of the Comprehensive Epilepsy Center at NYU Langone Medical Center. "We still need more research, but this new trial provides more evidence than we have ever had of cannabidiol's effectiveness as a medication for treatment-resistant epilepsy."

Cannabidiol, or CBD, is a compound in the cannabis plant that does not contain psychoactive properties that induce a high. The study included a liquid pharmaceutical formulation of CBD, called Epidiolex, which is manufactured by GW Pharmaceuticals and has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. GW Pharmaceuticals funded the clinical trial.

For the study, 120 children and adolescents with Dravet Syndrome between the ages of 2 and 18 years were randomized across 23 sites in the United States and Europe to receive either CBD 20 mg/kg or placebo added to their existing treatment over a 14-week period. Seizure frequency was tracked for one month prior to the study for baseline readings, and during the course of the study.

Specifically, seizure frequency dropped in the CBD-treated group by 39 percent from a median of nearly 12 convulsive seizures per month before the study to about six; three patients' seizures stopped entirely. In the placebo group, there was a 13 percent reduction in seizures from about 15 monthly seizures to fourteen. The difference in the degree of seizure reduction between the CBD group and the placebo group was both statistically significant and clinically consistent.

Side effects – experienced by 93.4 percent of patients in the CBD group and 74.6 percent of those treated with placebo – were generally reported as mild or moderate in severity. The most common side effects in the CBD group were vomiting, fatigue and fever. Eight participants from the CBD group withdrew from the trial due to side effects compared to one participant in the placebo group.

The new study confirms results from a December 2015 open-label expanded access program led by Dr. Devinsky that reported reductions in seizure frequency. In that program, both the researchers and patient's families knew they were receiving CBD, which may have introduced a bias into the results. This new, randomized, controlled clinical study eliminated those concerns as participants and their physicians did not know if they were on CBD or placebo, say the study authors.

Future research will look at whether safety and tolerability might be improved and whether efficacy of CBD can be maintained at lower doses. Longer term studies of CBD for Dravet Syndrome as well as for other forms of treatment-resistant epilepsy are also underway.

In addition to Dr. Devinsky, the co-authors in this study were: J. Helen Cross, PhD, FRCPCH, Linda Laux, MD, Eric Marsh, MD, Ian Miller, MD, Rima Nabbout, MD, Ingrid E Scheffer, MD, PhD , Elizabeth Thiele, MD, and Stephen Wright, MD on behalf of The Cannabidiol in Dravet Syndrome Study Group. Judith Bluvstein, MD, and Daniel Friedman, MD, also served as co-authors at the NYU Langone site involved in the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release is clear in mentioning the side effects of the use of this drug in the study: “Side effects – experienced by 93.4 percent of patients in the CBD group and 74.6 percent of those treated with placebo – were generally reported as mild or moderate in severity. The most common side effects in the CBD group were vomiting, fatigue and fever. Eight participants from the CBD group withdrew from the trial due to side effects compared to one participant in the placebo group.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Oct. 26, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental psoriasis treatment performed significantly better than the commonly prescribed medication methotrexate in a new clinical trial.

The drug briakinumab reduced psoriasis symptoms by at least 75 percent in nearly 82 percent of those taking it, compared to just 40 percent of those on methotrexate. But serious side effects were more common among the briakinumab users.

"Very high levels of response" were observed and maintained throughout the study period, said lead researcher Dr. Kristian Reich, a professor of dermatology at the University of Gottingen and a managing partner at Dermatologikum Hamburg, both in Germany.

Results of the study are published in the Oct. 27 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. The study was funded by the drug's manufacturer, Abbott Laboratories.

Psoriasis affects about 5 million Americans, according to the U.S. National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS). The disease causes patches of thick, red, inflamed skin that have silvery scales. Psoriasis can affect any part of the body, including the skin, nails, genitals and inside the mouth, according to NIAMS.

The current study included 317 people with moderate to severe psoriasis. The study volunteers had had psoriasis for at least six months, and the condition affected at least 10 percent of their bodies.

Nearly half of the study participants were randomly selected to receive injections of briakinumab at a dose of 200 milligrams (mg) for the first and fourth week of the study, and 100 mg at week eight and every four weeks thereafter. The study lasted one year. The remaining volunteers were given between 5 mg and 25 mg of oral methotrexate weekly.

After six months, nearly 82 percent of those in the briakinumab group had at least a 75 percent improvement in the psoriasis area-and-severity index (PASI), a commonly used measurement to assess the severity of psoriasis. Slightly less than 40 percent of those on methotrexate had a 75 percent improvement in their PASI score, according to the study.

After a year, about 66 percent of those taking briakinumab had a 75 percent improvement in their PASI score compared to almost 24 percent for those on methotrexate, according to the study.

Briakinumab works by dampening the immune system response that causes psoriasis, said Bruce Bebo, director of research and medical programs for the National Psoriasis Foundation, based in Portland, Ore.

More serious infections were seen in people taking briakinumab (2.6 percent) vs. those taking methotrexate (1.8 percent). There were also two cases of cancer in people taking briakinumab and none in the methotrexate group. However, the researchers said these differences weren't statistically significant.

"Cancer risk is extremely hard to define, and this study was not powered to detect any difference in the risk of developing a malignancy," said Bebo.

He said that in an earlier trial of briakinumab, some unexplained major adverse cardiac events occurred. At the time, Abbott withdrew its application for approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration pending further research. In the current study, no serious cardiovascular events were reported.

Of the increased infections and cancers, Reich said, "Although these differences were not statistically significant, they lead to questions regarding a favorable risk-benefit profile of the drug."

Research on briakinumab is continuing. An ongoing three-year trial involves 248 people from the current study.

For people living with psoriasis, Bebo said the message from this study is that "dramatic progress has been made from where we were just five years ago."

Learn more about psoriasis treatments from the National Psoriasis Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Better than the competing WebMD story, this story quantified the serious infections and explained the two cancer cases seen in the briakinumab group.  It also explained that an earlier trial of the drug showed “some unexplained major adverse cardiac events.”  This was a more complete explanation than what WebMD provided.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
October 26, 2017 - For younger patients with severe damage to the rotator cuff muscles, a "reverse" shoulder replacement provides lasting improvement in shoulder function, according to a study in The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery. The journal is published in partnership with Wolters Kluwer.

"In the absence of treatment alternatives, reverse total shoulder arthroplasty [RTSA] is a justifiable treatment for patients with a massive, irreparable rotator cuff tear before the age of 60," according to the report by Christian Gerber, MD, of the University of Zurich and colleagues. Despite a substantial risk of complications, most patients are satisfied with the outcomes of RTSA at follow-ups of a decade or longer.

Stable Long-Term Results of RTSA in Patients Younger than 60

The researchers analyzed the long-term outcomes of RTSA in 20 patients, average age 57 years. All had "massive, irreparable" tears of the rotator cuff muscles, causing shoulder "pseudoparalysis,"with little no ability to lift the arm.

This group of patients typically gets limited benefit from shoulder replacement with conventional implants, which rely on the rotator cuff muscles to provide shoulder movement. The RTSA technique--using an implant in which the natural locations of the shoulder "ball and socket" are reversed--uses other muscles to move the shoulder, providing an alternative when the rotator cuff is severely damaged or destroyed.

When first introduced, RTSA was performed mainly in elderly patients who placed low demands on the shoulder. With refinements in technique and components in more recent years, the procedure has been used in younger, more active patients. But there are concerns about how well the results of RTSA will hold up over time in this group of patients.

The new study focused on long-term outcomes of RTSA in patients under age 60. The patients underwent follow-up examination between eight and 19 years after surgery (average 11.7 years). Three patients had RTSA in both shoulders, for a total of 23 procedures.

Compared to their preoperative status, most patients had substantial long-term improvement after RTSA. The average Constant score--a standard assessment accounting for shoulder motion, strength, daily activities, and pain--at the time of final-follow-up improved from 24 to 59 (out of a possible 100).

Patients' ratings of "subjective shoulder value" improved from 20 percent to 71 percent (compared to 100 percent for a normal shoulder). Shoulder movement and strength increased, while pain decreased. The improvement was similar for patients with and without prior shoulder surgery.

However, complications occurred in 39 percent of the shoulders. Further surgery was required in six shoulders; in two cases, the RTSA procedure was considered a failure.

When complications occurred, long-term shoulder functioning was not as good but even with the high complication rate, 72 percent of patients rated their satisfaction level as excellent or good.

The results alleviate concerns that the clinical benefits of RTSA might not hold up over time in younger, more active patients. Despite its high complication rate, Dr. Gerber and colleagues conclude that RTSA "provides substantial and lasting improvement" in shoulder function and pain, in a group of patients with limited treatment options.

Click here to read "Reverse Total Shoulder Arthroplasty for Massive, Irreparable Rotator Cuff Tears Before the Age of 60 Years: Long-Term Results."

About The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery

The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery (JBJS) has been the most valued source of information for orthopaedic surgeons and researchers for over 125 years and is the gold standard in peer-reviewed scientific information in the field. A core journal and essential reading for general as well as specialist orthopaedic surgeons worldwide, The Journal publishes evidence-based research to enhance the quality of care for orthopaedic patients. Standards of excellence and high quality are maintained in everything we do, from the science of the content published to the customer service we provide. JBJS is an independent, non-profit journal.

Wolters Kluwer N.V. (AEX: WKL) is a global leader in information services and solutions for professionals in the health, tax and accounting, risk and compliance, finance and legal sectors. We help our customers make critical decisions every day by providing expert solutions that combine deep domain knowledge with specialized technology and services.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2016 annual revenues of €4.3 billion. The company, headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands, serves customers in over 180 countries, maintains operations in over 40 countries and employs 19,000 people worldwide.

Wolters Kluwer Health is a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry. For more information about our products and the organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.

For more information about Wolters Kluwer's solutions and organization, visit http://www. , follow us on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release states, “However, complications occurred in 39 percent of the shoulders. Further surgery was required in six shoulders; in two cases, the RTSA procedure was considered a failure.”  It adds that, “When complications occurred, long-term shoulder functioning was not as good but even with the high complication rate, 72 percent of patients rated their satisfaction level as excellent or good.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eylea outperforms Avastin for diabetic macular edema with moderate or worse vision loss

NIH-funded clinical trial shows Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis perform similarly when vision loss is mild.

A two-year clinical trial that compared three drugs for diabetic macular edema (DME) found that gains in vision were greater for participants receiving the drug Eylea (aflibercept) than for those receiving Avastin (bevacizumab), but only among participants starting treatment with 20/50 or worse vision. Gains after two years were about the same for Eylea and Lucentis (ranibizumab), contrary to year-one results from the study, which showed Eylea with a clear advantage. The three drugs yielded similar gains in vision for patients with 20/32 or 20/40 vision at the start of treatment. The clinical trial was conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), which is funded by the National Eye Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health.

“This rigorous trial confirms that Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all effective treatments for diabetic macular edema,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D. “Eye care providers and patients can have confidence in all three drugs.”

Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all widely used to treat DME, a consequence of diabetes that can cause blurring of central vision due to the leakage of fluid from abnormal blood vessels in the retina. The macula is the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The drugs are injected into the eye and work by inhibiting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a substance that can promote abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage. Although the drugs have a similar mode of action, they differ significantly in cost. Based on Medicare allowable charges, the per-injection costs of each drug at the doses used in this study were about $1850 for Eylea, about $60 for Avastin, and about $1200 for Lucentis.

DRCR.net investigators enrolled 660 people with DME at 89 clinical trial sites across the United States. When the study began, participants on average were 61 years old with 17 years of type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Only people with a visual acuity of 20/32 or worse were eligible to participate (to see clearly, a person with 20/32 vision would have to be 20 feet away from an object that a person with normal vision could see clearly at 32 feet). At enrollment, about half the participants had 20/32 to 20/40 vision. The other half had 20/50 or worse vision. In many states, a corrected visual acuity of 20/40 or better in at least one eye is required for a driver’s license that allows both day- and nighttime driving.

Each participant was assigned randomly to receive Eylea (2.0 milligrams/0.05 milliliter), Avastin (1.25 mg/0.05 mL), or Lucentis (0.3 mg/0.05 mL). Participants were evaluated monthly during the first year and every 4-16 weeks during the second year. Most participants received monthly injections during the first six months. Thereafter, participants received additional injections of assigned study drug until DME resolved or stabilized with no further vision improvement. Subsequently, injections were resumed if DME worsened. Additionally, laser treatment was given if DME persisted without continual improvement after six months of injections. Laser treatment alone was the standard treatment for DME until widespread adoption of anti-VEGF drugs a few years ago.

Among participants with 20/40 or better vision at the trial’s start, all three drugs improved vision similarly on an eye chart. On average, participants’ vision improved from 20/40 vision to 20/25.

Among participants with 20/50 or worse vision at the trial’s start, visual acuity on average improved substantially in all three groups. At two years, Eylea participants were able to read about 3.5 additional lines on an eye chart; Lucentis participants were able to read about three additional lines, and Avastin participants improved about 2.5 lines, compared with visual acuity before treatment. Eylea outperformed Avastin at the one- and two-year time points. While Eylea outperformed Lucentis at the one-year time point, by the two-year time point gains in visual acuity were statistically no different. At the end of the trial, average visual acuity was 20/32 to 20/40 among participants in all three groups.

“The results of the DRCR Network’s comparison of Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis will help doctors and their patients with diabetic macular edema choose the most appropriate therapy,” said John A. Wells, M.D., the lead author of the study and a retinal specialist at the Palmetto Retina Center, Columbia, South Carolina. “The study suggests there is little advantage of choosing Eylea or Lucentis over Avastin when a patient’s loss of visual acuity from macular edema is mild, meaning a visual acuity of 20/40 or better. However, patients with 20/50 or worse vision loss may benefit from Eylea, which over the course of the two-year study outperformed Lucentis and Avastin.”

The number of injections participants needed was about the same for all three treatment groups. Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis participants on average required nine injections in the first year of the study and five in the second year.

The need for laser treatment varied among the three treatment groups. By two years, 41 percent of participants in the Eylea group received laser treatment to treat their macular edema, compared with 64 percent of participants in the Avastin group and 52 percent in the Lucentis group.

The risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from a cardiovascular condition or an unknown cause by end of the trial was higher among participants in the Lucentis group. Twelve percent of Lucentis participants had at least one event, compared with five percent of participants in the Eylea group and eight percent of participants in the Avastin group. This difference in cardiovascular rates has not been seen across all other studies, and therefore may be due to chance. Continued assessment of these serious cardiovascular events and their association with these drugs is important in future studies. Cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke are common complications of diabetes. The occurrence of eye complications, such as eye infections and inflammation, was similar for all three drugs.

Results of the study were published online today in Ophthalmology, the journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology. Eylea and Lucentis were provided by drug manufacturers Regeneron and Genentech, respectively. Additional research funding for this study was provided by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, also a part of NIH.

“This important study would not have happened without funding from the National Institutes of Health and the cooperation of two competing companies,” said Adam R. Glassman, M.S., principal investigator of the DRCR.Net Coordinating Center at the Jaeb Center for Health Research.

The DRCR.net is dedicated to facilitating multicenter clinical research of diabetic eye disease. The Network formed in 2002 and comprises more than 350 physicians practicing at more than 140 clinical sites across the country. For more information, visit the DRCR.net website at http://drcrnet.jaeb.org/.

The study was funded by grants EY14231, EY14229, and EY18817.

The study is registered as NCT01627249 at ClinicalTrials.gov.

Macular edema can arise during any stage of diabetic retinopathy and is the most common cause of diabetes-related vision loss. About 7.7 million Americans have diabetic retinopathy. Of these, about 750,000 have DME. The NEI provides information about diabetic eye disease at http://www.nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic. View an NEI video about how diabetic retinopathy can be detected through a comprehensive dilated eye exam at http://youtu.be/sQ-0RkPu35o.

NEI leads the federal government's research on the visual system and eye diseases. NEI supports basic and clinical science programs that result in the development of sight-saving treatments. For more information, visit http://www.nei.nih.gov.

The NIDDK, a component of the NIH, conducts and supports research on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, nutrition and obesity; and kidney, urologic and hematologic diseases. Spanning the full spectrum of medicine and afflicting people of all ages and ethnic groups, these diseases encompass some of the most common, severe and disabling conditions affecting Americans. For more information about the NIDDK and its programs, visit http://www.niddk.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that “The risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from a cardiovascular condition or an unknown cause by the end of the trial was higher among patients in the Lucentis group. Twelve percent of Lucentis participants had at least one event, compared with five percent of the participants in the Eylea group and eight percent of the participants in the Avantis group.”  This is useful information. The release also points out that more study is needed to determine if these treatments affect the rate of heart problems or if this observation was due to chance.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Many women with early-stage breast cancer can skip chemotherapy without hurting their odds of beating the disease — good news from a major study that shows the value of a gene-activity test to gauge each patient’s risk.

The test accurately identified a group of women whose cancers are so likely to respond to hormone-blocking drugs that adding chemo would do little if any good while exposing them to side effects and other health risks. In the study, women who skipped chemo based on the test had less than a 1 percent chance of cancer recurring far away, such as the liver or lungs, within the next five years.

‘‘You can’t do better than that,’’ said the study leader, Dr. Joseph Sparano of Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

An independent expert, Dr. Clifford Hudis of New York’s Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, agreed.

‘‘There is really no chance that chemotherapy could make that number better,’’ he said. Using the gene test ‘‘lets us focus our chemotherapy more on the higher risk patients who do benefit’’ and spare others the ordeal.

The study was sponsored by the National Cancer Institute. Results were published online Monday by the New England Journal of Medicine and discussed at the European Cancer Congress in Vienna.

The study involved the most common type of breast cancer — early stage, without spread to lymph nodes; hormone-positive, meaning the tumor’s growth is fueled by estrogen or progesterone; and not the type that the drug Herceptin targets. Each year, more than 100,000 women in the United States alone are diagnosed with this.

The usual treatment is surgery followed by years of a hormone-blocking drug. But many women also are urged to have chemo, to help kill any stray cancer cells that may have spread beyond the breast and could seed a new cancer later. Doctors know that most of these women don’t need chemo but there are no great ways to tell who can safely skip it.

A California company, Genomic Health Inc., has sold a test called Oncotype DX since 2004 to help gauge this risk. The test measures the activity of genes that control cell growth, and others that indicate a likely response to hormone therapy treatment.

Past studies have looked at how women classified as low, intermediate or high risk by the test have fared. The new study is the first to assign women treatments based on their scores and track recurrence rates.

Of the 10,253 women in the study, 16 percent were classified as low risk, 67 percent as intermediate and 17 percent as high risk for recurrence by the test. The high-risk group was given chemotherapy and hormone-blocking drugs. Women in the middle group were randomly assigned to get hormone therapy alone or to add chemo. Results on these groups are not yet ready — the study is continuing.

But independent monitors recommended the results on the low-risk group be released, because it was clear that adding chemo would not improve their fate.

After five years, about 99 percent had not relapsed, and 98 percent were alive. About 94 percent were free of any invasive cancer, including new cancers at other sites or in the opposite breast.

‘‘These patients who had low risk scores by Oncotype did extraordinarily well at five years,’’ said Dr. Hope Rugo, a breast cancer specialist at the University of California, San Francisco, with no role in the study. ‘‘There is no chance that for these patients, that chemotherapy would have any benefit.’’

Dr. Karen Beckerman, a New York City obstetrician diagnosed with breast cancer in 2011, said she was advised to have chemo but feared complications. A doctor suggested the gene test and she scored very low for recurrence risk.

‘‘I was convinced that there was no indication for chemotherapy. I was thrilled not to have to have it,’’ and has been fine since then, she said.

Mary Lou Smith, a breast cancer survivor and advocate who helped design the trial for ECOG, the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, which ran it, said she thought women ‘‘would be thrilled’’ to skip chemo.

‘‘Patients love the idea of a test’’ to help reduce uncertainty about treatment, she said. ‘‘I’ve had chemotherapy. It’s not pretty.’’

The test costs $4,175, which Medicare and many insurers cover. Others besides Oncotype DX also are on the market, and Hudis said he hopes the new study will encourage more, to compete on price and accuracy.

‘‘The future is bright’’ for gene tests to more precisely guide treatment, he said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We give the story the benefit of the doubt here. It mentions that adding chemo exposes patients “to side effects and other health risks,” but it doesn’t detail what those effects are. Two other people mentioned in the story refer to “complications” and chemo being “not pretty,” but the story does not elaborate on these comments. The National Cancer Institute lists a slew of side effects from undergoing cancer treatment, such as bleeding, fertility problems and hair loss.
On the flip side, researchers mentioned it’s possible that patients in the low risk group could experience relapses in the future, and it’s unclear if early administration of chemo would have helped in these cases. We address this point in the “Quality of Evidence” section, since researchers addressed this as a study limitation in their paper.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 20 (HealthDay News)-- An experimental drug for treating Alzheimer's disease that previously showed troubling side effects may actually be safe in the long run, researchers report.

The keys to the safety of the drug, bapineuzumab, may be lowering the dose and not giving it to patients with ApoE4, a gene mutation linked to Alzheimer's, according to two studies scheduled for presentation Wednesday at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference on Alzheimer's Disease in Paris.

"The data from the open-label trial are encouraging. Patients were able to tolerate bapineuzumab for two to four additional years without the emergence of any new safety concerns," said Dr. Stephen Salloway, author of one of the studies. "This is important because we are conceptualizing this drug as a long-term treatment for Alzheimer's disease."

Encouraging does not translate into certainty, however, another expert pointed out.

"I think it is too early to tell from the data from this small Phase 2 safety trial," said Ian Murray, an assistant professor of neuroscience and experimental therapeutics at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine in College Station. "We will have to wait for larger trials to comment on this as a potential therapy."

The studies were funded by Pfizer Inc. and Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy.

Although bapineuzumab has shown promise in certain Alzheimer's patients, other research found that patients taking a higher dose of the drug had an increased risk of brain inflammation from water retention. This resulted in headache, memory loss, hallucinations, reduced coordination or other symptoms. But no problems were seen with lower doses.

Bapineuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody, which binds to and might be able to eliminate beta amyloid peptide in the brains of people with Alzheimer's. Most experts believe that the build up of beta amyloid proteins, which accumulate as plaque, is responsible for Alzheimer's.

Salloway's study looked at the drug's safety in 194 Alzheimer's patients, most of whom had mild- to-moderate Alzheimer's and participated in a long-term (78 weeks or longer) study. Some of the participants were followed for four years or more.

Ninety-one percent of participants had side effects, about a quarter of which were attributable to bapineuzumab. Of these, 85 percent were mild or moderate.

The overall rate of vasogenic edema (water on the brain) was 9.3 percent, a number that decreased over time, said Salloway, a professor of neurology and psychiatry at Alpert Medical School of Brown University and director of the Butler Hospital Memory and Aging Program in Providence, R.I. The edema was symptomless in most cases, he said.

The other study, which involved looking at more than 2,000 MRI scans from 262 patients, found 36 cases of amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA) may have been linked to the bapineuzumab.

These imaging abnormalities may indicate inflammation of the brain caused by water retention.

But only 8 of those 36 cases involved symptoms, and they were more likely to be found in patients with APOE-e4 who were taking higher doses of the drug. The likelihood of these effects diminished with additional infusions of lower-dose bapineuzumab.

"There is a growing sense that VE [vasogenic edema] or ARIA [amyloid-related imaging abnormalities] is a manageable side effect and may actually be a sign that the drug is clearing amyloid from the brain and the blood vessels," said Salloway. "Treatment will require ongoing monitoring with MRI."

The researchers, who said monitoring of bapineuzumab will continue, are now awaiting the results of a larger Phase III trial on the drug.

Because this study was presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Alzheimer's Association has more on this condition.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story indicated that some patients taking the higher does of the drug experienced headache, memory loss, hallucinations, reduced coordination or other symptoms.  From the information in the story, it appeared that 8% (21/262) of patients participating in a second study using the lower dose of the medication had some anomalies on MRI scan but no reported symptoms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Data published by Alzheon in the Journal of the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease is the first report to associate efficacy of an amyloid-targeted drug with the number of APOE4 alleles

FRAMINGHAM, Mass., October 24, 2016 - Results published today in The Journal of the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease (JPAD) describe analyses of Phase 3 data for the investigational amyloid-targeted drug, tramiprosate, in patients with Mild to Moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD). These efficacy analyses evaluated patient subgroups based on the number of ε4 alleles of apolipoprotein E (APOE4), a major genetic risk factor in up to 65 percent of patients with AD. The published results showed a gene-dose effect at the high dose of tramiprosate (150 mg, twice daily), with patients with two APOE4 alleles (APOE4/4 homozygotes) showing the largest clinical benefit, those with one APOE4 allele (APOE4 heterozygotes) showing an intermediate benefit, while APOE4 non-carriers showed no benefit from tramiprosate. The results published in JPAD are the first evidence from a large clinical trial to associate efficacy of an amyloid-targeted agent with APOE4 status in AD patients.

The manuscript, titled "Clinical Benefits of Tramiprosate in Alzheimer's Disease Are Associated with Higher Number of APOE4 Alleles: The 'APOE4 Gene-Dose Effect'," is featured in the advanced online publication of The Journal of the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease (JPAD) with lead authors from Alzheon, Inc., a biopharmaceutical company focused on treatments for neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders. Based on the analyses in the publication, Alzheon is developing ALZ-801, an optimized oral prodrug of tramiprosate, and has refined the design of the pivotal clinical trial to evaluate ALZ-801 as a potential disease-modifying agent in symptomatic AD patients who are APOE4/4 homozygotes.

Anton P. Porsteinsson, MD, Professor of Psychiatry at the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry and Director of the Alzheimer's Disease Care, Research and Education Program at the University of Rochester in Rochester, NY, and an investigator in the North American Phase 3 clinical trial, commented: "The genetically-defined population of APOE4 carriers has an 8-12 fold increased risk of developing AD and has more rapidly progressive disease, usually becoming symptomatic a decade earlier than non-carriers of the APOE4 genotype. These analyses with tramiprosate in the APOE4 subgroups are compelling, and suggest a meaningful clinical benefit, on top of the existing symptomatic AD treatments, in Alzheimer's patients who are in great need of new treatments. We can apply these insights about the therapeutic response of APOE4 carriers to refine patient selection and potentially improve the success rate of new Alzheimer's medicines."

The efficacy and safety analyses with tramiprosate published in JPAD reveal a therapeutic effect in patients who are carriers of APOE4 after segmenting them from the larger, non-genetically-defined study population in the Phase 3 clinical program, involving more than 2,000 AD patients in North America and Europe. In the overall Mild and Moderate AD study population with baseline MMSE of 16-26 (and any APOE genotype), the North American study did not demonstrate a significant benefit with either of two tramiprosate doses (100 mg BID and 150 mg BID), compared to placebo, during the 78-week study period. As a result, the European study was terminated before completion, and the results were not previously published.

"To our knowledge, this is the first time that the clinical benefits of an amyloid-targeted agent have been associated with the number of APOE4 alleles in Alzheimer's patients. This new insight shows how we can apply a precision medicine approach in AD and develop this drug for the right patients, namely patients with the APOE4 genotype, which carries the highest risk as well as the earliest onset and faster disease progression," said Martin Tolar, MD, PhD, Founder, President and CEO of Alzheon. "These newly-published findings form the basis for the design of our Phase 3 program, and further support our company's commitment to advance ALZ-801 into pivotal studies in APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients who represent up to 15% of AD patients1. We are preparing to advance ALZ-801, a promising new treatment for Alzheimer's disease, into confirmatory clinical studies in 2017."

The observed gene-dose effects of tramiprosate in APOE4 carriers are consistent with the prevalence of amyloid pathology in AD patients. Amyloid imaging in AD clinical trials has shown the highest prevalence of positive amyloid scans in APOE4/4 homozygotes, and the lowest prevalence in APOE4 non-carriers. As one of the few orally-administered amyloid-targeted agents, tramiprosate blocks the aggregation of beta amyloid monomers into toxic oligomers, and was developed to show efficacy in patients with amyloid pathology and an accurate diagnosis of AD.

Efficacy Results in APOE4/4 Homozygous Patients from the JPAD Phase 3 Analyses

The published results showed the largest clinical benefit in the Alzheimer's APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients, who represent approximately 15 percent of patients in the study.3 APOE4/4 homozygous patients who received the high dose of tramiprosate showed efficacy benefit compared to placebo on both cognitive and functional measures in the Phase 3 analyses. The effects on the ADAS-cog cognitive outcome were significant at Week 65 (LS means difference from placebo: 3.47, nominal p = 0.007) and Week 78 (2.60, nominal p = 0.043), and corresponded to 66 percent and 40 percent benefit from tramiprosate compared to placebo. These effects were supported by functional benefits on the CDR-SB that showed a positive trend at Week 65 (LS means difference from placebo: 0.79, nominal p = 0.063) and were numerically in favor of tramiprosate at Week 78 (0.54, nominal p = 0.21).

"APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients are especially challenging since they are known to have the highest burden of amyloid pathology in cerebral cortex and blood vessels, which explains their susceptibility to ARIA-E with some amyloid-targeted treatments. In these new subgroup analyses, the high dose of tramiprosate showed promising clinical effects in APOE4/4 homozygous AD patients already receiving maximal standard of care, and this dose was not associated with any events of vasogenic edema," said Susan Abushakra, MD, Chief Medical Officer of Alzheon and lead author on the JPAD publication. "Replication of these findings in Alzheon's planned Phase 3 study would provide a meaningful therapeutic advance for AD patients with the APOE4/4 genotype, and we are now preparing to carry forward these results into the development of ALZ-801."

The safety profile of tramiprosate in 2,025 AD patients across the two studies was favorable and similar in the APOE4 carriers and non-carriers. The main adverse events were gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting and weight loss), which were mild or moderate in severity.

New ARIA-E safety analyses were reported in the JPAD publication. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluations in 426 patients were conducted during the Phase 3 studies and did not reveal any events of vasogenic brain edema (ARIA-E or amyloid-related imaging abnormalities-edema) on either dose of tramiprosate. Vasogenic edema (or brain swelling) is a side effect observed in clinical studies with some injectable anti-amyloid antibodies, which requires MRI monitoring and can occasionally be serious.

About Tramiprosate and the New Prodrug ALZ-801

In 2013, Alzheon obtained the license to tramiprosate and the associated portfolio of drug compounds, along with the historical clinical dataset, and applied new insights to the existing data. This led to the development of an optimized oral, amyloid-targeted drug candidate, ALZ-801. Alzheon developed ALZ-801 as a novel oral prodrug of tramiprosate, designed to improve the pharmacokinetic and gastrointestinal tolerability profile, while retaining tramiprosate as the active agent in ALZ-801. Phase 1 studies in more than 170 subjects, including healthy elderly, showed that ALZ-801 provides consistent plasma levels of tramiprosate, with very low inter-subject variability. The rate of nausea and vomiting was also lower than with tramiprosate tablets. ALZ-801 at the dose of 265 mg provided equivalent systemic plasma exposures to tramiprosate 150 mg tablets. Alzheon is advancing ALZ-801 into pivotal Phase 3 studies in the genetically-defined APOE4/4 homozygous patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Apolipoprotein E, or APOE, is a gene that provides a predictive window into an individual's Alzheimer's disease prognosis. APOE encodes for a protein called apolipoprotein E, which combines with fats to form lipoproteins that can be moved throughout the body. In the brain, apolipoprotein E helps shuttle cholesterol to neurons to support their normal function. There are three forms, or alleles, of the APOE gene, called ε2, ε3 and ε4. The ε4 allele has been found to correlate with high risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. People who inherit one copy of the ε4 allele, APOE4 heterozygotes, have an increased chance of developing the disease; those who inherit two copies of the allele, APOE4 homozygotes, are at even greater risk and tend to have more aggressive disease. The ε4 allele is significantly overrepresented in the Alzheimer's disease population compared to the general population: up to 65 percent of Alzheimer's patients carry one or two copies of the ε4 allele compared to about 25 percent of the general population.

Alzheon, Inc. is committed to developing innovative medicines by directly addressing the underlying pathology of devastating neurodegenerative disorders. Our lead Alzheimer's clinical candidate, ALZ-801, is a Phase 3-ready, first-in-class, small molecule oral inhibitor of amyloid aggregation and neurotoxicity - hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease. ALZ-801 is a novel prodrug that builds on the safety and efficacy profile of the active compound tramiprosate, which has been evaluated in clinical trials involving over 2,000 Alzheimer's patients. Our clinical expertise and technology platform is focused on developing drug candidates using a precision medicine approach based on individual genetic and biological information to advance therapies with the greatest impact for patients.

1 Ward et al. Neuroepidemiology; 2012; 38:1-17 

2 Sevigny et al. Nature; 2016; 537, 50-56 

3 Abushakra et al. J Prev Alz Dis 2016;3(4):219-228. Advanced online publication: http://www. 

4 Aisen et al, Arch Med Science; 2011; 7, 1: 102-111 

5 Degenhardt et al. Psychosomatics; 2016, 57:208-216 

6 Sperling et al. Alzheimer's & Dementia 7; 2011, 367-385
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release contained enough detail about safety issues to give it a satisfactory when it noted: “The safety profile of tramiprosate in 2,025 AD patients across the two studies was favorable and similar in the APOE4 carriers and non-carriers. The main adverse events were gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting and weight loss), which were mild or moderate in severity.”
We would have liked more discussion of how patients might use the drug and whether there are any other harms that could loom from treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A common treatment for prostate cancer may slightly increase patients' risk of heart problems, new research says.

Experts said the findings could make doctors think twice before prescribing the standard hormone treatment to men with prostate cancer, particularly if they are at risk of heart disease. The research was announced Tuesday at a joint meeting of the European Cancer Organisation and the European Society for Medical Oncology in Berlin.

"What we can do with these results is to raise a flag with hormone treatments," said Mieke Van Hemelrijck, a cancer epidemiologist at King's College in London and the study's lead researcher.

More than 670,000 men are diagnosed with prostate cancer globally every year, making it the second-most common cancer in men, after lung cancer. In the U.S., about 600,000 men are being treated with endocrine therapies for prostate cancer.

Van Hemelrijck and colleagues studied more than 30,000 men in Sweden with prostate cancer who got hormone therapy between 1997 and 2006, for about three years. They compared the rate of heart problems in those patients to the rate in the general Swedish population.

Prostate cancer patients had a 28 percent higher relative chance of having a fatal heart attack and a 21 percent increased chance of dying from heart disease. Still, these risks were low in absolute terms: researchers estimated the hormone therapies would cause an extra 10 heart problems – like chest pain or a heart attack – a year for every 1,000 prostate cancer patients.

"What patients should do is talk about this with their doctor," said Michael Thun, a vice president emeritus at the American Cancer Society, who was not connected to the research. "It makes a lot of sense and could one day change treatment guidelines."

Previous studies have found hormone therapy given to prostate cancer patients with a history of heart disease increases their chances of dying.

Van Hemelrijck hypothesized that hormone therapy disrupts the normal circulation of testosterone in the body. Scientists think testosterone has some protective effect on the heart. Thus, hormones that interfere with testosterone could be deadly.

"There is no definitive evidence, though the risk of heart problems is definitely something doctors should consider when prescribing hormone treatment," Thun said.

Helen Rippon, head of research management at Britain's Prostate Cancer Charity, said the benefits of hormone therapy ultimately outweighed the increased risk of heart problems. "This is not a colossal risk," Rippon said.

"For the vast majority of men, the benefits of hormone therapy are absolutely clear: it can halt the disease or stop it for years," she said. "Clinicians always make decisions on a case-by-case basis, and this is one more piece of information for them to consider."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


This story focuses on one potential harm of hormonal therapies given to men with prostate cancer. And while some specifics are included in the body of the story, the headline and lead of the story paint a much harsher picture of the potential risk than do the actual statistics reported by the researchers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - The experimental orphan drug teprotumumab significantly reduces the eye bulging associated with Graves’ disease, according to results of a small trial.

Among the 88 participants with moderate-to-severe disease who were given intravenous infusions of either teprotumumab or a dummy drug every three weeks for eight treatments, 43 percent who got the real drug had a reduction of at least 2 millimeters in eye protrusion by the sixth week compared to 4 percent in the placebo group.

“In virtually all the responders, the changes are frequently what anyone would call dramatic,” said lead study author Dr. Terry Smith of the University of Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor.

The eyes don’t have that bulging appearance, he said, and many of them return to the degree of bulging they had before they got the disease.

“That’s something that we almost never see in someone who’s manifested the degree of disease one needed to have in order to get into the study,” Smith said.

The marked reduction in bulging is similar to that reported after decompression surgery, Smith and his colleagues write in the New England Journal of medicine.

Graves’ disease is the most common cause of overactive thyroid in the United States, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). It is an autoimmune disorder, in which the immune system attacks the thyroid gland.

Certain immune-system signaling molecules also target other tissues in the body, including in the eyes, which causes their bulging appearance, sometimes known as Graves’ eyes. About 30 percent of people with Graves’ disease develop mildly bulging eyes, and 2 to 5 percent develop severe bulge. This eye condition usually lasts one to two years and often improves on its own, according to NIDDK.

Teprotumumab blocks one of these immune signaling molecules, so researchers wanted to see what effect it might have on the eyes of Graves’ patients with moderate to severe bulge.

The study “included some of the worst cases imaginable and we’re now wondering whether the drug might find expanded utility in much-less-severe disease,” Smith told Reuters Health in a telephone interview.

By week 24, the response rate was 69 percent with the drug and 20 percent with placebo. Among those who completed therapy, the rates were 79 percent and 22 percent, respectively.

More people who received the drug had sizeable reductions in disease activity and reductions of 3 mm or more in eye bulge compared to the placebo group, the researchers note.

However, while only 10 percent of patients who received the drug had double vision before the study, that rose to 50 percent by 24 weeks.

High blood sugar was also a key side effect in participants who already had diabetes, the study team notes, but adjusting diabetes medications solved that problem.

The typical treatment for Graves’ eyes is glucocorticoids, which are not always effective and also have side effects, the study team notes.

The drug, also known as RV001 or R1507, has been developed by Genmab and Roche. River Vision Development Corporation licensed the drug from Roche. On Monday, Horizon Pharma announced that it was acquiring River Vision, which paid for the new study.

Smith said FDA approval could come sometime in 2018. Enrollment in a follow-up trial is expected to begin within six weeks.

The duration of response to the autoimmune inflammatory disease, along with the quick response to initial therapy, suggests fewer infusions may be just as effective, “but future studies will sort that out,” Smith said.

The researchers also cautioned that the study only included volunteers with active disease of recent onset so “the potential of teprotumumab in benefiting patients with milder, less active, or stable disease was not assessed.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/2qSTjSn New England Journal of Medicine, online May 3, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that using the new drug brought on double vision among 50 percent of the patients by six months. Only 10 percent of the patients admitted double vision at the start of the trial.  Also, the story states that “High blood sugar was also a key side effect in participants who already had diabetes, the study team notes, but adjusting diabetes medications solved that problem.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Even if you’re not a big fan of seafood, you probably know that adding more fish to your diet can do a lot of good, from improving your heart health to lowering inflammation. Now, according to scientists at the University of Colorado, there is even evidence that the healthy fat can boost your chances of getting pregnant.

The study, presented at the American Society of Reproductive Medicine annual meeting, was in mice, so more research needs to be completed before omega 3 foods or supplements become part of treatment for infertility. But Dr. Malgorzata Skaznik-Wikiel, an obstetrician-gynecologist who led the study, is encouraged. She worked with a group of mice that are genetically bred to have healthy ratios of omega 3 fatty acids. These mice are born with the ability to bathe cells and tissues in omega 3 fats, so the team then looked at their egg development in the ovaries.

What she found: The mice with the higher levels of omega 3 fatty acids seemed to have more precursors to egg cells than control mice with lower levels of the fat, meaning they had a larger reserve of eggs-to-be. These could then mature into a healthy egg that is fertilized and can lead to a live birth. When the ovaries were examined even further, Skaznik-Wikiel also found that the quality of the eggs were better among the animals with higher levels of omega 3s. Higher quality eggs improves the chances that the egg will be fertilized and develop into a live pup.

“Based on this study, it looks very encouraging that omega 3s can potentially improve fertility,” says Skaznik-Wikiel. “Our study shows that there may be some relationship between dietary factors and things like egg quality so one idea may be recommending supplementation with omega 3s to improve fertility.”

Exactly how the healthy omega 3 fatty acids are helping the ovary to produce better quality eggs isn’t clear yet. But other studies Skaznik-Wikiel has done with mice suggests that these fats may lower levels of inflammation that can adversely affect ovarian function.

More studies need to replicate and confirm the role that omega 3 fatty acids might play in fertility, but for now, Skaznik-Wikiel says that there isn’t much harm in consuming more omega 3 fats. (Some people who are predisposed to bleeding problems may be at higher risk of hemorrhages with high doses of omega 3s, but those cases are relatively rare.)

There may also be other benefits linked to omega 3 fatty acids for the fetus as well, in helping nerve development — that’s why many prenatal vitamins include forms of omega 3 fats. “We hope in the future to have more answers to be able to say firmly that yes, omega 3 fatty acids are the way to go [for women hoping to get pregnant,]” she says. “But even without that firm answer at this point I don’t see the harm in supplementing.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that the researcher “says there isn’t much harm in consuming more omega 3 fats;” it adds that high doses of omega 3s, in rare cases, increase the risk of hemorrhage in people prone to bleeding problems. That is just enough to merit a satisfactory rating.
It does not mention, however, that omega 3 supplements can cause allergic reactions in people with allergies to either fish or to the plants, seeds or nuts from which the supplements are derived. MayoClinic.org also notes that “there is not enough information at this time regarding the safety of fish oils when used in amounts greater than those found in foods during pregnancy and breastfeeding,” which suggests that the risks of supplement use could be higher among the most likely audience for this story: women who have been trying to get pregnant.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 14 (HealthDay News) -- A drug commonly used to prevent excess bleeding in surgeries could keep thousands of people from bleeding to death after trauma, a new study suggests.

The drug, tranexamic acid (TXA) is cheap, widely available around the world and easily administered, experts said. It works by significantly reducing the rate at which blood clots break down, the researchers explained.

"When people have serious injuries, whether from accidents or violence, and when they have severe hemorrhage they can bleed to death. This treatment reduces the chances of bleeding to death by about a sixth, " said researcher Dr. Ian Roberts, a professor of epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in the U.K.

According to Roberts, each year about 600,000 people bleed to death worldwide. "So, if you could reduce that by a sixth, you've saved 100,000 lives in one year," he said.

The report, which was primarily funded by philanthropic groups and the British government, is published in the June 15 online edition of The Lancet.

For the study, Roberts and colleagues in the CRASH-2 consortium randomly assigned more than 20,000 trauma patients from 274 hospitals across 40 countries to injections of either TXA or placebo.

Among patients receiving TXA, the rate of death from any cause was cut by 10 percent compared to patients receiving placebo, the researchers found. In the TXA group, 14.5 percent of the patients died compared with 16 percent of the patients in the placebo group.

When the researchers looked at deaths from bleeding, those in the TXA group experienced a 15 percent reduction in mortality. Among patients receiving TXA, 4.9 percent died from bleeding, compared with 5.7 percent of the patients receiving placebo, they found.

Although there was some worry that TXA might lead to more heart attacks, strokes or clots in the lungs, the researchers observed no such increase among patients getting the drug.

Dr. Jerrold H. Levy, deputy chair for research at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that, "these data are really neat, because any therapy to reduce mortality in trauma is, I think, a major finding."

Using this drug to treat trauma patients is a completely new idea, Levy said. "I think people should consider it [TXA] following trauma on the basis of this study," he said.

Currently, TXA is not generally used in emergency rooms to treat trauma patients, but Roberts believes that this study could change that.

"It's not our job to tell doctors how to treat their patients, but this is a drug that is safe and effective in a condition where people have a high risk of death," he said.

The researchers believe that TXA could have even wider uses, such as reducing brain bleeds after brain injury. The drug could also be used to reduce postpartum bleeding, which the researchers say causes some 100,000 deaths a year worldwide.

In fact, a trial to see whether TXA can reduce postpartum bleeding has started, the team noted.

Levy however, cautioned that the results of this study apply only to TXA and do not mean that people should try similar drugs hoping for similar results.

"Everybody wants to be creative, but you have to look at the data, and they used TXA," Levy said. "You can't get creative and say 'Ah, one of the other drugs will do the same thing' -- you don't know that, and that's one of my concerns."

For more information on trauma, visit the U.S. National Institute of General Medical Science.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story correctly states that the researchers observed no increase in clots in the patients receiving TXA, earning enough for a satisfactory. However, we wish it had included, as the AP did, a caveat regarding the difficulty of identifying clots in trauma patients who subsequently die.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A comparison of 2 of the most common combination therapies for locally advanced prostate cancer show the more aggressive option is linked with a higher rate of survival

(Philadelphia) - High-risk prostate cancer, that which has continued to grow but not yet metastasized, is commonly treated with combination therapies. Each method has pros and cons, but there is little clarity whether one might be more effective than the other. For the first time, researchers have shown that more patients live longer if treated with the combination of prostate removal plus radiation therapy. The research was published September 25th in the journal Cancer.

"There's a lot of debate about whether to remove the whole prostate and follow up with radiation therapy. Or, as a second option, to spare the prostate and treat it using radiation therapy plus hormone-blocking therapy," said senior author Grace Lu-Yao, PhD, Associate Director of Population Science at the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center - Jefferson Health, one of only eight NCI-designated cancer centers nationwide with a prostate cancer program of excellence. "Our study suggests that removing the prostate followed by adjuvant radiotherapy is associated with greater overall survival in men with prostate cancer."

The risks of prostate removal, or prostatectomy, are well known and include higher chance of developing incontinence and erectile dysfunction. There are some risks associated with radiation treatment and hormone therapy, but they are less common, and are typically thought to have a lower impact on quality of life. "Prostatectomy is an unpopular treatment," said Lu-Yao. "Our study showed that only six percent of men with high-risk cancer were treated with it." It's not just the risk of side effects.For some men, especially those who are not fit enough for the surgery, prostatectomy is not an option. However, this may be an option for some patients to reconsider."

In the largest population-based retrospective study to date, Dr. Lu-Yao and colleagues examined the records of 13,856 men in the Medicare-SEER registry diagnosed with locally advanced prostate cancer -- cancer growth that had not yet metastasized to distant sites in the body. Dr. Lu-Yao and colleagues looked at the patients who were treated either with prostatectomy plus adjuvant radiation as one group, and compared them to another group who were treated with radiation therapy plus hormone-blocking therapy. They matched the comparison groups by age, race and co-morbidity to control for factors that may influence patient outcomes, and analyzed which group did better 10 to 15 years after their procedures.

They found that 10 years after treatment, 89 percent of the prostate removal plus radiation group was still alive. That compared with the 74 percent survival at ten years in the group that received only radiation plus hormone therapy, amounting to a 15 percent survival advantage in the group that was treated with prostate removal.

"For high-risk prostate patients we started the use of aggressive radiation therapy after surgery 20 years ago," said Adam Dicker, Senior Vice President and Chair of the Department of Enterprise Radiation Oncology at Jefferson Health, who was not involved in the study. "We recognized that it may have curative potential."

"However, the proportion of men undergoing prostatectomy plus radiation therapy decreased significantly over time and there were trade-offs for the survival advantages," said Dr. Lu-Yao. Men who received the combination of surgery and radiotherapy had higher rates of erectile dysfunction (28 percent vs 20 percent) and higher rates of urinary incontinence (49 percent vs 19 percent).

Another interesting finding from the research was that slightly more than half of men diagnosed with the disease did not receive combination therapies for their prostate cancer. "Two modes of treatment are recommended by both United States and European guidelines for cancer treatment. It was surprising to see only 29 percent of patients received the recommended combination therapies, and as many as 20 percent are not getting any treatment six months after their diagnosis," said Dr. Lu-Yao. "Our data can't tell us the reason for this deviation from guidelines and further studies are needed."

"One of the strengths of retrospective studies of patient data is that it reveals what happens in the real world, rather than the carefully controlled context of a clinical trial," said Dr. Lu-Yao. "Our data is revealing the real-world practice as well as some of the advantages and disadvantages of those medical preferences."

"This important study demonstrates that many men with high-risk prostate cancer derive a survival advantage through a multi-modality approach to their disease. Several large clinical trials are nearing completion that should validate these retrospective findings of the benefits of primary radical prostatectomy followed by additional therapies such as adjuvant radiation," said Leonard Gomella, Chair of the Department of Urology at Jefferson (Philadelphia University + Thomas Jefferson University), who was not involved in this research.

The study was funded by the New Jersey Health Foundation, the National Cancer Institute (P30 CA-072720 and CA-116399 and the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey Biometrics Shared Resource. A complete list of potential conflict interest disclosures can be found in the manuscript.

Article reference: Thomas L. Jang, Neal Patel, Izak Faiena, Kushan Radadia, Dirk F. Moore, Sammy E. Elsamra, Eric A. Singer, Mark N. Stein, James A. Eastham, Peter T. Scardino, Yong Lin, Isaac Y. Kim, Grace L. Lu-Yao, "Comparative effectiveness of radical prostatectomy with adjuvant radiotherapy versus radiotherapy plus androgen deprivation therapy for men with advanced prostate cancer," Cancer, DOI: 10.1002/cncr.31726, 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This was a strength. The release stated: “Men who received the combination of surgery and radiotherapy had higher rates of erectile dysfunction (28 percent vs 20 percent) and higher rates of urinary incontinence (49 percent vs 19 percent).”
The news release also stated: “The risks of prostate removal, or prostatectomy, are well known and include higher chance of developing incontinence and erectile dysfunction. There are some risks associated with radiation treatment and hormone therapy, but they are less common, and are typically thought to have a lower impact on quality of life.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Monitoring high-risk pregnancies with ultrasound tests may help prevent some fetal and newborn deaths, a new research review finds.

The review assessed a technology called Doppler ultrasound, which measures blood flow through the umbilical cord. Abnormal findings indicate that the fetus may be under stress.

Doppler ultrasound, done in the third trimester, is an established way to monitor high-risk pregnancies — those complicated by problems like poor fetal growth or health conditions in the mother, such as high blood pressure and heart and kidney diseases.

Still, the benefits of such monitoring had not been entirely clear. There have been concerns that abnormal findings on Doppler ultrasound may prompt doctors to sometimes unnecessarily intervene — by, for instance, performing a cesarean section.

But in the new review, researchers found that across 16 studies of more than 10,000 high-risk pregnancies, Doppler ultrasound testing was linked to a 29 percent reduction in fetal and newborn deaths.

Among women who did not receive ultrasound monitoring, 1.7 percent suffered a fetal or newborn death, versus 1.2 percent of women who underwent ultrasound.

The benefit seemed to stem from better decisions on C-sections and inductions of labor, according to the researchers, led by Dr. Zarko Alfirevic of the University of Liverpool in the UK.

He and his colleagues report their review findings in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, which is published by the Cochrane Collaboration, an international research organization that evaluates medical studies.

In an interview, Alfirevic said that the evidence supports using Doppler in high-risk pregnancies where the mother has high blood pressure or the fetus is abnormally small. In these cases, the fetus may not be getting enough nutrients and oxygen through the placenta.

“These women really should have a Doppler investigation of the umbilical artery,” Alfirevic said. Typically, high-risk women would receive other types prenatal testing as well, such as electronic fetal-heart monitoring.

“We’re just saying this (Doppler ultrasound) should be part of it,” Alfirevic said.

In practice, Doppler ultrasound may also be recommended for women who have diabetes or are having a prolonged pregnancy (beyond 42 weeks). But there is not yet strong evidence that these women benefit, Alfirevic said.

In general, he and his colleagues found, the trials included in the review, which were mainly done in the 1990s, had their shortcomings. Some had flaws in their design, while in other cases the researchers failed to provide details on key elements of the study design.

However, with Doppler an established technique for monitoring high-risk pregnancies, Alfirevic said it is very unlikely that any future studies will test Doppler against no Doppler — as most studies in this review did.

Research, according to Alfirevic, has moved on to other questions, including how to best manage abnormal findings from a Doppler scan.

In some cases, early delivery may be the best course, but it is unclear whether other options — such as bed rest or tighter blood pressure control in a woman with high blood pressure — are effective.

Another question, Alfirevic said, is whether ultrasounds of blood vessels other than the umbilical artery might improve pregnancy outcomes.

One thing that is clear, the researcher stressed, is that Doppler ultrasound is not necessary for women with average, healthy pregnancies.

“There is no evidence to suggest that it should be done in low-risk women,” Alfirevic said.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story notes that there has been concern that the use of Doppler ultrasound might increase unnecessary interventions, including cesarean section deliveries in cases where it is not actually needed. It says the studies indicated that Doppler ultrasound appeared to lead to better decisions about cesarean sections and inductions of labor. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The finding is another in a series suggesting that early detection of cancer might not always lead to better outcomes for patients. A study published in March, for instance, suggested that early detection of using the blood test did not help men live longer but did lead to unnecessary treatments.

This new study does not refer to initial diagnosis of ovarian cancer, only to a relapse. Doctors are convinced that if the initial diagnosis can be made early, which is very difficult, the cancer can be treated by surgery. But for relapsed ovarian cancer, surgery is usually not an option.

Dr. Beth Karlan, director of gynecologic oncology at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in , said the results of the new trial would “make us all rethink the approach to treating patients with recurrent ovarian cancer.”

Dr. Karlan, who was not involved in the study but presented a commentary on it, said CA125 testing should be done less frequently. But she stopped short of saying it should be eliminated, saying that in any event, patients would not accept that.

“Many women often say they live from one CA125 to the next,” she said.

The new study, done in and nine other countries, compared 265 women who began chemotherapy after their CA125 levels began to rise with 264 women who waited to begin chemotherapy until they had symptoms, like or pain.

The group getting the test began chemotherapy a median of about five months earlier. But the overall median survival for the groups was the same, about months from the start of their remission. Moreover, the extra chemotherapy seemed to worsen the quality of life.

Dr. Rustin said the explanation for the counterintuitive results was not that CA125 was a poor predictor of cancer’s return. Rather, he said, some cancers were sensitive to chemotherapy, so it did not matter if they were treated early. Other were resistant to chemotherapy and would not respond to treatment no matter when it was given.

Dr. Andrew Berchuck, director of gynecologic oncology at , said that while “it’s the American way, sort of, to be aggressive” and treat early, some doctors and patients even now did not start chemotherapy when CA125 rises.

“I’ve had patients who wouldn’t dream of not being treated,” Dr. Berchuck said. “But there are also people who wouldn’t want to go back on chemo unless they absolutely have to.”

Diane Paul, an ovarian cancer survivor and patient advocate in , said that when she was getting the CA125 test, she asked her doctors not to tell her the results, to reduce her anxiety. “I was in a constant state of , waiting for the test, waiting for the results,” she said.

But others would prefer to know. “This makes me feel in control of this disease,” said Carol Tawney of Shawnee, Kan., a seven-year survivor who has her CA125 tested every two months.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the major harm of CA-125 testing, which is that it could lead to unnecessary treatment in women who would not benefit from it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Sept. 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Pancreatic cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy after surgery don't see improved long-term survival with the drug gemcitabine, compared with patients receiving a chemotherapy regimen consisting of fluorouracil and folinic acid, new research suggests.

The finding, reported in the Sept. 8 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, stems from work conducted by Dr. John P. Neoptolemos, of the Cancer Research U.K. Liverpool Cancer Trials Unit at the University of Liverpool in England, and colleagues.

The study authors noted that, currently, the prognosis for pancreatic cancer is very poor, with a five-year survival rate of less than 5 percent. Surgery to remove cancerous tissue can boost the odds to as much as 10 percent, however, and there is active search underway to improve a patient's chances even more by adding in additional chemotherapy following surgery.

The pool of nearly 1,100 patients that the researchers focused on were part of the large European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer trial that took place across 159 pancreatic cancer centers located in Europe, Canada, Australasia and Japan.

Between 2000 and 2007, the participants were divided into one of two six-month chemotherapy groups: one receiving fluorouracil and folinic acid post-surgery and the other receiving gemcitabine.

After nearly three years of treatment, the researchers found almost no difference between survival rates in the two groups.

Those who received fluorouracil and folinic acid chemotherapy had lived an average of 23 months. At the one- and two-year markers, survival rates for that group was approximately 78.5 and 48 percent, respectively.

At the three-year mark, patients on the gemcitabine regimen achieved an average survival rate of 23.6 months. One- and two-year survival rates were 80 and 49 percent, respectively, the investigators found.

"In conclusion, gemcitabine did not result in improved overall survival compared with fluorouracil plus folinic acid in patients with [surgically removed] pancreatic cancer," the authors concluded in their report.

However, the team did observe one appreciable difference: patients on gemcitabine were less likely to experience serious side effects as a result of their chemotherapy treatment than those on the fluorouracil/folinic acid treatment (7.5 percent versus 14 percent).

Dr. Michael Choti, a professor of surgery and oncology at the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, described the study as "important," but he does not believe it will alter the current approach to post-surgical chemotherapy.

"Really in the scope of things following major surgery, both are fairly tolerable regimens, and this study doesn't necessarily change the pattern of use in terms of choosing post-operative therapy," Choti said.

"But the point is that pancreatic cancer is a terrible disease, and really just a minority of patients are candidates for surgery. And even for those, unfortunately 75 to 80 percent of those will go on to recur even after the surgery appears to be successful. So, indeed, there has been a strong interest in giving the best additional therapy possible," Choti added.

"So this is not a revolutionary finding, but it's part of an effort to look at what we have and even to find newer regimens with more combinations of drugs," he noted. "And that's exactly what's already underway, as we search for more aggressive and more successful treatments."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more information on pancreatic cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Harms and tolerability are discussed, and the rates of serious side effects for each group are provided. Specific examples of those serious effects would’ve been ideal, such as were provided in the JAMA editorial: “more stomatitis and diarrhea [were] observed in the fluorouracil and leucovorin group and more myelosuppression in the gemcitabine group.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a step toward developing a blood test that would detect eight common cancers, possibly even before symptoms appear.

As they report Thursday in the journal Science, they're hoping their idea would eventually lead to a $500 test that can screen for cancer and identify people with the disease when it's in its earliest stages and more treatable.

But they have a long way to go.

There have been many attempts over the decades to develop blood tests to screen for cancers. Some look for proteins in the blood that appear with cancer. Others more recently have focused on DNA from tumors. But these methods alone don't give reliable results.

So Nickolas Papadopoulos, a professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, collaborated with many colleagues at the medical school to develop a new approach. It combines two methods into one test.

Their experimental test, dubbed CancerSEEK, focuses on eight major cancers: lung, breast, colon, pancreas, liver, stomach, ovary and esophagus.

"We selected those eight cancers based on how frequent they are, also [because] a lot of them do not have any screening modality right now," Papadopoulos says.

The researchers looked at 1,005 people who had been diagnosed with these cancers. The blood test found signs of cancer in about 70 percent of them.

They also looked at 812 people without cancer diagnoses and found just seven of them — less than 1 percent — apparently had a false reading that found cancer. A low false-positive rate is critical for any test that could be used widely to screen people for cancer.

Of course, the ultimate goal of this test is to find cancer in people who haven't already been diagnosed. And that percentage could well be lower than the 70 percent average. For example, the test was successful only about 40 percent of the time in the patients the researchers studied with the earliest stage 1 cancers.

Though 40 percent success would be far from ideal, "we still think this is a very important milestone in detecting cancers in asymptomatic people," Papadopoulos says. "That could save their life."

"I am incredibly excited by this new paper," says Joshua Schiffman, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Huntsman Cancer Center at the University of Utah who was not involved in the study. "This is the paper that's going to set the field in motion."

But Schiffman points out that there are many issues to work out – even assuming the test proves reliable among people who have not been previously diagnosed with cancer. For instance, if the success rate is around 40 percent at detecting cancer, that means it misses cancers more often than it finds it.

"The thing we worry about quite often is ... if we have a test result that is negative we don't want to give false reassurance to the patient," he says. He is concerned that patients will think to themselves, "Even though I have this weird stomach pain that won't go away, I know it's not cancer. I'm not going to go to the doctor because the CancerSEEK test told me it was negative," Schiffman says. "And that would be a terrible thing."

Another problem is that the test results find signs of cancer, but often fail to pinpoint which part of the body is affected. "That's a tremendous problem that has to be overcome," he says.

"We've come about one step in a thousand-mile journey," says Vinay Prasad, an oncologist and cancer researcher at the Oregon Health and Science University who was not involved in the study.

First, he notes, the Hopkins team will need to demonstrate that the test will be useful in patients without symptoms. Then the researchers will need to show that the rate of false alarms remains very low, otherwise people will be sent on needless and expensive medical odysseys.

And for the test to be useful, "you've got to find cancer that's going to otherwise be lethal, and not cancer that would otherwise be destined to do nothing," Prasad says.

That's been a huge problem with previous cancer screening tests, especially for prostate cancer and breast cancer, and has led to pointless and potentially dangerous treatments, he says.

An effective screening test would hold lots of potential for cancer patients, Prasad says.

"We want this to be true, we hope that this is true, but we have learned through 30, 40, 50 years of cancer screening that we have to do the right studies at the outset to know that it's true," Prasad says.

The scientists at Hopkins have already launched their next study, which could involve tens of thousands of apparently healthy volunteers who are enrolled in the Geisinger Health Plan in Pennsylvania. Their experience will help answer the next big question, which is whether CancerSEEK will pick up cancer in people who don't have symptoms.

If that multiyear experiment succeeds, the researchers will still have to demonstrate that the test improves and extends the lives of cancer patients.

Papadopoulos is less concerned that the test could detect cancers that might not in fact benefit from treatment.

"In a personal level, I do want to know," he says. "That doesn't mean I have to go and have a surgery. However, I still think this is very useful information, knowing that something is happening and follow it up."

As for the cost of the test, Papadopoulos says the research team has tried hard to make it affordable. They're hoping to make it economical, so that each test could cost about $500. But he says Johns Hopkins holds the patent and has not licensed it as yet to a company that would ultimately set the price.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does an excellent job of finding an independent source who explains that one of the potential risks of cancer screening tests is either identifying cancers that are not there, or are benign, and can lead to “pointless and potentially dangerous treatments.”
The opposite harm is also mentioned; that is, a screening test that erroneously gives a negative result, leading providers to falsely reassure a patient that cancer is not there.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- An intrauterine device that releases a progestin hormone may be an effective treatment for younger women with early-stage uterine cancer, Italian researchers report.

By delaying a total hysterectomy, which is the usual treatment for endometrial cancer, the IUD allows women to remain fertile and possibly to have families, according to the study published online Wednesday in Annals of Oncology, the monthly journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology.

"The study was done to see if this was a viable option for younger women who want to preserve fertility," said Dr. Jamie Bakkum-Gamez, senior associate consultant in the division of gynecologic surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. "We see it as buying more time to have a family and, once that's completed, to have a hysterectomy."

"It's a very important trial," added Dr. Angeles Alvarez Secord, associate professor of gynecologic oncology at Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center in Durham, N.C. "I've been using [the IUD] clinically for several years now for this purpose in patients who desire future fertility and some patients who cannot undergo surgery or who are at high risk for surgical complications. It's a fantastic alternative to treat patients with these diseases, and this study will help doctors when they discuss [treatment options] with patients."

Bakkum-Gomez has also used the method in her practice and is conducting a study of the IUD, which was originally designed as a contraceptive device, for this purpose.

About 3 percent to 5 percent of women who get endometrial cancer, which affects the womb lining, are under the age of 40 and will lose their fertility if they undergo a hysterectomy. The majority of these women have not yet had children, according to background information in the article.

Although the IUD is not yet approved to treat endometrial cancer, it is approved and widely used to treat endometriosis and abnormal uterine bleeding.

While hysterectomy or removal of the uterus is the accepted treatment for this kind of cancer, doctors have been using the hormone in oral form for the past 20 years, but only for "well-selected groups of women," said Dr. Elizabeth Poynor, a gynecologic oncologist and pelvic surgeon with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Well selected," in this case, means those with early-stage disease who want to maintain their fertility, much like the group in this trial.

Oral hormone treatment to slow down the cancer's growth is a systemic therapy, however, and can have adverse side effects such as skin rashes, nausea and vomiting, headaches and abnormal uterine bleeding, according to background material accompanying the study.

The theoretical -- but still unproven -- advantage to this new IUD method, Poynor said, is that "there is a lower risk of systemic side effects . . . and that you may be giving higher doses of the drug directly into the uterus."

The authors followed 20 Italian patients from January 1996 to June 2009 with atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH), which often precedes the cancer, and 14 women with early-stage endometrial cancer confined to the inner layer of the womb.

Participants -- all of whom were between ages 20 and 40 -- had an IUD known as Mirena, which released levonorgestrel, inserted for a year. They also received monthly injections of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which halts estrogen production, for six months.

The IUD was removed at the end of the year if there was no evidence of cancer.

Ninety-five percent of women with AEH initially saw their lesions disappear completely, while 57.1 percent of women with early-stage cancer also responded completely to the treatment. (The disease progressed in one of the women with AEH and four of the women with early-stage cancer.)

Of the patients with AEH, four later relapsed and required further treatment; of the women with early-stage cancer, two who had an initial complete response relapsed. However, all the women were alive and seemingly cancer-free by the end of the study after further treatment (either the IUD and GnRH treatment or a hysterectomy), the study reported.

"They did show a higher recurrence or progression rate with endometrial cancer than with AEH and that is consistent with other data," said Bakkum-Gamez, who added that the IUD method would not be appropriate for later-stage cancers, which tend to be more aggressive.

No adverse effects from treatment were noted, according to the researchers, who declared no conflicts of interest.

In background material, the researchers stated the progestin-releasing IUD should be effective in treating AEH and also early endometrial cancer, as long as those patients were evaluated with laparoscopy, ultrasound and MRI to make sure their cancer had not spread and there was no simultaneous ovarian cancer.

Nine of the women in the study successfully delivered babies.

The National Cancer Institute has more on endometrial cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story accurately notes that the study reported no adverse effects. The study’s authors reported only on adverse effects that were sufficient to require suspension of treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DNA Blood Test Gives Women A New Option For Prenatal Screening

When Amy Seitz got pregnant with her second child last year, she knew that being 35 years old meant there was an increased chance of chromosomal disorders like Down syndrome. She wanted to be screened, and she knew just what kind of screening she wanted — a test that's so new, some women and doctors don't quite realize what they've signed up for.

This kind of test , called cell free fetal DNA testing, uses a simple blood sample from an expectant mother to analyze bits of fetal DNA that have leaked into her bloodstream. It's only been on the market since October 2011 and is not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration — the FDA does not regulate this type of genetic testing service. Several companies now offer the test, including Sequenom and Illumina. Insurance coverage varies, and doctors often only offer this testing to women at higher risk because of things like advanced maternal age.

"I think that I initially heard about it through family and friends," says Seitz. "They had had the option of it given to them by their doctors."

To her, it sounded great. She didn't want an invasive procedure like amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.Those are considered the gold standard for prenatal genetic testing, but doctors must put a needle into the womb to collect cells that contain fetal DNA, which means a small risk of miscarriage.

"I wasn't interested in going as far as getting an amniocentesis because of the risk associated with that," she explains, "and so when I heard about this test, that was part of the reason that I was most interested in it."

This new way of testing fetal DNA seemed to have already become fairly common where Seitz used to live, in Washington, D.C. But she had recently moved to Alabama, and the clinic she went to there wasn't as familiar with it — although when she talked to her doctor, she learned the clinic had just had a visit from a company's sales representative.

"I think it was a fairly new test for them at that point, but she was interested in pursuing it further to see what needed to be done," Seitz says.

Seitz got her blood drawn last July, becoming one of hundreds of thousands of pregnant women who've opted for this new kind of test instead of the more traditional, invasive ones. Doctors say the impact has been huge.

"Those of us in the field who do diagnostic procedures like CVS and amnio have seen a drastic decrease in the number of those procedures that are being performed," says Dr. Mary Norton, an expert on maternal-fetal medicine and genetics at the University of California, San Francisco. "Places are reporting doing fewer than half the number of procedures that were being done previously."

But, she says, things have changed so quickly that it may be hard for doctors and patients to know what they're dealing with.

"It's still new and it's quite different than previous genetic testing that's been available," says Norton. "It's quite a different paradigm, if you will."

An invasive test like amniocentesis or CVS lets doctors get a complete picture of the chromosomes and a solid diagnosis.

Until the new testing technology came along, the only less invasive option was for an expectant mother to get an ultrasound, plus have her blood tested for specific proteins. This can reveal if there's an increased risk of certain disorders, but it's not very accurate and produces a lot of false alarms.

Studies have shown that the new fetal DNA tests do a better job, says Norton. They're less likely to flag a normal pregnancy as high risk.

"They're much more accurate than current screening tests, but they are not diagnostic tests in the sense that amniocentesis is," says Norton, "and so I think that has led to some confusion."

Even though the newer blood tests do look at fetal DNA, they can't give a definitive answer like an amniocentesis can because they're analyzing scraps of fetal DNA in the mother's blood that are all mixed up with her own DNA.

Norton says when women get worrisome results from one of these new tests and are referred to her center, they sometimes don't understand why doctors are offering a follow-up amnio "because they were under the impression that this was as good as an amnio."

She is concerned that some people might end a pregnancy without getting confirmatory testing and points to one study last year that found a small number of women did that.

"There's at least some evidence that it's happening to a greater degree than I think many of us are comfortable with," she says.

The tests are being used more and more widely. Some worry that the companies' websites and marketing materials don't make the limitations clear enough.

But Dr. Lee Shulman doesn't see it that way. He's an obstetrician and geneticist at Northwestern University in Chicago who has consulted for a couple of the testing firms.

"Patients need to understand that while this is better, it is not a diagnostic test, and I think the companies have done a great job in putting this material out," he says. "Whether or not clinicians use this material and take it to heart and use it for patient counseling is a different story."

He says the technology is so new that a lot of doctors have no experience with it, and consumers need to understand that.

"If the patient, if the couple, are not getting the answers, not getting the information they feel comfortable with, they need to seek out prenatal diagnostic centers, maternal fetal specialists, clinical geneticists, who may have more experience," says Shulman.

For example, here's one thing that might turn out to be a little more complicated than would-be parents might expect. Along with screening for the common chromosomal disorders, companies offer parents the chance to learn their baby's sex — weeks before it's clear on a sonogram.

"Many women are very excited by the idea that as part of their blood testing, they could find out pretty definitively if the baby is a boy or a girl," says Dr. Diana Bianchi, an expert on prenatal diagnostics at Tufts University School of Medicine.

What they may not realize, she says, is that the test will also determine whether there's something abnormal about the sex chromosomes.

"Approximately 1 in 700 pregnancies there's an extra X or extra Y," she says, noting that these are mild conditions that would normally go undetected, unless a woman had an invasive test like an amnio. Some babies with these conditions grow up into adulthood and never know they have them, unless they face a symptom like infertility.

Seitz, in Alabama, thought it was a bonus that getting this new blood test would tell her if she was having a boy or a girl. But it actually didn't do that, because of a paperwork glitch.

"The box for sex got unchecked somewhere along the way, so we weren't able to find it out from the test," says Seitz, who learned from an ultrasound that she was having a girl. The results she did get from the fetal DNA test were reassuring.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story cited several harms associated with the new screening tests, including the risk that some women may terminate a pregnancy based on the screening results alone without follow up diagnostic tests. It also noted that the tests can pick up minor genetic abnormalities that might previously have gone unnoticed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, May 16, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A daily dose of the antioxidant selenium doesn't appear to elevate "bad" cholesterol levels, and may in fact prompt a very modest boost in "good" cholesterol, a new British study reveals.

The finding comes from a six-month examination of the impact of various dosages of the supplement on the cholesterol levels of healthy people in England.

"The issue is that there have been an awful lot of studies, about eight, that have looked at blood cholesterol, both good and bad, and have found an association with high blood selenium," said study author Margaret P. Rayman, a professor of nutritional medicine at the University of Surrey in Guildford, England. But an association is only that; it doesn't mean one thing causes another.

"So we looked for whether selenium actually causes cholesterol to rise, and we definitively found that there wasn't an adverse effect," Rayman said. "In fact, we can safely and confidently say that, if anything, selenium had a slightly beneficial effect."

However, the safety of selenium has not been studied, and the authors said the findings weren't significant enough to recommend supplementation of the trace mineral. They also noted that the results can't necessarily be applied to Americans, because of differences in the food supply and diets of each country.

For the study, published in the May 17 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine, the authors focused on about 500 healthy British men and women aged 60 to 74 between 2000 and 2001.

Blood tests determined blood selenium, good cholesterol and bad cholesterol levels at the start of the study. For six months, some participants were assigned to take daily selenium yeast supplements in either low, intermediate or high doses, while others were given a dummy pill for the duration.

Noting that blood selenium levels were relatively low across the board at the study's launch, the authors found that selenium levels did rise as a result of supplementation, while those taking selenium also experienced a slight drop in both bad cholesterol (LDL) and overall cholesterol levels. Good cholesterol (HDL) levels rose a bit solely among those assigned to the highest selenium dosage. None of the patients experienced any serious side effects as a result of selenium supplementation.

Rayman and her associates concluded that selenium supplementation does not appear to have a negative impact on blood cholesterol levels overall, and may in fact be "modestly beneficial." High cholesterol levels can increase the risk of heart attack.

However, she cautioned that in general such supplementation has a minor impact and is not advisable as an effective means to combat high cholesterol, particularly for people who already have high blood selenium levels.

She added that the team's observations were based exclusively on an analysis of British residents, and that the findings may not necessarily apply in North America.

"In the U.K., people's baseline selenium levels in the blood are considerably lower than they are in the U.S.," she noted. "There are various reasons for that, including the fact that in the U.S. you have a wheat belt that means there is quite a high amount of selenium in the bread staple, which is not the case in the U.K."

"So, we can't extrapolate our findings to the U.S.," Rayman said. "And so I would caution against anybody in the U.S. increasing their selenium intake based on what we found, because we also know there's an increased risk for type 2 diabetes when you increase selenium intake if you are already at a high level of blood selenium levels."

Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said that efforts to gauge the potential health impact of selenium have not yet demonstrated any clear benefit attributable to the trace mineral.

"Overall, the evidence is inadequate to establish a protective role of selenium in cardiovascular disease or to recommend selenium supplementation to improve cardiovascular health," he said.

There's more on selenium at the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story was a little confusing on this point. It initially says that selenium’s safety “has not been studied,” but later quotes a researcher who says there is an increased risk for type 2 diabetes with selenium supplements in individuals whose blood levels are already high. The story does note that there were no serious side effects in the selenium supplement users participating in this study, but it could have qualified this by mentioning the relatively short duration of the study (6 months) and the potential for problems with longer-term use. Too much selenium can also, in rare cases, result in condition called selenosis, which includes symptoms such as gastrointestinal upsets, hair loss, white blotchy nails, garlic breath odor, fatigue, irritability, and mild nerve damage.
A toss-up here, but since the story indicated that this was not a risk-free intervention and reported on the study findings as appropriate, we’ll rule it satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The bodies of many older Americans are practically bionic: more than 770,000 hip and knee replacements are performed each year in the United States.

Now another aging joint is fast becoming a candidate for replacement. This year, 4,400 patients are expected to undergo surgery to replace arthritic or injured ankles with artificial joints made of metal alloys and lightweight plastic, according to industry estimates.

Four models are commonly used in the United States, with Food and Drug Administration approval. And demand is expected to grow as more and more baby boomers hobble into their 60s and 70s with debilitating ankle pain.

Ankle replacement has been around for three decades, but it has been slow to catch on. Problems with early devices left surgeons and patients wary. The operation is complex, and many foot and ankle surgeons lack experience. While Medicare pays for ankle replacement, many private insurers do not.

Each year about two million Americans visit the doctor for ankle pain from arthritis or fracture. An estimated 50,000 people a year experience end-stage ankle arthritis, in which the ankle cartilage has worn away completely, causing painful bone-on-bone contact and some level of disability.

Until lately, such patients have had only one surgical option: ankle fusion surgery, in which the worn-out part of the joint is removed and the bones are permanently locked together with screws and plates. The procedure usually relieves pain, but the patient loses mobility in the ankle, leading to changes in gait and, ultimately, additional wear and tear and arthritic pain in other parts of the ankle. About 25,000 ankle fusions were performed in the United States last year.

Andrew Keaveney, now 73, shattered his ankle in a fall from a truck while hanging flags as an American Legion volunteer. Surgery repaired the broken bones, but he continued to have severe pain.

Doctors suggested ankle fusion, but he found a surgeon who offered total ankle replacement. He had the operation in December 2008, and now he says the ankle is “99 percent.”

“Before the surgery, I couldn’t sleep at night,” said Mr. Keaveney, of Locust Valley, N.Y. “Now I’m able to climb ladders. I have absolutely no pain. I was even playing soccer with my grandkids a few months ago.”

His surgeon, Dr. Craig S. Radnay, an associate at the Insall Scott Kelly Institute for Orthopedics and Sports Medicine in New York City and on Long Island, says he is now a “big believer” in ankle replacement for certain patients.

“For an ankle replacement you have to be a little more picky in who you select for those cases,” he said. “But I can’t tell you how many patients come in, and I mention this option they don’t even know exists.” (Dr. Radnay, who says he has performed more than 100 ankle replacements using an Inbone device from Wright Medical Group of Arlington, Tenn., is now a paid consultant to the company, helping to gather data on long-term success rates.)

The ideal patient is around 60 years old and of normal weight, although doctors consider older patients, depending on their health. People with diabetes may not be good candidates because they may risk complications as a result of poor blood circulation.

Dr. Jonathan T. Deland, chief of the foot and ankle service at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, said that while the devices had improved, he remained cautious about offering the operation. (Dr. Deland is helping to develop a new ankle replacement device for Zimmer of Warsaw, Ind., which may be submitted for F.D.A. approval this year.)

“The big concern about ankle replacement is how often do they fail and how often do they loosen,” he said.

Complications can include slow healing, as well as infection. Severe complications are rare, but they can result in amputation. Still, Dr. Deland said, “we’re getting fewer and fewer failures.”

The new models require that less bone be removed, so the bone to which the device is affixed is stronger. In addition, instruments used to guide surgeons in aligning the artificial joint have improved. Dr. Deland cited data showing that for some recent models, 90 percent of ankle replacements were still in place after an average of eight and a half years.

Though the four devices in common use have technical differences in design and in how they are implanted, doctors say the choice of device matters far less than the experience of the surgeon. The procedure is among the most difficult that foot and ankle surgeons perform, and one of the biggest challenges is getting proper alignment of the replacement joint.

Dr. Brian Donley, an orthopedic surgeon who is director of the foot and ankle center at the Cleveland Clinic, says patients should always ask their doctor to disclose any financial interest in a device. (He performed the first United States operation using the Salto Talaris device from Tornier of Minneapolis, and receives consulting fees from the company.)

Even with a successful implantation, patients should not necessarily expect to have the same ankles they did at 18. They should not try to return to activities like basketball and distance running. But golf and walking, and sometimes even skiing, are typically allowed.

“My happiest patients I have in my practice are my ankle replacement patients,” Dr. Donley said. “They are so appreciative about how their life has been changed. They can go to their grandchild’s wedding and get up and have a dance.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story presents some risks, i.e. replacement failure, loosening, slow healing, infection and amputation.  It also mentions that not all individuals are appropriate candidates for surgery.  It could have provided numbers for how often these harms occur.  Nonetheless. we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion and grade it barely satisfactory. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 17, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Regular use of ibuprofen, a common anti-inflammatory drug, significantly lowers the risk for developing Parkinson's disease, Harvard researchers report.

People who took three or more tablets a week showed a 40 percent lower risk than those who didn't take the common pain reliever, their study found.

Study author Dr. Xiang Gao, an instructor and epidemiologist at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, said the findings are important for anyone at increased risk for Parkinson's because most people with the disease eventually become severely disabled.

"There is thus a need for better preventive interventions," Gao said. "In this context, our findings regarding the potential neuroprotective effect of ibuprofen, one of the most commonly used analgesics, on Parkinson's disease may have important public health and clinical implications."

Parkinson's is a disease that affects nerve cells in the brain that control the movement of muscles. It affects an estimated 1 million people in the United States, men far more often than women. The exact cause is unknown, but experts believe it's a combination of genetic and environmental factors.

Gao said that though the drug levodopa is the current standard treatment for Parkinson's, much more is needed. He is scheduled to present the findings in Toronto at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Neurology in April.

The findings came from an analysis of data on 136,474 people who did not have Parkinson's at the start of the study. In a six-year span, 293 were diagnosed with the disease. Those who took the largest doses of ibuprofen were less likely to have developed Parkinson's than were those who took smaller amounts of the drug, the study found.

No other pain reliever was found to lower the risk for Parkinson's.

Dr. Michele Tagliati, an associate professor of neurology and director of the Parkinson's Disease Center at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City, described the results as somewhat surprising and said they emphasized the need for further study.

"It's intriguing [that the finding applied to] just ibuprofen and not aspirin or acetaminophen or other commonly prescribed medications for inflammation because it implies something more specific to ibuprofen that should be investigated," Tagliati said. "So it narrows the focus to a subgroup of [anti-inflammatory drugs]."

Tagliati called the study "eye-opening." Parkinson's is not considered an inflammatory disease, he said, adding: "We might be missing something. There is more work to be done."

But in the meantime, Tagliati said, he would "definitely discuss ibuprofen use" with his patients because, if it works to protect against the disease, it could very well benefit those who already have it.

He cautioned that persistent use of ibuprofen can lead to gastritis, or inflammation of the stomach lining, but said that, in comparison, "there is very little to lose when measuring its side effects against the effects of Parkinson's," which can include loss of balance, stiffness, hallucinations and dementia.

The National Parkinson's Foundation has more on Parkinson's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did at least mention that "persistent use of ibuprofen can lead to gastritis, or inflammation of the stomach lining."
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When a couple is struggling to conceive, it's the woman who is usually the first — and often the only one — to be poked, prodded and analyzed, experts say. The burden of figuring out infertility is too often placed on the woman alone.

"Unfortunately, the majority of society looks at infertility as a women's issue, but that's just not the case," said Brad Imler, American Pregnancy Association president.

Placed among dozens of pregnancy, ovulation and female fertility kits, an at-home sperm test that hit retail shelves in April could help change that mentality, experts said.

SpermCheck Fertility, which determines in minutes whether a man's sperm count is low, offers almost instant insight into one of the many aspects of male fertility. Although it's not a comprehensive evaluation and could give some consumers a false sense of security, the test does provide a starting point while drawing attention to male infertility as a legitimate health concern.

"It may provide (an opportunity for) both physicians and couples to take a closer look at ways for men to step up to the plate and optimize their reproductive potential," said Dr. Robert Brannigan, urologist at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. "I think anything that highlights the fact that men can have issues, that men do play a role in infertility, is important."

Approximately 15 percent of U.S. couples of reproductive age who are trying to conceive face infertility issues, said Brannigan, an expert in male fertility.

Male infertility contributes to 50 percent of those cases, he said. Male infertility alone is the cause 30 percent of the time; a combination of male and female factors account for the other 20 percent.

SpermCheck Fertility is designed to help couples determine more quickly whether male infertility might be a problem for them, said Ray Lopez, CEO of SpermCheck, based in Charlottesville, Va. Many men put off having a semen analysis because they don't want to provide a sample in a doctor's office or lab, he said.

"No one wants to go through the embarrassment of jumping in that room and looking at dirty magazines," Lopez said.

Giving men the opportunity to take a test in the privacy of their home helps get the process moving, he said.

Men tend to think they're perfectly healthy, especially when it comes to their sexuality, APA's Imler said. This test, which is noninvasive, could be wake-up call for some.

"If there is a problem with him, it's identified a little quicker," Imler said. "We love the idea of avoiding that heartache of that month to month struggle of trying to conceive without success."

SpermCheck Fertility is the only FDA-approved home sperm test currently on the market and available in retail stores, Lopez said. The test costs about $40; the average cost of a semen analysis in a doctor's office is about $100.

At-home sperm tests are a fairly new idea, Imler said, but SpermCheck Fertility is not the first one. Four years ago an FDA-approved home test called Fertell, which is no longer for sale, offered an evaluation of both male and female fertility.

There are also several at-home sperm analysis kits available online. They each include a microscope and cost at least $80.

Although it's not the first ever at-home test, SpermCheck Fertility is the first one to use the lateral flow assay method, Lopez said. When the semen sample is applied to the test strip, the liquid works its way up the paper until it reaches the results window.

"It's very, very similar to a pregnancy test," Lopez said. "The concept behind our test is to keep it simple, user friendly."

For Brittany Scott, a Cortland resident whose husband took the SpermCheck Fertility test, however, it seemed a little more complicated than a pregnancy test. Scott said she was surprised by the number of steps involved, although none were very difficult.

Scott, a "mommy blogger" who requested and received a free test to review, said she wanted her husband to take the test to see if a recent vasectomy had worked. The result showed that the father of four's sperm count was below the test's threshold.

"It was blatantly negative. I was really glad that the test was not ambiguous at all," she said. "There was no line I could mistake."

Scott said she wished the test had been available when the couple was struggling to conceive their first child. After about 11 months of trying, she had pushed her husband to get a semen analysis from a doctor.

"If this test had been around back then, he would have definitely been more willing to do it" than the semen analysis, she said.

SpermCheck Fertility tests were created after a scientist at the University of Virginia discovered a specific protein found only in the head of sperm, Lopez said. By detecting that protein, the test indicates whether or not a semen sample contains 20 million sperm per milliliter.

About 90 percent of fertile men have sperm counts above that concentration, according to the SpermCheck Fertility instructions.

But there is not a strict cutoff point between normal or abnormal, Brannigan said. Some men might be considered in the infertile range and have no problem impregnating a woman. And others have sperm counts that seem fine, but they have difficulty.

"If his sperm concentration is indeed greater than 20 million, that's very encouraging," Brannigan said. "But it's by no means a definitive marker of proven fertility because there is a significant overlap between fertile and infertile men."

As stated in the SpermCheck Fertility instructions, sperm count is not the only factor that contributes to male fertility. The test is not intended to be a complete semen analysis or an overall indicator of a man's fertility, Lopez said.

The male reproductive system should not be oversimplified, Brannigan said. There are several characteristics of sperm alone — at least three that aren't addressed by SpermCheck — that affect male fertility. In addition, hormones and the delivery of the sperm play a part.

"There are a number of components that lead to a man having normal fertility potential," Brannigan said. "It's a complicated picture."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story points out that the test might lull men into a false sense that they have no fertility problems. “A positive result from the SpermCheck Fertility test could give men a false sense that everything is all right, APA’s Imler said. It might even cause some men to delay a necessary doctor’s evaluation, Brannigan said.”
The story waited a little too long to make this point, but we were glad to see it included.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - In a new study of middle-aged New Jersey men, taking cholesterol-lowering drugs was linked to a lower chance of dying from prostate cancer.

The findings don’t prove that the drugs, called statins, ward off aggressive cancer. But they jibe with previous studies suggesting that getting cholesterol levels under control might help reduce the risk of life-threatening disease, researchers said.

“People may be on these medications for their heart, but it may actually be doing them some good for their prostate,” said study author Dr. Stephen Marcella, from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in New Brunswick.

“If a person’s on the fence about taking a statin medication for their heart, this is another potential benefit they may have by taking one of these,” he told Reuters Health.

Marcella and his colleagues collected the medical records of 380 men who had died of prostate cancer and another 380 of the same age and race without prostate cancer or with non-lethal cancer.

Most of the men were white and in their mid- to late-60s, on average. Close to one in four of the men in both groups combined had ever taken a statin.

The researchers found that men who died of prostate cancer were half as likely to have taken a statin at any time, and for any duration, than men in the “control” group.

When they accounted for whether or not men were overweight and their other health problems and medications, it turned out that those with fatal cancers were 63 percent less likely to have ever taken a statin, according to findings published in Cancer.

But, Marcella added, “I would not tell a person if they don’t have a risk of heart disease, (if) they don’t have hypertension...to take a statin just to prevent lethal prostate cancer.”

The evidence that’s effective, he said, just isn’t there yet.

And even if statins do turn out to help prevent fatal prostate cancer, researchers said, previous studies have suggested they don’t lower a man’s risk of getting less aggressive forms of the disease.

According to the American Cancer Society, about one in every six men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some point, and one in every 36 men will die of the disease.

Marcella’s team didn’t have the data to figure out if taking a statin for longer, or starting one earlier, was more beneficial than more limited use of the drugs.

The researchers also couldn’t tell whether men started using statins before or after they were diagnosed with aggressive cancer.

But they did find that while high-potency, often newer statins were linked to a lower risk of fatal prostate cancer, lower-potency drugs were not. That suggests it’s something about the drugs themselves that lower men’s chances of dying from prostate cancer, Marcella said.

Statins may protect against fatal prostate cancer through their known cholesterol-lowering effects, said Dr. Stephen Freedland, who studies prostate cancer at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, but wasn’t involved in the new study.

He said that cholesterol is a “key nutrient” for cancer cells, so lower cholesterol levels in the body could prevent more aggressive forms of cancer from developing.

But it’s also possible that statins don’t prevent certain cancers at all, Freedland said, and it’s something else about men who take statins — for example, if they also change their diet and start exercising — that explains their lower risk of fatal cancer.

“It gets very, very tricky to sort out,” Freedland told Reuters Health.

To prove that statins protect against aggressive cancer would require a large study in which cancer-free men, or those with early-stage disease, are randomly assigned to take statins or not and then tracked for years to see how many of them die from cancer.

That type of study, especially involving healthy, disease-free men, would be very expensive and time consuming, said Dr. Nelly Tan, from the University of California, Los Angeles, who has studied statins and prostate cancer risk.

About one-quarter of adults age 45 and older in the U.S. take statins to lower cholesterol and protect against heart attacks. The drugs run anywhere from $11 to more than $200 per month, and sometimes cause side effects including muscle pain, nausea and gas and liver dysfunction.

Researchers agreed that until there’s clearer evidence for benefit, men with healthy hearts shouldn’t seek out statin prescriptions for the purpose of lowering their prostate cancer risks.

But Freedland said that other strategies for lowering cholesterol — such as eating better and exercising regularly — are ways almost everyone can lower their disease risks in the meantime.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Good job briefly mentioning statin side effects of muscle pain, nausea, gas, and liver dysfunction.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (Embargoed Until Oct. 18, 2018 @ 10:05AM ET) -- A surgical technique called EDAS (encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis) significantly decreases the rate of stroke recurrence and death for patients with severe atherosclerosis of the brain arteries, according to findings of a Phase IIa clinical trial presented today at the World Stroke Congress in Montreal. Atherosclerotic disease, in which plaque buildup narrows the brain arteries, is one of the most common causes of strokes.

Neurosurgeons performing EDAS reroute arteries from the scalp and the membranes that cover the brain and place these arteries under the skull near areas of the brain at risk of stroke. Over time, new blood vessels form, creating fresh pathways for blood and oxygen to reach the brain.

The trial, led by Nestor R. Gonzalez, MD, professor of Neurosurgery and director of the Neurovascular Laboratory at Cedars-Sinai, enrolled 52 patients with severe brain atherosclerosis, also known as intracranial atherosclerotic disease, or ICAD, who showed symptoms of either a recent stroke or a mini-stroke, called a transient ischemic attack. These patients received EDAS surgery, along with intensive medical management, which included diet and lifestyle changes, blood thinners and other medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar levels.

After one year, 9.6 percent of the patients treated with the surgery experienced another ischemic stroke or died, compared with 21.2 percent of patients in a matched control group who received only intensive medical management. Two of the EDAS patients had small wound openings that required additional surgical interventions, but there were no intracranial hemorrhages or other serious adverse events, the researchers reported.

"Our findings in this intermediate-stage trial are promising for applying EDAS surgery to intracranial atherosclerotic disease," said Gonzalez said. Previously, EDAS has been used for moyamoya disease, a rare cerebrovascular disorder that affects younger patients.

Gonzalez said the new trial addressed a serious medical need. "Even under the best current treatments, ICAD carries high rates of recurrent stroke and death, compared with other causes of stroke," he said. "Developing new therapeutic strategies is crucial for ICAD patients."

Current ICAD therapies--in addition to intensive medical management--include bypass surgery to connect a blood vessel from outside the brain to a vessel inside the brain, as well as angioplasty with stenting, which involves inflating a tiny balloon inside a cerebral artery to open it up and placing a stent device inside the artery. Despite advances in medical care, annual rates of recurrent stroke and death are remain high, at 15 percent or more for ICAD patients, according to published research.

Gonzalez said his team is working with the stroke prevention working group of the National Institutes of Health to develop a proposal for a Phase III randomized clinical trial across multiple institutions to further test the effectiveness of EDAS as compared with intensive medical management. While this Phase IIa trial selected patients from previous studies as the control group, the Phase III study would enroll new ICAD patients for both the control and experimental groups, he explained.

"This clinical trial moves us significantly closer to preventing strokes and death in high-risk populations," said Keith Black, MD, professor and chair of the Department of Neurosurgery. "As a nationally renowned physician-investigator, Dr. Gonzalez personifies the dedication of Cedars-Sinai to translating the most advanced research into new cures."

Besides Gonzalez, the trial involved other investigators from the stroke centers of Cedars-Sinai and UCLA.

Funding: Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Strokes of the National Institutes of Health under award number K23NS079477-01A1.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release addresses harms criteria with the following statement:  “Two of the EDAS patients had small wound openings that required additional surgical interventions, but there were no intracranial hemorrhages or other serious adverse events, the researchers reported.”
While we’ll award a borderline satisfactory, we wish that the release had cautioned that a study of 52 people is incapable of identifying harms that might occur with a larger and broader sample of patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A biotech company today will begin offering the first genetic test to assess a woman's risk for the most common forms of breast cancer, reigniting debate about the growing number of unregulated genetic tests.

The test by Decode Genetics of Reykjavik, Iceland, a respected pioneer in genetic research, promises to determine a woman's risk through a simple blood sample or cheek swab. Previously, the only tests for breast cancer risk were for relatively rare genes, leaving most women with no way to assess their individual genetic predisposition.

"What this does for women is allow them to assess their personal risk for the common forms of breast cancer," said Kári Stefánsson, Decode's chief executive. "That's what you need to do to make early diagnoses or take preventive measures. This test will most definitely save lives."

While welcomed by some patient advocates and doctors, the $1,625 test raises concerns among others. Some questioned its reliability, while others worried that the results could either lull women into a false sense of complacency or needlessly alarm them, prompting them to take unnecessary tests or even undergo unneeded surgery.

"There is at least a significant chance this test will could falsely reassure some women and alarm others," said Eric Winer, a breast cancer expert at Harvard Medical School and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology. "I fear for many women the results could be quite misleading."

"I wouldn't recommend to anyone that she have such a test. I certainly wouldn't want my daughter to have such a test," said Mary-Claire King, a geneticist and breast cancer expert at the University of Washington. "It's meaningless, and it could very easily introduce real confusion."

The test comes as concern has been rising about the proliferation of genetic tests. Hundreds of laboratories are now offering genetic testing for more than 1,200 conditions. The Food and Drug Administration does not regulate such tests when they are performed by the labs offering them.

"There is concern about the validity of many genetic tests that are being offered," said Joan Scott, deputy director of the Center for Genetics and Public Policy at Johns Hopkins University. "Without an external review, the consumer -- be it the physician or the patient directly -- is not going to know which ones have been validated."

An FDA spokeswoman said the agency had just become aware of the new test and could not say whether it would take any action, though she noted that in August the agency sent a letter expressing concern to another company marketing a questionable genetic test for ovarian cancer.

"I can't speculate on this one," said Karen Riley, the spokeswoman.

Breast cancer strikes more than 180,000 women each year in the United States and kills more than 40,000, making it the most common form of cancer after skin cancer and second leading cancer killer among women.

Doctors can estimate a woman's chances of developing breast cancer based on a variety of factors, including her age and family history, but most women have no way of knowing their precise risk. Women with a strong family history can get tested for two genes that sharply increase their predisposition, but they account for only 1 to 3 percent of all breast cancers.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story provides appropriate caveats for women who are considering this test. Namely, a lower than average score might suggest a woman could forgo screening.  Women with a higher than average risk score could experience unnecessary anxiety and possibly choose treatments they do not need (such as prophylactic mastectomy).  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New York, NY, September 22, 2015 - The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendation against regular prostate specific antigen (PSA) screening for prostate cancer is controversial. While it may reduce the risk of over diagnosis and overtreatment, the reduction in intermediate and high risk cancer diagnoses raises concern because of the potential for delayed diagnoses of important cancers in men who may benefit from treatment, according to investigators reporting in The Journal of Urology®.

Prostate cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer death among men in the U.S., with nearly 30,000 deaths annually. Deaths from prostate cancer have declined by about 40% since the advent of PSA screening in the late 1980s, and 40-70% of that decline may be attributable to screening. However, radiation therapy and surgery have a negative impact on quality of life. The uncertain benefit of PSA based screening, combined with the complications associated with treatment, led the USPSTF to conclude in October 2011 that the harms of PSA based screening outweighed the benefits, leading it to recommend against regular screening.

"Our study was designed to assess the impact of the USPSTF recommendation on screening practices among urologists and primary care providers and the incidence of prostate cancer," explained lead investigator Daniel A. Barocas, MD, MPH, of the Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. "We know there is decreased utilization of PSA testing in some institutions and health systems, but has the number of incident cases per month changed substantially since the draft guideline was issued?"

Investigators evaluated the effect of the USPSTF guideline on the number and distribution of new prostate cancer diagnoses in the U.S. They identified incident cancers diagnosed between January 2010 and December 2012 in the National Cancer Database and assessed the trend of new prostate cancers diagnosed each month before and after the draft guideline was issued, comparing their findings with colon cancer.

This study helped quantify the potential benefits (reduced harms of over diagnosis and overtreatment of low risk disease and disease found in elderly men) and potential harms (missed opportunities to diagnose important cancers in men who may benefit from treatment).

The number of prostate cancer diagnoses dropped by more than 12% (1363 cases) in the month after the USPSTF draft guideline was issued and the number continued to drop, resulting in an overall decline of 28% in incident prostate cancer diagnoses in the year after the draft guideline was issued. By contrast, the number of monthly colon cancer diagnoses remained stable. Diagnoses of low, intermediate, and high risk prostate cancers all decreased significantly, but new diagnoses of non-localized disease did not change. The decreases were similar across all subgroups of age, comorbidity, race, income, and insurance.

The study showed that 12 months after the draft guidelines were published diagnoses of new low risk cancers had fallen by 37.9%, and continued to fall more rapidly than other disease risk strata, suggesting that, in this regard, the USPSTF recommendation had its intended effect,. Similarly, new diagnoses had fallen by 23.0-29.3% among men over age 70 and by 26.0% among infirm men, populations at risk for harms of treatment but unlikely to live long enough to benefit from early detection.

However, the study also identified a drop of 28.1% in diagnoses of intermediate risk disease and 23.1% in high risk prostate cancer one year after the draft guideline, which could result in missing important opportunities to spare men with higher risk cancers from progressive disease and cancer death.

"While some of the effects of this guideline may be beneficial in terms of reducing harms of over diagnosis and overtreatment, the reduction in intermediate and high risk cancer diagnoses raises concern for delayed diagnoses of important cancers associated with inferior cancer outcomes," noted Dr. Barocas. "Future research should focus on prostate cancer screening paradigms that both minimize harms and maximize the potential benefits of screening, as well as accounting for individual patient risk factors and preferences."
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The harm of not screening is implied to be an increased risk for prostate cancer mortality because diagnoses of high-risk cancers could be delayed. We’ll award a Satisfactory here, although we’d note that we don’t have high quality data supporting this supposition. The PIVOT trial of surgery vs. watchful waiting for men who were mostly screen-detected was negative.  Only post-hoc analyses showed a potential survival benefit for aggressively treating high-risk cancers.  One modeling study suggested that screening can be associated with net gain of quality-adjusted life years–though the 95% confidence interval also includes a net loss.
Another potential harm associated with screening are the adverse effects of treatment (whether necessary or unnecessary). The release notes that “radiation therapy and surgery have a negative impact on quality of life,” but this is somewhat euphemistic as we’re talking about potential for incontinence, impotence, and biopsy-related sepsis as well as death.  There are hard numbers citing the rates of incontinence and impotence related to prostate surgery, so those certainly could have been cited here discussing harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Sept. 11, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- New research suggests that Opdivo -- a drug that works with the immune system to fight melanoma -- is more effective than the current standard of care for patients who've had surgery to remove advanced tumors.

The international study was funded by Opdivo's maker, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and included more than 900 patients with stage III and stage IV melanoma.

Patients were treated at 130 medical centers across 25 countries. All underwent surgery for their cancer before they began treatment with either Opdivo (nivolumab) or Yervoy (ipilimumab), the drug that's the current standard of care.

Both drugs are "immunotherapies," which work by boosting the immune system's ability to spot and destroy tumor cells.

After a year of treatment, 71 percent of patients in the Opdivo group were alive without any recurrence of the disease, compared with 61 percent of those treated with Yervoy. And at 18 months, the rate was 66 percent for Opdivo and 53 percent for Yervoy, the findings showed.

According to the Skin Cancer Foundation, metastatic melanoma accounts for only about 1 percent of skin cancer cases but causes the majority of skin cancer deaths.

"Our results demonstrate that [Opdivo] is more effective in treating patients with stage III and IV melanoma, cutting the risk of relapse by a third," lead researcher Dr. Jeffrey Weber, professor of medicine at NYU School of Medicine, said in a university news release.

"Results like this will change how we practice medicine. Hopefully, physicians will embrace the use of [Opdivo] in these high-risk patients as adjuvant therapy," added Weber, who also helps direct NYU's Perlmutter Cancer Center in New York City.

One cancer surgeon who reviewed the findings was impressed.

"Based on this study, it appears that patients with advanced melanoma who have their disease completely removed by surgery should go on to receive additional therapy with Opdivo," said Dr. Gary Deutsch. He is a surgical oncologist at Northwell Health's Imbert Cancer Center in Bay Shore, N.Y.

"Not only did these patients have a better survival outcome at one year, but they had only one-third the side effects compared to Yervoy," Deutsch said.

The study found that patients taking Opdivo had fewer severe side effects than those taking Yervoy, at 14 percent versus 45 percent. Five percent of patients on Opdivo had to stop treatment due to side effects, compared with 31 percent of those on Yervoy. The most common side effects for both drugs were fatigue and diarrhea.

Weber added that "the safety of [Opdivo] is very promising."

The study is scheduled for presentation Monday in Madrid, Spain, at the annual meeting of the European Society for Medical Oncology. It was also published online Sept. 10 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Both Opdivo and Yervoy are already approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat advanced (metastatic) melanoma. In some patients, the drugs are used in combination.

Dr. Michele Green is a dermatologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. She said any advance in the care of aggressive melanomas is welcome news for patients.

"It is amazing that there is now an alternative that is superior to conventional chemotherapy for advanced metastatic disease," Green said after reviewing the new study findings. "With these advanced melanomas -- that have high risks of recurrences and have poor outcomes -- it is vital to look at alternative treatments. The future in cancer treatments lies in immunotherapy and other targeted options."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on melanoma.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that the most common side effects were fatigue and diarrhea. But the story also offers information about how common any adverse side effects were — for both Opdivo and Yervoy. That’s valuable information. What’s more, the story notes that Opdivo was less likely to cause adverse side effects than Yervoy, and that those side effects were less severe. Again, that’s useful context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
University of Pennsylvania researchers have identified what may be a more effective way to help people quit smoking. About 70 percent of smokers give up the daunting effort during the first week of trying.

The researchers, led by Caryn Lerman, a professort of psychiatry, divided 1,246 subjects into slow metabolizers of nicotine and normal metabolizers of the addictive chemical, based on the length of time it took for them to rid their bodies of the drug. The ratio of two metabolites, or byproducts, of the body's processing of nicotine allows easy identification of the two groups. The metabolite is found in blood and saliva.

The results of the comparison showed that slow metabolizers did just as well on a nicotine patch or the drug varenicline (marketed as Chantix), a drug that works on the nicotine receptors in the brain. But the patch costs less and has fewer side-effects than varenicline (including nausea, difficulty sleeping and abnormal dreams), so the researchers concluded that slow metabolizers should be put on the patch.

Normal metabolizers of nicotine, meanwhile, had more success with varenicline because they tend to rid their systems of nicotine faster, limiting the effectiveness of the patch. Varenicline contains no nicotine.

"The slower metabolizers, they do very well with the patch. And they get no incremental benefit from varenicline," Lerman said in an interview. "Why spend the money? Why have the side-effects?"

This may seem like common sense, but no one had ever tested it before, she said. And given how difficult it is to kick the habit, smokers need all the help they can get to succeed the first time they try, Lerman said.

"Each time somebody fails, it affects their self confidence," Lerman said. "The trial and error approach is not optimal."

Researchers did not test nicotine gum because it delivers a less consistent flow of nicotine to the user, she said. The patch, worn on the skin, delivers a steady flow of the drug, she said.

In some of the test groups, overall success rates were fairly low, Lerman noted, but the study was conducted during the Great Recession, a time when financial stress may have depressed the chances of succeeding for everyone, regardless of which approach was used.

This post has been updated.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story notes that side effects of varenicline include nausea, difficulty sleeping, and abnormal dreams. It also acknowledges that there is harm in pursuing a therapy that does not work if the quitter is discouraged. Excerpt: “Each time somebody fails, it affects their self confidence,” Lerman said. “The trial and error approach is not optimal.”  We’ll rate this borderline satisfactory, but ideally we would have liked to see some quantification of these side effects, especially since frequency of side effects is an important part of the rationale for choosing one approach over the other. Moreover, the story should have explored potential harms from the blood test used to classify nicotine metabolism. How accurate is it? And if the test is wrong, what does that mean for your chances of quitting successfully?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- There's too little evidence to say definitively whether treating early, localized prostate cancer with radiation is a better option than "watchful waiting," new research finds.

In a study funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), researchers from Tufts University reviewed the available literature on radiation and prostate cancer, including 10 randomized controlled trials and 65 observational studies.

They concluded there was "insufficient evidence" to say with certainty whether radiation treatment compared to watchful waiting is more likely to save lives.

"We just don't have sufficient information to say much of anything," said Dr. Stanley Ip, an assistant professor of medicine at Tufts University Medical Center.

In part, that's because researchers found no randomized controlled trials -- considered the gold standard of research -- that compared radiation therapy with watching waiting, Ip said. Though there were observational studies, those may be biased because men who opt to hold off on treatment may be those whose tumors are lower risk to begin with, he said.

The study is published in the June 6 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Watchful waiting -- which does not involve cancer treatment -- means having regular exams while keeping an eye on the tumor to see if it grows or spreads. It is usually recommended when doctors feel someone's advanced age will allow them to outlive the generally slow-moving cancer or when someone has other conditions that are more likely to prove lethal.

Men who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer -- meaning it's confined to the prostate gland and has not spread -- are confronted with a bewildering array of options for treating it: surgery; radiation; drugs to deprive the tumor of the hormone androgen that may drive its growth; or watchful waiting.

In 2008, AHRQ also commissioned a review of studies on other prostate cancer treatment options, but that report could not draw conclusions on the best approach either.

"What all of these analyses have found is there is very limited data that allows us to determine which of these approaches in the best approach," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate cancer for the American Cancer Society.

Brooks said more comparative effectiveness research, which compares different kinds of treatments, is needed.

In the meantime, what are men diagnosed with early prostate cancer to do?

Men and their doctors need to consider what the tumor looks like under the microscope, which can help gauge how aggressive it may be. They should also consider age and overall health status, including whether or not the patient has other conditions more likely to cause death than the prostate cancer.

Finally, patients and their doctors should weight the potential debilitating side effects of the treatments, such as incontinence and erectile dysfunction, against how comfortable the man is with holding off on treatment, experts say.

"Men need to learn as much as they can about the possible outcomes and benefits of the various treatments and the potential side effects, and choose which direction they are most comfortable with," Brooks said.

In the current review, researchers found several trials that compared different doses of radiation and different types of radiation therapy, including external beam radiation therapy, in which a radiation is delivered through a beam through the skin, or brachytherapy, in which radioactive isotopes are delivered via injection into the prostate.

For those methods, too, there was too little research to say with confidence which method was superior in preventing deaths from prostate cancer, the researchers said. Retrospective studies, however, found that radiation treatments were associated with increased urinary or bowel problems, compared with no treatment or no initial treatment.

There was also "moderate strength evidence" that a higher external beam radiation was more effective than a lower dose.

Taken together, the review "does point out that based on current evidence, doctors should not be telling their patients that this form of radiation is better than that form," Brooks said. "Some of the distinctions being made are not really supported by the evidence."

Proton beam therapy in particular is expensive, but according to this report, there isn't enough evidence to show it's any better than other option.

Radiation, he noted, may be the best option for men whose tumors have spread outside the gland, since simply removing the prostate gland surgically is not likely to be as effective, he said.

The American Cancer Society estimates that in 2009, approximately 192,000 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer and approximately 27,000 men died of the disease.

The National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story did state: “Retrospective studies, however, found that radiation treatments were associated with increased urinary or bowel problems, compared with no treatment or no initial treatment.”  We wish it had provided more detail, but we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Aug. 15, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A traditional Chinese herbal treatment may reduce fever from H1N1 ("swine flu") influenza just as well as the prescription medication Tamiflu, a new study suggests.

"For thousands of years, Chinese herbs have been used to treat influenza," study co-authors Dr. Chen Wang and Dr. Bin Cao, of Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, in China, said in an email. "The pandemic influenza 2009 gave us the opportunity to evaluate a standard Chinese herb formula" designed to target the flu, they added.

Cao and Wang, who specialize in infectious diseases and clinical microbiology, said the herbal recipe -- known as maxingshigan-yinqiaosan (M-Y) -- is easily accessible throughout China and much less expensive than Tamiflu (oseltamivir).

However, finding the medicine in the United States is difficult, if not impossible, given that it contains the stimulant ephedra. The United States has banned or restricted the sale of ephedra products because of concerns about possible complications, such as heart attack, stroke and even death, related to its use as a weight-loss supplement.

The authors discuss their findings in the Aug. 16 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

The 2009 H1N1 ("swine flu") pandemic sparked influenza cases around the globe, resulting in nearly 18,000 deaths, the authors said.

Per World Health Organization (WHO) recommendations, in most instances, Tamiflu was the treatment of choice, where it was available. However, it is often out of reach in less developed parts of the world, such as rural China, where traditional herbal medicines are a likely default treatment.

The M-Y flu preparation is composed of 12 herbs: ephedrae, zhimu, qinghao, shigao, yinhua, huangqin, chaoxingren, lianqiao, bohe, zhebeimu, niubangzi and gancao.

To compare the relative effectiveness of M-Y and Tamiflu in treating H1N1 influenza, the authors focused on 410 previously healthy patients who were diagnosed with a "very mild" form of the illness.

The men and women were relatively young, with an average age of 19. They were being treated in 11 different medical facilities across four Chinese provinces during the height of the pandemic, between July and November of 2009, to prevent spreading the flu, not because their symptoms were severe.

Within 72 hours of the onset of symptoms, the patients were assigned to one of four five-day treatment groups. One group was given 75 milligrams of Tamiflu twice a day in capsule form; a second group received 200 milliliters of M-Y four times a day in liquid form; a third group took the same dosages of Tamiflu and M-Y together; and a fourth group received no treatment.

All of the herbs were screened for quality, and the M-Y mixture was deemed to meet Chinese safety standards.

The results: Both M-Y and Tamiflu were effective at eliminating fever, whether administered on their own or in combination.

All three approaches helped to resolve fever sooner than no intervention whatsoever, the authors said, noting it appeared that fever dissipated fastest when M-Y and Tamiflu were given together. However, none of the treatment methods appeared to be superior in terms of overall viral control, and side effects were minimal in all cases.

Even though the ephedra-containing herbal is not readily available in the United States, the M-Y herbal formula is available in many countries besides China, including Korea, Japan, India and Germany, the study authors noted.

Duffy MacKay, vice president of scientific and regulatory affairs at the Council for Responsible Nutrition, which represents the dietary supplement industry, believes that fears over ephedra's use as a weight-control agent have overlooked "its more traditional and much safer" role as a medicine against lung inflammation.

MacKay said that in China, traditional medicine is "seamlessly integrated" into everyday medical practice.

"Here in the U.S., we do things differently," he said. "We have our prescription drugs on the one hand, and then we have dietary supplements on the other."

But, MacKay continued, "it should also be understood that these two treatments actually work very differently. Tamiflu works to stop viral replication. But the herbal formula is working on symptoms to help people become more comfortable. And those are two very different goals," he noted.

"So our advice," MacKay added, "is that because H1N1 can be very serious, it's very important to see your doctor. And once you're under the care of your licensed physician there's certainly a lot of things in the world of botanicals that might help."

For more on the flu and traditional medicine, visit the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions adverse effects that have been associated with ephedra, one of the constituents of the herbal treatment being tested. It also says that minimal side effects were seen in all treatment groups of this study. The story could have commented on other possible side effects of herbals, such as potential interactions with other medications.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New Rochelle, NY, September 25, 2017--A phase 3 study of children ages 6-12 years with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has shown that a delayed-release, long-acting formulation of the stimulant methylphenidate, when taken in the evening, led to significant improvement in ADHD symptoms and functional impairment first thing the next morning, compared to a placebo. Children taking the delayed-release stimulant did not have to wait for a morning dose to take effect and also benefited from improved symptoms later in the afternoon and evening, according to the study results published in Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, a peer-reviewed journal from Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers. The article is available free on the Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology website.

The article entitled "Efficacy and Safety of HLD200, Delayed-Release and Extended-Release Methylphenidate, in Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder" is coauthored by Steven Pliszka, MD, from The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio and colleagues from Massachusetts General Hospital (Boston, MA), Westside Medical Family Practice (Clinton, UT), University of Tennessee Health Science Center (Memphis, TN), Meridien Research (Maitland and Bradenton, FL), Children's Development Center (Winter Park, FL), Ironshore Pharmaceuticals & Development (Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands), and Mount Sinai Medical Center (New York, NY), on behalf of the HLD200-108 Study Group.

The drug formulation, which consists of two layers of microbeads with an inner drug-loaded core, delays release of the active ingredient for 8-10 hours and then provides controlled extended release designed to cover the early morning into the evening. The medication was well tolerated, with the main adverse effects of appetite suppression and insomnia being those commonly reported for other formulations of methylphenidate.

"Developing new formulations of effective medications for patients with ADHD improves the lives of children with the disorder," says Harold S. Koplewicz, MD, Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology and President of the Child Mind Institute in New York.

Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology is an authoritative peer-reviewed journal published bimonthly in print and online. The Journal is dedicated to child and adolescent psychiatry and behavioral pediatrics, covering clinical and biological aspects of child and adolescent psychopharmacology and developmental neurobiology. Complete tables of content and a sample issue may be viewed on the Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology website: http://www. .

Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers is a privately held, fully integrated media company known for establishing authoritative peer-reviewed journals in many promising areas of science and biomedical research, including Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, Games for Health Journal, and Violence and Gender. Its biotechnology trade magazine, GEN (Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology News), was the first in its field and is today the industry's most widely read publication worldwide. A complete list of the firm's 80 journals, books, and newsmagazines is available on the Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers website: http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release addresses possible harms with use of this new formulation of the drug by saying, “the main adverse effects of appetite suppression and insomnia being those commonly reported for other formulations of methylphenidate.” The study itself offers more detail and a breakdown of what proportion of participants experienced these effects but most were considered to be mild.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SILVER SPRING, Md., May 18, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Tecentriq (atezolizumab) to treat the most common type of bladder cancer, called urothelial carcinoma. This is the first product in its class (PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors) approved to treat this type of cancer.

"Tecentriq provides these patients with a new therapy targeting the PD-L1 pathway," said Richard Pazdur, M.D., director of the Office of Hematology and Oncology Products in the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. "Products that block PD-1/PD-L1 interactions are part of an evolving story about the relationship between the body's immune system and its interaction with cancer cells."

Tecentriq targets the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway (proteins found on the body's immune cells and some cancer cells). By blocking these interactions, Tecentriq may help the body's immune system fight cancer cells. Tecentriq is the first FDA-approved PD-L1 inhibitor and the latest in the broader class of PD-1/PD-L1 targeted biologics approved by the FDA in the last two years.

Tecentriq is approved for the treatment of patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma whose disease has worsened during or following platinum-containing chemotherapy, or within 12 months of receiving platinum-containing chemotherapy, either before (neoadjuvant) or after (adjuvant) surgical treatment. Urothelial carcinoma is the most common type of bladder cancer and occurs in the urinary tract system, involving the bladder and related organs. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) estimates 76,960 new cases of bladder cancer and 16,390 deaths from the disease in 2016.

The safety and efficacy of Tecentriq were studied in a single-arm clinical trial involving 310 patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma. This trial measured the percentage of patients who experienced complete or partial shrinkage of their tumors (objective response rate). The study also looked at the difference in effect based on "positive" versus "negative" expression of the PD-L1 protein on patients' tumor-infiltrating immune cells. In all patients, 14.8 percent of participants experienced at least a partial shrinkage of their tumors, an effect that lasted from more than 2.1 to more than 13.8 months at the time of the response analysis. In patients who were classified as "positive" for PD-L1 expression, 26 percent of participants experienced a tumor response (compared to 9.5 percent of participants who were classified as "negative" for PD-L1 expression).

While patients who received Tecentriq experienced a tumor response across the study, the greater effect in those who were classified as "positive" for PD-L1 expression suggests that the level of PD-L1 expression in tumor-infiltrating immune cells may help identify patients who are more likely to respond to treatment with Tecentriq. Therefore, today the FDA also approved the Ventana PD-L1 (SP142) assay to detect PD-L1 protein expression levels on patients' tumor-infiltrating immune cells and help physicians determine which patients may benefit most from treatment with Tecentriq.

The most common side effects of treatment with Tencentriq were fatigue, decreased appetite, nausea, urinary tract infection, fever (pyrexia) and constipation. Tencentriq also has the potential to cause infection and serious side effects that result from the immune system effect of Tencentriq (known as "immune-mediated side effects"). These severe immune-mediated side effects involve healthy organs, including the lung, colon and endocrine system.

The FDA granted the Tecentriq application breakthrough therapy designation, priority review status and accelerated approval for this indication. These are distinct programs intended to facilitate and expedite the development and review of certain new drugs in light of their potential to benefit patients with serious or life-threatening conditions.

Tecentriq is marketed by Genentech based in San Francisco, California. The Ventana PD-L1 (SP142) assay companion diagnostic for Tecentriq is marketed by Ventana Medical Systems, based in Tucson, Arizona.

For more information:

FDA: Office of Hematology and Oncology Products 

FDA: Approved Drugs: Questions and Answers 

FDA: Companion Diagnostics 

NCI: Bladder Cancer

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation's food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release includes a description of side effects of this treatment. The most common ones included fatigue, decreased appetite, nausea, urinary tract infection, fever (pyrexia) and constipation. The release also mentions that patients taking the drug have an increased risk of infection and serious side effects that are “immune-mediated.” We would have liked a bit more context on what this term means for patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) – - Adding spice – in the form of curcumin supplements – to the daily diets of people with risk factors for heart disease may lower inflammation, a new study suggests.

Inflammation is implicated in a wide range of illnesses, from heart disease to cancer and joint pain. In the eight-week trial, researchers found significant reductions in signs of inflammation, such as C-reactive protein and other blood markers.

“Curcumin is the active ingredient of the famous spice turmeric and has a long history of culinary and medicinal use in the Asian countries,” said the study’s senior author Amirhossein Sahebkar.

“Two key effects of curcumin that account for most of the therapeutic effects of this compound are its strong antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties,” said Sahebkar researcher at the Mashhad University of Medical Sciences in Iran, in an email.

These properties of curcumin have been shown in several animal studies, he noted, but there have been relatively few studies in people. So his team designed a randomized controlled clinical trial to see if short-term use of a curcumin supplement could reduce inflammation in people with metabolic syndrome, a cluster of risk factors for heart disease.

Having a large waistline, high blood pressure, high blood sugar, low levels of HDL (good) cholesterol and high levels of triglycerides, are among the factors that make up metabolic syndrome. People with three or more of these classic traits are at higher than average risk of developing heart disease or diabetes or both.

Inflammation is also emerging as a feature of metabolic syndrome, Sahebkar’s team writes in the journal Clinical Nutrition. They set out to see if curcumin supplements could at least roll back that risk factor by enrolling 117 participants who had been diagnosed with metabolic syndrome for their study.

Half were given pills containing one gram of curcumin powder, and the other half were given similar looking pills with no curcumin inside. All the participants took the supplements every day for eight weeks.

At the beginning of the study and again at the end, the researchers measured levels of three blood markers of inflammation, including C-reactive protein (CRP), which even on its own has been linked with heart disease risk.

They found that the people who took curcumin had improved blood levels of all three biomarkers as well as reduced fasting blood sugar and hemoglobin A1c, a measure of long-term blood sugar levels. The comparison group had higher glucose and levels of one of the inflammation markers, and no changes in the other markers.

The study team also analyzed data from eight previous studies and confirmed that curcumin had shown a significant reduction of CRP concentrations in a total of 281 patients.

“The findings of our studies, along with clinical findings reported by other groups, indicate the usefulness of daily use of curcumin supplement for the prevention and treatment of several diseases,” Sahebkar said.

The researchers didn’t examine the effect of curcumin on any diseases, and it was a fairly brief study, so it’s not clear what the long-term implications may be they caution in their report.

The study was funded by the Clinical Trial Research Center in Tehran and the Iran National Science Foundation. One of the authors is CEO of Sabinsa Corporation and Sami Labs Ltd, manufacturers of curcumin supplements.

Sahebkar said most of the clinical benefits reported for curcumin have been achieved when curcumin was added to a standard drug therapy regimen, and patients should be careful not to replace their prescribed drugs with curcumin without prior consultation with their physician.

“Curcumin is a very safe natural supplement, and there is no severe adverse event associated with its use, even at high doses,” Sahebkar said.

However, owing to limited safety information, pregnant and lactating women should avoid using this supplement, Sahebkar said.

“In addition, patients with malabsorption syndrome, gall bladder problems, gastric ulcer, bleeding problems as well as those who are undergoing surgery, and those who have a history of hypersensitivity to herbal products should be cautious and consult with their physician before taking this supplement,” Sahebkar said.

Sahebkar added that he is often asked about the possibility of using turmeric instead of pure curcumin supplements.

“Whilst turmeric is known to have several medicinal properties, and its regular use in diet is strongly suggested, it cannot be regarded as an equivalent substitution of curcumin,” he said.

Sahebkar said turmeric contains very low quantities of curcumin, usually less than 5 percent, and curcumin has a very low absorption in its raw form, usually less than one percent of raw curcumin is absorbed when taken orally.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story does say that pregnant and lactating women should avoid using curcumin supplements, and quotes one of the study authors as saying that “patients with malabsorption syndrome, gall bladder problems, gastric ulcer, bleeding problems as well as those who are undergoing surgery, and those who have a history of hypersensitivity to herbal products should be cautious and consult with their physician before taking this supplement.”
We’ll rate this good enough for a satisfactory, although the story could have noted that many of these warnings seem to relate to the fact curcumin may interfere with iron metabolism (posing problems for those with iron deficiencies), and that curcumin can apparently also cause nausea, dizziness, or diarrhea in some people.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, July 24, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- The active ingredient in pot that gets you high can calm agitation in people with advanced Alzheimer's disease, a small new study suggests.

Canadian researchers found that a form of synthetic THC significantly decreased agitation in a small group of Alzheimer's patients, working even better than the drugs now used.

"This is the first clinical trial to show that a cannabinoid can decrease agitation," said lead researcher Krista Lanctot, a senior scientist at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center in Toronto.

However, many study patients suffered from sedation due to the drug, noted Keith Fargo, director of scientific programs and outreach at the Alzheimer's Association.

"We would love to see this study done in a larger group of people, to see if it continues to be effective in a larger group, and how worried we need to be about this sedation side effect," Fargo said.

Agitation is a frequent symptom of advanced Alzheimer's, Lanctot explained. Doctors struggle to control it through off-label use of drugs like antipsychotics and anticonvulsants.

Agitated patients yell, scream, pace and wander, she said. They also can become physically aggressive, striking out at people and hurting themselves or others.

"You're going to find one in five outpatients with it. But when you get to the long-term care facilities, about 50 percent of inpatients will have agitation," Lanctot said. "It's actually a big treatment challenge. The drugs we have now do not work very well and they're associated with an increase in mortality."

The off-label drugs used to treat Alzheimer's are indeed a bit dodgy. For example, only one person out of five to 14 treated with antipsychotics actually experiences a decrease in agitation, Lanctot said. And for every nine to 25 people helped, one will die.

But Lanctot and her colleagues suspected that cannabinoids might help control agitation, given that natural cannabinoids in the brain decrease as Alzheimer's enters its advanced stages.

"We know cannabis has several effects that might be good for people with agitation," Lanctot said. "It has a calming effect. It helps with weight loss because it helps with appetite. It's also used for pain."

The synthetic THC drug, nabilone, is approved in Canada for treating nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy. It comes in capsule form.

"It's a milder form of TCH" compared to whole-leaf marijuana, Lanctot said. "We hoped it wouldn't have the side effects associated with cannabis, but would have the calming effects."

During the clinical trial, 39 patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease received nabilone for six weeks to treat their clinically significant agitation, followed by six weeks with an inactive placebo.

"We had a significant decrease in agitation. The decrease we saw was larger than is seen with the currently used medications," Lanctot said.

Patients underwent significant overall improvement in their other behavioral symptoms, and had small benefits in their brain function and nutrition during the study. Their caregivers also reported reduced levels of stress, according to Lanctot.

These benefits came with a downside, though. About 45 percent of patients experienced sedation with nabilone, compared with 16 percent for placebo, the findings showed.

Lanctot and Fargo do not recommend that relatives or friends of those with agitated Alzheimer's provide them medical marijuana to ease their suffering.

"This trial tested a synthetic analog of THC. It's not THC, and it's certainly not whole-plant marijuana," Fargo said. "There's virtually no data on whole-plant marijuana, whether or not it's effective or safe in people with Alzheimer's disease."

A form of synthetic THC is available in the United States, called dronabinol and sold under the trade name Marinol, Lanctot said. It's used as an appetite stimulant for people with AIDS and an anti-nausea remedy for chemotherapy patients.

Marinol is now being tested for its usefulness in treating Alzheimer's symptoms, Lanctot said. People interested in trying it should reach out to one of the big clinical trials; Johns Hopkins is one of the centers testing Marinol.

"We wouldn't want to change clinical practice based on one study," Lanctot added.

The study was to be presented Tuesday at the Alzheimer's Association meeting in Chicago. Research presented at medical meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Alzheimer's Society has more about cannabis and Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: A major strength of this news release is that it favors cautious, rather than hyped language.
It’s clearly stated:
About 45 percent of patients experienced sedation with nabilone, compared with 16 percent for placebo.
We very much appreciated how the story also anticipated that some readers might take the study findings as justification for self medicating with marijuana, and why that might be risky.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 4, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- People suffering from restless legs syndrome may find some relief by taking one of several drugs approved to treat the condition, a new review confirms.

The medications, which include Requip (ropinirole), levodopa, Neurontin (gabapentin) and Lyrica (pregabalin), appear to reduce symptoms of the syndrome in more than 60 percent of patients, researchers report. The first two drugs raise dopamine levels in the body, and the last two drugs reduce the amount of calcium reaching brain cells and trigger the production of other chemicals that help reduce pain. Dopamine is a brain chemical that regulates movement and mood.

"Physicians and patients now have better information on the effectiveness and harms of two types of drug treatments for patients with at least moderately severe restless legs symptoms in which to guide treatment choices," said review author Dr. Timothy Wilt, core investigator at the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Restless legs syndrome causes a person to feel a powerful urge to move his or her legs. The legs become uncomfortable when lying down or sitting, and the condition can disrupt sleep and take a toll on the quality of life, the researchers said.

One expert, Dr. Martin Niethammer, a neurologist at the Movement Disorders Center of North Shore-LIJ's Cushing Neuroscience Institute in Manhasset, N.Y., said this study is merely a review of the current treatments for restless legs syndrome.

"There is nothing new here at all," he said. "It doesn't add anything to the field."

This is just a compilation of evidence that follows guidelines that have been long established in both Europe and the United States, Niethammer said.

"These are the only treatments approved by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," he added.

The report was published in the March 4 online issue of JAMA Internal Medicine.

For the analysis, Wilt's team reviewed 29 clinical trials. The researchers found that 61 percent of those taking dopamine agonists showed at least a 50 percent improvement in their symptoms, compared with 41 percent of those taking an inactive placebo.

In addition, those taking dopamine agonists slept better and scored higher on measures of quality of life. Dopamine agonists were originally developed to treat Parkinson's disease.

Side effects of dopamine agonists can include euphoria, hallucinations, weight loss, nausea, insomnia, tiredness or weakness, dizziness and drowsiness.

There are generic versions of Requip that cost far less, running between $11 and $22 a month. Insurance covers the treatment in most cases, so actual out-of-pocket costs will vary by insurance plan. The same is true for levodopa, Wilt said.

Neurontin and Lyrica also helped relieve symptoms in 61 percent of patients, compared with 37 percent of those taking a placebo, the researchers found.

The most common side effects of these drugs include fatigue, swelling in the legs, dizziness and weight gain.

Without insurance, Lyrica costs can run more than $100 a month, but again co-pays will vary by plan, Wilt said. The same is true for Neurontin, which can cost $117 to $135 a month without insurance.

Wilt noted there is no information on the effectiveness of treatments in pregnant women, young or old patients, those with milder symptoms or those with other serious medical conditions. "We urge caution in extending our conclusions to these individuals," he noted.

"Treatments for restless legs syndrome is now frequently advertised direct-to-consumer, and thus while this may enhance awareness it may result in patients seeking treatment for milder or other conditions not well-studied," he explained.

The harms of medications may outweigh benefits for these individuals, Wilt said. "Up to 25 to 50 percent with even moderate to severe and longstanding symptoms stop taking these medications after more than a year due to either side effects or lack of benefit," he noted.

Nonetheless, for people with moderate to severe restless legs syndrome symptoms, these medications provided important benefits, at least in the short term, Wilt said.

Patients should tell their doctors if they have bothersome sensations in their legs that include distressing, irresistible urge to move them that is relieved by rest, Wilt said.

"This may be due to restless legs syndrome or other conditions. An accurate diagnosis is important. Effective treatments for restless legs syndrome are available, and in patients with more severe symptoms may include medications," he said.

For more on restless legs syndrome, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story lists adverse effects commonly seen with both classes of medication discussed in the story. It adds, “Up to 25 to 50 percent with even moderate to severe and longstanding symptoms stop taking these medications after more than a year due to either side effects or lack of benefit.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Like spicy foods? If so, science has some good news for you: Eating hot chili peppers may help you live longer.

A new study, published in PLoS ONE, found that consumption of hot red chili peppers was associated with a 13 percent lower risk of death.

The research is observational, so no cause and effect relationship can be established. Still, the authors say the study strengthens the growing body of evidence that spicy food may have protective health properties that can lead to a longer life.

For the study, researchers at the Larner College of Medicine at the University of Vermont analyzed data on more than 16,000 Americans using the National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey (NHANES). Participants were followed for an average of 18.9 years.

The researchers note that people who ate hot red chili peppers tended to be “younger, male, white, Mexican-American, married, and to smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, and consume more vegetables and meats . . . had lower HDL-cholesterol, lower income, and less education,” in comparison to participants who did not consume red chili peppers.

Though the mechanism by which chili peppers could help delay death is not well understood, there are some theories.

Previous, mostly experimental research has suggested that spices and their bioactive ingredient, capsaicin, have anti-obesity, antioxidant, anti-inflammation and anti-cancer properties.

The authors say capsaicin also possesses antimicrobial properties that “may indirectly affect the host by altering the gut microbiota.”

The research corroborates a 2015 study conducted in China and published in the BMJ that found regular consumption of spicy food is associated with a lower risk of death.

But experts caution that this doesn’t mean everyone should pile on the spices at dinner time to improve their health and increase their longevity. People with gastrointestinal issues, for example, should hold off on the hot sauce.

“For those who are affected by digestive disorders such as a stomach ulcer, I would be cautious about eating spicy foods,” Lu Qi, of Harvard’s T. H. Chan School of Public Health and Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, and lead author of The BMJ study, told CBS News.

The authors suggest further research should investigate the benefits of other spices and the effects of certain chili pepper subtypes.

“Such evidence may lead to new insights into the relationships between diet and health, updated dietary recommendations, and the development of new therapies,” they write.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story addresses potential harms from eating red hot chili peppers, by quoting an expert source warning about discomfort and worsening symptoms in people with digestive disorders such as stomach ulcers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Blood drawn from expectant mothers could offer parents an earlier sneak peek at their baby’s sex than methods currently used in the U.S., researchers said Tuesday.

The test may be particularly valuable for families that harbor sex-linked genetic disorders like hemophilia, they add.

Because such disorders mostly strike boys, knowing that the baby is a girl could spare the mother diagnostic procedures, such as amniocentesis, that carry a small risk of miscarriage.

“It could reduce the number of invasive procedures that are being performed for specific genetic conditions,” said Dr. Diana Bianchi of Tufts University School of Medicine, who worked on the new study.

But other researchers voiced concerns, saying it could be misused to terminate a pregnancy if the baby isn’t of the desired sex.

“What you have to consider is the ethics of this,” said Dr. Mary Rosser, an obstetrician and gynecologist at the Montefiore Medical Center in New York.

“If parents are using it to determine gender and then terminate the pregnancy based on that, that could be a problem,” she told Reuters Health. “Remember, gender is not a disease.”

The test looks for small pieces of the male sex chromosome in the mother’s blood, which would mean she is carrying a baby boy. Some European hospitals already rely on the method, called cell-free fetal DNA, although it’s not available from doctors in the U.S.

“What they are finding in England is that many women are not going on to have the invasive tests,” Bianchi told Reuters Health.

In those procedures, doctors either extract a small amount of the fluid that surrounds the fetus (amniocentesis) or they take a sample of the placenta (chorionic villus sampling). Between one in 100 and one in 600 mothers miscarry as a result, according to Bianchi.

In a fresh look at the medical evidence for the blood test, she and her colleagues analyzed 57 earlier studies that included more than 6,500 pregnancies.

They found parents could trust the test 98.8 percent of the time when it said they’d have a boy, and 94.8 percent of the time when it indicated a girl.

That leaves some room for error, which could be important if parents are making medical decisions based on the results — such as whether or not to get an invasive procedure to look for genetic disorders.

However, the current non-invasive alternative — an ultrasound done at the end of the first trimester — isn’t always good at spotting a baby’s sex, Bianchi’s team reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

And the blood test is reliable as early as seven weeks into the pregnancy, whereas ultrasound is not.

Bianchi said one study had estimated the blood test costs about 255 pounds in the UK (about $413), all included. While it’s available over the Internet, she said her team had only looked at hospital-based test performance.

“I don’t know why it is not being incorporated in the US,” she said.

Rosser, however, chalked that up to the ethical issues it raises.

“It is a great test that can be part of our armamentarium of noninvasive testing that we use,” she said. “But it should only be used by families that are at risk for sex-linked diseases.”

Bianchi said she owns stock in Verinata Health, a company that is developing cell-free fetal DNA tests for Down syndrome, although that company had no role in the new study.

The American College of Medical Genetics did not respond to requests for comment on the DNA tests.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We give this a barely passing grade, because the story does quote one ethicist raising doubts about how parents may use the test. She points out: “Remember, gender is not a disease.” Reuters does not use the word “abortion.” Seems to be a bit light on the harms side of the social equation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Nuplazid (pimavanserin) tablets, the first drug approved to treat hallucinations and delusions associated with psychosis experienced by some people with Parkinson’s disease.

Hallucinations or delusions can occur in as many as 50 percent of patients with Parkinson’s disease at some time during the course of their illness. People who experience them see or hear things that are not there (hallucinations) and/or have false beliefs (delusions). The hallucinations and delusions experienced with Parkinson’s disease are serious symptoms, and can lead to thinking and emotions that are so impaired that the people experiencing them may not relate to loved ones well or take appropriate care of themselves.

“Hallucinations and delusions can be profoundly disturbing and disabling,” said Mitchell Mathis, M.D., director of the Division of Psychiatry Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “Nuplazid represents an important treatment for people with Parkinson’s disease who experience these symptoms.”

An estimated 50,000 Americans are diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease each year, according to the National Institutes of Health, and about one million Americans have the condition. The neurological disorder typically occurs in people over age 60, when cells in the brain that produce a chemical called dopamine become impaired or die. Dopamine helps transmit signals between the areas of the brain that produce smooth, purposeful movement -- like eating, writing and shaving. Early symptoms of the disease are subtle and occur gradually. In some people Parkinson’s disease progresses more quickly than in others. As the disease progresses, the shaking, or tremor, which affects the majority of people with Parkinson’s disease, may begin to interfere with daily activities. Other symptoms may include depression and other emotional changes; hallucinations and delusions; difficulty in swallowing, chewing, and speaking; urinary problems or constipation; skin problems; and sleep disruptions.

The effectiveness of Nuplazid was shown in a six-week clinical trial of 199 participants. Nuplazid was shown to be superior to placebo in decreasing the frequency and/or severity of hallucinations and delusions without worsening the primary motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.

As with other atypical antipsychotic drugs, Nuplazid has a Boxed Warning alerting health care professionals about an increased risk of death associated with the use of these drugs to treat older people with dementia-related psychosis. No drug in this class is approved to treat patients with dementia-related psychosis.

In clinical trials, the most common side effects reported by participants taking Nuplazid were: swelling, usually of the ankles, legs, and feet due to the accumulation of excessive fluid in the tissue (peripheral edema); nausea; and abnormal state of mind (confused state).

Nuplazid was granted for the treatment of hallucinations and delusions associated with Parkinson’s disease. Breakthrough therapy designation is a program designed to expedite the development and review of drugs that are intended to treat a serious condition and where preliminary clinical evidence indicates that the drug may demonstrate substantial improvement over available therapy on a clinically significant endpoint. The drug was also granted a priority review. The FDA’s program provides for an expedited review of drugs that offer a significant improvement in the safety or effectiveness for the treatment, prevention, or diagnosis of a serious condition.

Nuplazid is marketed by Acadia Pharmaceuticals Inc. of San Diego, California.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that Nuplazid has a “Boxed Warning alerting health care professionals about an increased risk of death associated with the use of these drugs to treat older people with dementia-related psychosis.” Other harms observed in the very brief (6-week) trial are swelling due to the accumulation of excessive fluid in the tissue, nausea  and confusion. The release would have been stronger had it given us an idea of how common or rare these side effects are.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Older adults who get plenty of vitamin E in their diets may have a somewhat lower risk of developing dementia than those who consume less of the nutrient, a study published Monday suggests.

Researchers found that among 5,400 Dutch adults age 55 and older, the one-third who reported the highest vitamin E intake from food were 25 percent less likely to develop dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease, over the next decade than the third with the lowest intakes.

The findings, reported in the Archives of Neurology, do not prove that vitamin E itself protects the aging brain. Studies so far have come to conflicting conclusions as to whether vitamin E or other antioxidants may influence older adults’ risk of dementia.

However, the new study followed participants for a longer period than most previous studies on antioxidants and dementia. And it supports findings from some previous research that dietary vitamin E, in particular, might be related to a lower risk of dementia.

Researchers have been interested in whether antioxidants like vitamins E and C and beta-carotene might help stave off dementia because, in theory, their actions might interfere with the process of brain-cell degeneration.

Antioxidants neutralize unstable forms of oxygen called reactive oxygen species that can damage cells throughout the body. Reactive oxygen species are produced naturally in the body, as byproducts of metabolism; because the brain is an area of high metabolic activity, it is thought to be particularly vulnerable to accumulating oxidative damage over a lifetime.

However, studies so far have come to mixed conclusions as to whether older adults with a high dietary intake of various antioxidants have a lower risk of dementia. And clinical trials looking at the effects of antioxidant supplements have found no evidence that they cut Alzheimer’s risk.

For the new study, researchers led by Dr. Monique Breteler, of Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, used data from 5,395 adults age 55 and older who were dementia-free at the start of the study. At that point, they were interviewed about their usual diet habits, which the researchers used to estimate their intake of vitamins C and E and beta-carotene.

Over the next decade, 465 study participants were diagnosed with dementia, including 365 with Alzheimer’s.

Among the one-third of men and women with the highest vitamin E intakes from food, 120 developed dementia. Of the third with the lowest intakes, 164 were diagnosed with dementia.

When Breteler’s team considered a number of other factors — including participants’ age, education, weight, and smoking and drinking habits — high vitamin E intake was linked to a one-quarter reduction in dementia risk.

The one-third of study participants with the highest vitamin E consumption typically got 18.5 milligrams (mg) per day, just over the recommended daily intake of 15 mg.

The researchers acknowledge that they cannot exclude the possibility that factors other than vitamin E explain the connection. Nor is it clear why vitamin E, but not vitamin C or beta-carotene, was linked to a lower dementia risk.

But the finding is in line with a previous study of U.S. adults that found that a higher intake of vitamin E, but not vitamin C or beta-carotene, was related to a lower risk of developing Alzheimer’s over two years.

According to Breteler’s team, studies should continue to look at the relationship between antioxidant intake and dementia — including whether antioxidant consumption at different points in life might have different effects on dementia risk.

Food sources of vitamin E include wheat germ, nuts such as almonds and hazelnuts, vegetable oils such as sunflower and safflower oils, and some green vegetables, such as spinach and broccoli.

In the current study, participants’ primary vitamin E sources included vegetable oils, margarine and butter.

It is unlikely that people could get too much vitamin E from food. However, high doses of vitamin E from supplements carry a risk of bleeding. Experts advise that adults consume no more than 1,000 mg of vitamin E per day.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There are no known harms to eating a diet rich in foods containing vitamin E, but this story goes the extra mile and notes that high vitamin E intake from supplements can cause excessive bleeding.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OTTAWA, ON - August 21, 2017 - Researchers at the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO) looked at the incidence of and risk factors associated with sedation-related adverse events in pediatric emergency departments as part of a multi-centre observational study published today in JAMA Pediatrics.

When children and youth present at an emergency department and require an immediate painful procedure, it is standard to sedate the patient so they can tolerate the treatment. Procedural sedation is commonly used for painful or uncomfortable procedures like setting fractures, repairing lacerations and draining abscesses in emergency departments worldwide.

"Although sedation-related serious adverse events occur infrequently, recognition and early intervention is necessary to ensure patient safety," said Dr. Maala Bhatt, lead author, director of pediatric emergency research at CHEO, and assistant professor at the University of Ottawa. "We've been able to identify sedation medications and practices associated with the best clinical outcomes, which is practice-changing."

According to the authors, this study represents the largest and most robust prospective emergency department procedural sedation cohort to date. It includes children from six emergency departments across Canada, sedated with six different medication combinations.

The results of the study show that choice of sedation medication had the biggest impact on the incidence of adverse events and need for significant interventions in response to those events. The incidence of serious adverse events was lowest among patients sedated with ketamine-alone and highest among patients sedated with combination drugs ketamine plus propofol or fentanyl.

The overall incidence of adverse events in the study population was 11.7%. The most common events were a decrease in oxygen saturation (5.6%) and vomiting (5.2%). Significant interventions in response to an adverse event were rare, occurring in only 1.4% of children. Two other practices - receiving an opioid prior to sedation and having a laceration repair - were associated with the occurrence of vomiting, oxygen desaturation and need for significant interventions.

"The low rate of serious adverse events and significant interventions supports the safety of procedural sedation in the hands of emergency department physicians," said Dr. Bhatt. "While all sedation medications and combination of medications are effective and safe in the hands of experienced providers, ketamine-alone is associated with the fewest serious adverse events and significant interventions, making it a logical choice for providing procedural sedation for children in emergency departments."

Co-authors include: Drs. Maala Bhatt, David W. Johnson, Jason Chan, Monica Taljaard, Nick Barrowman, Ken J. Farion, Samina Ali, Suzanne Beno, Andrew Dixon, C. Michelle McTimoney, Alexander Sasha Dubrovsky, Nadia Sourial and Mark G. Roback for the Sedation Safety Study Group of Pediatric Emergency Research Canada (PERC).

This study was funded by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) team grant in Pediatric Emergency Medicine.

The CHEO Research Institute coordinates the research activities of the Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO) and is affiliated with the University of Ottawa. Its three programs of research include molecular biomedicine, health information technology, and evidence to practice research. Key themes include cancer, diabetes, obesity, mental health, emergency medicine, musculoskeletal health, electronic health information and privacy, and genetics of rare disease. The CHEO Research Institute makes discoveries today for healthier kids tomorrow. For more information, visit http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release did a good job of explaining possible harms that occur in relation to different types of sedation. A few words about the specific adverse events seen with ketamine would have been of value.  As a dissociative agent, ketamine is known for its ability to produce bizarre dreams, and hallucination as well as excessive salivation.
Here is an excerpt from the release:
“The overall incidence of adverse events in the study population was 11.7%. The most common events were a decrease in oxygen saturation (5.6%) and vomiting (5.2%). Significant interventions in response to an adverse event were rare, occurring in only 1.4% of children. Two other practices – receiving an opioid prior to sedation and having a laceration repair – were associated with the occurrence of vomiting, oxygen desaturation and need for significant interventions.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
George Burke has a talent for tossing back his daily cocktail — which contains vitamins, minerals, muscle-building compounds, some little-known research drugs and a microdose of LSD — in almost a single gulp. It’s a weird but handy trick for someone who swallows 25 pills a day, most of them purchases off the Internet.

Burke credits the regimen with giving him the cognitive edge he needs to thrive in California’s Silicon Valley, where he’s the co-founder of a food service that caters to athletes and fitness devotees.

He used to get his edge from Adderall, but after moving from New Jersey to San Francisco, he says, he couldn’t find a doctor who would write him a prescription. Driven to the Internet, he discovered a world of cognition-enhancing drugs known as nootropics — some prescription, some over-the-counter, others available on a worldwide gray market of private sellers — said to improve memory, attention, creativity and motivation.

“It’s not like every tech worker in Silicon Valley is taking nootropics to get ahead,” Burke acknowledges. “It’s the few who are getting ahead who are using supplements to do that.”

The word “nootropic” was coined in 1972 by a Romanian scientist, Corneliu Giurgea, who combined the Greek words for “mind” and “bending.” Caffeine and nicotine can be considered mild nootropics, while prescription Ritalin, Adderall and Provigil (modafinil, a drug for treating narcolepsy) lie at the far end of the spectrum when prescribed off-label as cognitive enhancers. Even microdosing of LSD is increasingly viewed as a means to greater productivity.

But when aficionados talk about nootropics, they usually refer to substances that have supposedly few side effects and low toxicity. Most often they mean piracetam, which Giurgea first synthesized in 1964 and which is approved for therapeutic use in dozens of countries for use in adults and the elderly. Not so in the United States, however, where officially it can be sold only for research purposes.

Piracetam is well studied and is credited by its users with boosting their memory, sharpening their focus, heightening their immune system, even bettering their personalities. But it’s only one of many formulations in the racetam drug family. Newer ones include aniracetam, phenylpiracetam and oxiracetam. All are available online, where their efficacy and safety are debated and reviewed on message boards and in podcasts.

A number of companies now market nootropic “stacks,” or formulas, some of which include piracetam, herbal remedies, amino acids and citicoline, a naturally occurring brain chemical that can be taken orally as a supplement, intravenously or as a shot.

Because they are sold as nutritional supplements and natural products that refrain from making health claims, they avoid close government scrutiny.

When Burke began ordering piracetam online five years ago, it arrived in baggies filled with white powder. “It was as if I was buying coke off the street,” he recalls. These days, he buys his stack from Nootroo, a San Francisco company.

But self-experimenters such as Burke often don’t restrict themselves to medication alone. Dedicated brain hackers, as they call themselves, are willing to exploit their own biology to try to sharpen their mind. Their methods include meditation, cold-water plunges, periodic fasting and high-fat, low-carbohydrate ketogenic diets.

“Who doesn’t want to maximize their cognitive ability? Who doesn’t want to maximize their muscle mass?” asks Murali Doraiswamy, who has led several trials of cognitive enhancers at Duke University Health System and has been an adviser to pharmaceutical and supplement manufacturers as well as the Food and Drug Administration. He attributes the demand to an increasingly knowledge-based society that values mental quickness and agility above all else.

But while some studies have found short-term benefits, Doraiswamy says there is no evidence that what are commonly known as smart drugs — of any type — improve thinking or productivity over the long run. “There’s a sizable demand, but the hype around efficacy far exceeds available evidence,” notes Doraiswamy, adding that, for healthy young people such as Silicon Valley go-getters, “it’s a zero-sum game. That’s because when you up one circuit in the brain, you’re probably impairing another system.”

Early studies attributed a lot of short-term benefits to nootropics — so much so that in 1983, Russian scientists turned to phenylpiracetam to boost the physical and mental performance of cosmonauts during space flight.

A 1999 study found that piracetam had beneficial effects on the hippocampal membranes of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. The hippocampus, an area of the brain that plays a key role in the formation of new memories, typically shows severe shrinkage with Alzheimer’s. The idea that piracetam might reverse that effect was exciting.

Although piracetam has a history of “relatively few side effects,” it has fallen far short of its initial promise for treating any of the illnesses associated with cognitive decline, according to Lon Schneider, a professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California. “We don’t use it at all and never have.”

As for newer nootropic drugs, there are unknown risks. “Piracetam has been studied for decades,” says cognitive neuroscientist Andrew Hill, the founder of a neurofeedback company in Los Angeles called Peak Brain Institute. But “some of [the newer] compounds are things that some random editor found in a scientific article, copied the formula down and sent it to China and had a bulk powder developed three months later that they’re selling. Please don’t take it, people!”

For Burke and other brain hackers, the evidence for nootropics is strong enough.

Burke, who begins each morning with a Bulletproof coffee — a rich brew of caffeine with dollops of butter and coconut oil — has created a San Francisco meetup group called Peak Performance “to teach all my friends in the tech space about life hacks so they can kick a--better every day.”

Last spring, 100 people showed up at a Peak Performance event where psychedelic psychologist James Fadiman said the key to unleashing the cognition-enhancing effects of LSD — which he listed as less anxiety, better focus, improved sleep, greater creativity — was all in the dosage. He recommended a tenth of a “party dose” — enough to give you “the glow” and enhance your cognitive powers without “the trip.”

Burke says he definitely got the glow. “The first time I took it, I was working on a business plan. I had to juggle multiple contingencies in my head, and for some reason a tree with branches jumped into my head. I was able to place each contingency on a branch, retract and go back to the trunk, and in this visual way I was able to juggle more information.”

Not all brain hacking involves taking a pill, though.

Nootrobox, a San Francisco company that markets a nootropic mix of vitamins, minerals and amino acids, promotes fasting as a way to energize brain and body.

“We stumbled upon fasting as a way to optimize cognition and make yourself into a more efficient human being,” says Manuel Lam, an internal medicine physician who advises Nootrobox on clinical issues. He and members of the company’s executive team have implanted glucose monitors in their arms — not because they fear diabetes but because they wish to track the real-time effect of the foods they eat.

“Fasting forces your body to deplete its glucose storage and trains it to look inside for fuel,” Lam enthuses. “It’s like being strapped to a solar panel. The sun is always shining on you.”

Nootrobox employees are encouraged to fast every Tuesday, then meet for breakfast on Wednesday at a local diner. Founded by two Stanford University computer graduates, the company has initiated an international fasting group on Facebook; at last count, there were 3,500 members.

Research on animals has shown that intermittent fasting — limiting caloric intake at least two days a week — can help improve neural connections in the hippocampus and protect against the accumulation of plaque, a protein prevalent in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease. Research has also shown that intermittent fasting helped reduce anxiety in mice.

Mark Mattson, chief of the Laboratory of Neurosciences at the National Institute on Aging, has overseen a lot of the animal studies on fasting and is impressed with the evidence — so much so that he has personally adopted a regimen of intermittent fasting.

“There’s pretty conclusive evidence from animal studies that intermittent fasting is beneficial for brain function and resistance to aging from neurogenerative diseases,” he says.

Fasting has been deployed since the ancient Greeks to fast-track learning. As Plato is said to have stated, “I fast for greater physical and mental efficiency.” The philosopher Pythagoras reportedly demanded that his students fast 40 days before attending his lectures.

Far easier to take a pill.

Looking for an edge

Vinh Ngo, a San Francisco family practice doctor who specializes in hormone therapy, has become familiar with piracetam and other nootropics through a changing patient base. His office is located in the heart of the city’s tech boom and he is increasingly sought out by young, male tech workers who tell him they are interested in cognitive enhancement.

Ngo has experimented with piracetam himself (“The first time I tried it, I thought, ‘Wow, this is pretty strong for a supplement.’ I had a little bit of reflux, heartburn, but in general it was a cognitive enhancer. . . . I found it helpful”) and the neurotransmitter DMEA (“You have an idea, it helps you finish the thought. It’s for when people have difficulty finishing that last connection in the brain”).

But he has also seen patients whose propensity for self-experimentation to improve cognition got out of hand. One chief executive he treated, Ngo said, developed an unhealthy predilection for albuterol, because he felt the asthma inhaler medicine kept him alert and productive long after others had quit working. Unfortunately, the drug ended up severely imbalancing his electrolytes, which can lead to dehydration, headaches, vision and cardiac problems, muscle contractions and, in extreme cases, seizures.

“There is that culture here [in Silicon Valley] that relies on being smarter than your own self,” Ngo says. “People want to find an edge over their competitor — that’s how they got their position in the first place. I’m trying to give them a little more wiggle room — but in a safe way.”

He says he screens his patients for addiction and cardiovascular problems and creates individual treatment plans based on their health histories and blood tests.

There’s no one-size-fits-all approach. “I don’t have a rubber stamp for everyone, and not everyone is a candidate” for cognitive enhancement, says Ngo, who requires that his patients sign waivers acknowledging possible health risks in taking nootropics.

If, for example, someone decides to go on medication — be it Adderall, albuterol or piracetam — the patient must understand that there is a risk for high blood pressure and heart problems.

“I want to empower them,” Ngo says, but “there’s a fine line between empowering them to make their own health decisions and staying healthy.”

Smart drugs are here. Should college students be allowed to use them?

A reality check on nootropics and other efforts to keep aging at bay
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Harms are addressed–enough to be Satisfactory for this criteria. But the discussion is confusing. The story initially says nootropics have “supposedly few side effects and low toxicity.” Later it states:
As for newer nootropic drugs, there are unknown risks. “Piracetam has been studied for decades,” says cognitive neuroscientist Andrew Hill, the founder of a neurofeedback company in Los Angeles called Peak Brain Institute. But “some of [the newer] compounds are things that some random editor found in a scientific article, copied the formula down and sent it to China and had a bulk powder developed three months later that they’re selling. Please don’t take it, people!”
In contrast, consider these unequivocal cautions in a similar Mercury News story last fall, starting in the seventh paragraph:
Research into the cognitive benefits of nootropics is still in its early stages, and some experts worry about the long-term health effects of ingesting potent synthetic smart drugs, which are largely unregulated.
Some users have reported side effects including headaches, upset stomach, insomnia, anxiety and depression.
Dr. Reid Blackwelder, past president of the American Academy of Family Physicians, said it concerns him that customers are ordering such drugs online without consulting a doctor, because some of the substances seem to have a powerful impact on the brain. And much of the research on the cognitive benefits of these substances is supported only by studies using animals, Blackwelder said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A small U.S. study suggests daily hormone injections may boost mental agility in older people with and without mild cognitive problems.

People who got growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), as opposed to inactive injections, improved on tests of attention and concentration skills - what psychologists call executive function.

And participants who got the hormone shots also felt the effects in their daily life, said Laura Baker, a memory researcher at the University of Washington & VA Puget Sound Health Care System in Seattle.

“On self-report, many of the folks in the active group reported they felt better,” Baker, who led the study, told Reuters Health. “They wanted to know where they could get (the hormone) after the study was over.”

But that’s jumping the gun, she warned, because the treatment is still experimental and GHRH is not approved to treat mental decline. What’s more, the hormone, which was provided free by the manufacturer in the study, today costs $700 for a single shot, Baker said.

An expert who wasn’t involved in the research echoed the cautions.

“I think it’s potentially good news, but I don’t think it’s to the point where people should go out and start using it,” said Dr. Ronald C. Petersen, who heads the Mayo Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center in Rochester, Minnesota.

The new study, published Monday in the Archives of Neurology, included 152 people aged 55 to 87. Sixty-six had “mild cognitive impairment,” which falls somewhere between normal forgetfulness and dementia.

Baker said researchers have failed so far to come up with effective drugs to treat mild cognitive impairment, just as there is no known treatment to stave off the normal memory decline that comes with age.

But recent work by one of Baker’s co-authors hints that nasal sprays with the hormone insulin may have a positive impact on memory in people with Alzheimer’s disease - although that’s far from conclusive yet.

GHRH, a hormone produced by the hypothalamus in the brain, is linked to the insulin system, but also has a host of other effects. It dwindles naturally with aging, which has been linked to declines in memory and executive function.

“All you have to do is supplement that hormone and it then will result in a whole cascade of effects that then restore an aging system to a younger system,” said Baker.

In her study, people injected a synthetic version of GHRH or a placebo daily for five months. At the end, those who got the drug did better on psychological tests of executive function - whether or not they had mild cognitive impairment.

It’s unclear how the test differences will translate into real life, said Baker. One test, for instance, asked participants to name the color of a font - say, green - used to write the name of a different color - say, “red”. But Baker said people who got the hormone were more likely to report improvements in their ability to focus during the day.

The researchers found no serious side effects in the study, although people who got the hormone more often complained of symptoms like skin reactions and joint pain.

Still, both Baker and Petersen said more work is needed to gauge the long-term consequences of GHRH injections. It’s possible health problems could show up down the road, and the mental boost may be short-lived.

“Is it going to work in the long run and is it going to be safe? That is still unknown,” said Petersen.

Baker added that it’s too early to say whether the hormone could play a role in thwarting the development of Alzheimer’s, which may affect as many as five million Americans.

Still, she said, “There are things we can all do to postpone (mental) decline.” Keeping medical conditions such as diabetes under control and getting regular exercise are two examples.

“We recommend commonly that people start exercising when they are having mild cognitive impairment,” Baker said. “Our work and others’ has shown that exercise really does make a difference.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: As with the benefits, we wish the story had quantified the side effects observed in the study, but since side effects were acknowledged and since the following caveat was included, we’ll give it a satisfactory score on this criterion:
“…more work is needed to gauge the long-term consequences of GHRH injections. It’s possible health problems could show up down the road, and the mental boost may be short-lived.
“Is it going to work in the long run and is it going to be safe? That is still unknown,” said Petersen. “
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Getting your tonsils out used to be just part of childhood — a rite of passage for children in the 1950s and '60s. Then it fell out of favor.

Today, the most common reason for the surgery is "sleep disordered breathing," a broad diagnosis that includes sleep apnea and snoring. About 10 percent of elementary-school-age children snore.

Doctors say snoring can cause bed-wetting, behavior problems, short stature and poor school performance. That's a far cry from the 1950s and '60s, when tonsillectomy was used to fight frequent sore throats.

Back then, it was the most popular surgery in the United States. In the 1960s sitcom Leave It to Beaver, Beaver Cleaver was so impressed by his dad's tales of ice cream and pretty nurses that he schemed to have his tonsils out, even though he didn't need it.

The tonsils are two glands that sit at the base of the tongue and are part of the body's immune system. The premise of tonsillectomies, back in their heyday, was that tonsils get infected themselves and no longer help fend off germs.

Then doctors started noticing that kids were still getting sore throats, even after having their tonsils taken out. But it wasn't until clinical trials were completed in the early 1980s that there was proof that tonsillectomy really only helped children with severe, recurrent throat infections.

"It was becoming unacceptable to just take tonsils out because they were there or you had a few infections," says Richard Rosenfeld, an ear, nose and throat doctor at SUNY Downstate in Brooklyn, N.Y. "People were growing up with their tonsils."

But growing up with tonsils can create another problem: snoring. Lisa Moran of Takoma Park, Md., remembers what it sounded like when her son ,Tyler Scorza, now age 7, slept.

"It was loud," Moran says. "You could hear him through he closed door, down the hall, snoring, and he would occasionally stop breathing."

At first, Tyler's pediatrician thought he'd outgrow the snoring. But he wasn't sleeping well and often didn't have any energy. The doctor recommended a head X-Ray, and the radiologist said that though Tyler's adenoids were enlarged, they weren't that bad.

By then, Tyler had been dealing with this for almost three years. He started getting frequent nasal infections. So his parents took him to an ear, nose and throat doctor. He said, sure, the adenoids are swollen.

"But the real problem is the tonsils!" Moran recalls. "He showed us on the X-ray that there was a tiny passage between the tonsils and the back of his throat — very small."

Enlarged tonsils (and adenoids) are the most common cause of sleep-disordered breathing in children. So the doctor recommended tonsillectomy.

But Tyler's parents were worried about the surgery. It's usually done as an outpatient procedure now, but with general anesthesia. That's never without some risk.

"Your child is under," says Moran, "completely under. This is not a local."

Other complications include pain after surgery and the risk of bleeding; about 4 percent of people have complications that require readmission to the hospital.

Despite hundreds of studies, there's still surprisingly little research on whether tonsillectomy really helps reduce the risk of sore throats. The operation continues to be controversial.

No less a personage than President Obama dissed tonsillectomy when he was stumping for health care overhaul in July 2009. In a prime time news conference, Obama said that doctors may think: " 'You know what? I make a lot more money if I take this kid's tonsils out.' "

Rosenfeld disputes Obama's claim, saying insurers usually pay a surgeon $200 to $300 for tonsil surgery.

The picture is further clouded because not all children with big tonsils have sleep-disordered breathing or frequent throat infections. Because of that, in 2002 the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended that children have a sleep study before surgery is considered.

About 530,000 tonsillectomies are performed in the United States each year. Obviously, parents could use some help in deciding whether surgery is needed. In January, the American Academy of Otolaryngology issued its first guidelines on tonsillectomy in children.

With sore throats, the ENTs recommend waiting (and treatment with antibiotics, if needed), unless a child has more than seven infections in a year. They'd recommend surgery if a child has five or more throat infections a year for two years, or three or more in three years.

There have been very few randomized studies on the effects of tonsillectomy for sleep-disordered breathing. Most of the researchers have asked parents or children whether they noticed improvements, and looked at a single measure, like behavior or quality of life. Still, the ENTs recommend tonsillectomy for sleep-disordered breathing, saying it reduces symptoms in most children.

Tyler's family decided to go ahead with the surgery; they went to the hospital at 5 a.m., and Tyler was home by noon. The doctors said he would be out of school for a week, but a throat infection kept him home a second week. His classmates sent him get-well cards.

A year later, Tyler is feeling great. And his snoring is gone. "Completely gone," his mom says. "You can hear a pin-drop quiet when he sleeps."

Tyler still hears snoring at night, he says. But he knows that the culprit is not him, or the family dog. It's Dad.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hispanic middle school children, at high risk for being overweight or obese, reduced their Body Mass Index (BMI) when they adhered to a nutrition intervention that included a snack of peanuts, compared to those children who did not.

The 12-week study was conducted by researchers at the University of Houston Department of Health and Human Performance (HHP), Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Woman's University. Their findings are published in the Journal of Applied Research on Children.

"Obesity is the most pressing health issue facing us today," said Craig Johnston, HHP assistant professor. "We'd like to think it's preventable, but from where I sit right now, there hasn't been a lot shown to be very effective on a large scale."

The study acknowledged that snacking is more common during the adolescent years and that the unhealthy eating habit can lead to an unhealthy weight. This is especially true if a student doesn't have access to other meals during the school day.

"We have a lot of kids skipping meals for a whole bunch of reasons," he said. "What we found is that kids get home from school around 4 p.m. There's less supervision by parents and less structure. Kids are sitting down at the TV and eating, eating, eating because they really didn't eat at school."

Instructors guided 257 Latino adolescents from three Houston-area charter schools through a program of physical activity and nutrition education. About half the students received a snack of peanuts or peanut butter three to four times a week, while the rest received the snack fewer than once a week. The snack was administered after school as students were boarding the school bus to go home. Peanuts were chosen because nuts are nutrient-dense snacks that promote a feeling of being full.

Following the 12-week intervention, students spent 12 more weeks maintaining the healthy snacking habit. At the end of the period, those students who received the snack more regularly experienced a decrease in their overall BMI (-.7kg/m2) compared to those who did not receive the regular peanut snack (-.3kg/m2). The researchers conclude that afterschool programs and schools can replace energy dense, unhealthy snacks with peanuts to provide a healthier alternative for children (researchers in the study ensured students did not suffer from nut allergies).

Johnston says the fight against obesity needs creative solutions that help people manage their weight, appetite and hunger by offering socially acceptable food choices.

"Schools are doing a great job of teaching kids, getting them workforce ready, and a whole bunch of other things. We've just got to make sure that our kids are going to live long, happy lives with that kind of education," he said.

Participants in the study were part of a larger longitudinal study on a school-based obesity intervention program. The Family Lifestyle Overweight (FLOW) Prevention Program is a school-based pediatric intervention for urban, low-income, minority students.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release notes that care was taken not to give these snacks to children who had nut allergies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Mindfulness meditation may help older adults get a better night's sleep, a small study suggests.

Researchers found that among 49 older adults with sleep problems, those who learned mindfulness practices started sleeping better within six weeks. In fact, they did better than their counterparts who were given conventional lessons on good sleep habits, the study authors said.

Experts said the findings, published online Feb. 16 in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine, are encouraging.

On average, the effects of the mindfulness program were comparable to what's been seen in studies of sleep medications and "talk therapy," said study leader David Black, an assistant professor of preventive medicine at the University of Southern California, in Los Angeles.

According to Black, that means older adults can feel comfortable opting for "mind-body" practices as a way to address moderate sleep problems. But he also emphasized the structured nature of the program tested in his study.

"From our results, it is worth a try to engage in a structured mindfulness-based intervention led by a certified teacher with extensive experience," Black said.

In general, "mindfulness" practices encourage people to focus their attention on the present moment, instead of the past or future, and to take an objective look at their thoughts and emotions.

Sleep problems, Black explained, both affect and are affected by the mind. When people have difficulty sleeping, they often start to worry about it -- and that anxiety can worsen their sleep problems. On top of that, poor sleep itself can lead to psychological "distress," such as depression symptoms, Black said.

"There is a cyclical pattern here between wakefulness, sleep disruption, worry and mood," he said.

By learning "non-judgmental mindful awareness," Black said, people can begin to see their thoughts and feelings without reacting to them. In basic terms, it helps them relax -- a "necessary prerequisite" for sleep, Black noted.

For the current study, his team recruited 49 older adults with "moderate" sleep problems, based on their answers to a standard sleep-quality questionnaire. It asked a range of questions -- including whether the person had problems falling asleep or staying asleep, had difficulty breathing at night, or felt drowsy during the day.

Black's team randomly assigned the participants to six weekly sessions of either sleep "hygiene" education or mindfulness training.

The mindfulness group learned different meditation techniques, as well as how to eat and move with more attention. The program, Black said, did not specifically address sleep -- a topic that might only stir anxiety in people who are already worried about a lack of sleep.

By the end of the study, the mindfulness group was showing a significant improvement -- shaving about three points, on average, from their scores on the sleep-problem scale. The group that received standard education lowered their scores by an average of 1 point.

The mindfulness group also showed greater improvements in depression symptoms and daytime fatigue, the investigators found.

Black said the benefits of mindfulness training were on par with what's been found in studies of sleep medications and cognitive behavioral therapy -- a form of "talk therapy" that is often helpful for insomnia, for example.

"Cognitive behavioral therapy is highly effective," said Adam Spira, an associate professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health in Baltimore.

The problem, Spira said, is that behavioral therapy for sleep problems is not always easily found -- and even when it's available, the process takes some effort.

"What I found most interesting about this [mindfulness] approach is that it's a non-drug option, and it's accessible to the community at large," said Spira, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

Classes in meditation are available in many communities, and there are books, websites and CDs where people can learn mindfulness techniques. (The course Black's team studied is available online, at http://marc.ucla.edu.)

The caveat, according to Spira, is that this study tested that specific program. There is no guarantee that the course at your local senior center or a book would have the same chances of working.

Still, Spira said, it's a promising approach to older adults' sleep problems -- and one that's needed. "We definitely need a whole menu of treatment options," he said.

One major reason is that sleeping pills, the most common current treatment, are temporary fixes at best. Plus, Spira said, they can have side effects that are particularly dangerous for older people -- such as dizziness and balance problems that can lead to falls, and problems with attention and memory.

Then there's the fact that sleep issues become common as people age, Spira said. Studies suggest that about half of adults age 55 and up have insomnia or some other sleep disturbance -- and that can have consequences for their physical and mental health.

There are still plenty of questions about the effects of mindfulness meditation on sleep quality. A key one is whether the benefits last.

Spira said that with cognitive behavioral therapy, there is evidence that people's sleep keeps improving after their therapy sessions have ended. "It'll be interesting to see whether people can learn mindfulness techniques, then see durable effects," he said.

The National Sleep Foundation has more on sleep disorders.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions risks in the context of sleep medication, saying that sleeping pills “can have side effects that are particularly dangerous for older people — such as dizziness and balance problems that can lead to falls, and problems with attention and memory.” By implication, the story is saying that the meditation showed no side effects. (For example, did it make it harder for any of the participants to sleep?) It would have been nice to have that issue clarified.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 7, 2009 (HealthDay News) -- Diabetes, heart attacks and other cardiovascular problems appear to be more common in men with prostate cancer who are treated with androgen deprivation therapy, which reduces or eliminates the male sex hormones that can promote cancer growth, a new study has found.

The finding indicates that androgen therapy is overused because its benefits have not been shown to outweigh its dangers in many cases, said Dr. Nancy L. Keating, associate professor of medicine and public health at Harvard Medical School and lead author of a report on the study published online Dec. 7 in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

"There are areas where hormone deprivation therapy has been shown to have a clear benefit," Keating said. "We're not suggesting that men who need hormone deprivation therapy should not have it. But lots of men get the therapy where it has not been shown to have a benefit."

One example is so-called PSA-recurrent cancer. Hormone deprivation therapy is started, Keating said, when levels of cancer-associated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) increase after surgery or radiation therapy, but there are no other indicators of danger.

"There has never been a trial showing an overall benefit in such cases," she said. "When you can have potentially serious adverse effects, you want to show caution."

Similarly, Keating said, no trial has shown an overall benefit for androgen deprivation therapy in cases where "watchful waiting" is chosen rather than radiation therapy or surgery for prostate cancer, Keating said.

"One third of men over 65 who don't have surgery or radiation get this therapy," she said. "Yet its effects have never been studied in a controlled trial."

Previous studies have shown potential dangers related to androgen deprivation therapy in older men, Keating said. The study she led looked at its effects on about 37,000 men treated for prostate cancer at Veterans Affairs hospitals.

Surgical removal of the testes was associated with a 40 percent increased risk for heart disease and a more than doubled risk for heart attack. Use of multiple hormone-blocking agents was associated with a 27 percent increased risk for heart disease.

The greatest risk was found for drugs that target gonadotropin-releasing hormone: 159.4 cases of diabetes per 1,000 person-years, compared with 87.5 for men who did not have androgen deprivation therapy, as well as a 35 percent increased risk for sudden cardiac death, a comparable increase in heart attack risk and a 22 percent increased risk for stroke.

Observational studies, which include all people with a condition, can never conclusively prove cause and effect, Keating acknowledged, because "the thing we can't account for is whether people who are on a treatment are different from those who aren't." But detailed evidence about the potential dangers of androgen deprivation therapy has not emerged from the more rigorous controlled trials that have been done "because they have looked only at cardiovascular deaths, and most patients who have heart attacks do not die of those heart attacks," she said.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a professor and chief of urology at the University of Connecticut Health Center, said that "the point of this paper is to help physicians understand that long-term use of this therapy carries consequences." Albertsen wrote an accompanying editorial in the journal.

Anti-hormone therapy was developed to treat the pain and other problems of advanced prostate cancer, Albertsen said, and so it was generally used for only three to five years.

"Now, many more men are being started on androgen deprivation therapy long before there are any symptoms of prostate cancer so they may be on it for up to 15 years," he said. "We are beginning to realize that there can be significant problems in terms of cardiovascular risk. So the lesson is that if you start the therapy early, you should be sure that there is increased survival because there is a downside."

Dr. Eric A. Klein, chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Glickman Urological and Kidney Institute, said that the study "is confirmatory of a lot of other, smaller studies.

"There is a growing realization that we cannot use androgen deprivation therapy in a haphazard fashion," Klein said. "It does save lives or delay progression for men with metastatic prostate cancer so the trade-offs there are reasonable. But in many other cases, the downside probably exceeds the benefit."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION:  The story included quantitative information about the harms associated with androgen deprivation therapy. However, it mixed uses of relative risks and absolute risks within the same sentence, which we think can only confuse readers. Excerpt: 
We urge journalists to use absolute risk throughout every story.  See our primer on this topic.  
Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this one.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
People with psoriasis who haven’t seen improvement with standard treatments now have a new option. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the injectable drug Siliq (broadalumab) for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in adults.

Because of an association with suicidal thoughts and behaviors, Siliq will be sold with a “black box” warning and should be considered only for patients whose psoriasis has not responded—or has stopped responding—to phototherapy or to other systemic medicines taken orally or via injection.

Plaque psoriasis is an autoimmune condition that causes cells to build up on the surface of the skin, forming thick red patches and flaky silver-white scales. Current treatment options for psoriasis include topical treatments (like corticosteroids) phototherapy (using an ultraviolet light box or a laser) and systemic drugs—delivered via a pill, an injection or an IV infusion—that work throughout the body.

Siliq is unique because it binds to the receptor of a protein called interleukin-17, a known contributor to inflammation. By blocking the receptor from being activated, it keeps the body from receiving signals that can fuel inflammatory responses and psoriasis progression. Two other psoriasis drugs currently on the market work similarly, but instead bind to the protein itself.

This small difference is significant, says Dr. Richard Fried, a member of the National Psoriasis Foundation medical board, since responses to drug treatments can vary dramatically from person to person. “Having another agent in our armamentarium that works by a different mechanism is a welcome addition and may prove beneficial to many psoriasis suffers,” he says in an email. (Fried says he has no involvement with the drug or the drug company.)

In the three clinical trials considered for drug approval, more than 50% of patients who used Siliq achieved total skin clearance—the ultimate goal of psoriasis treatments—within a year. The most common side effects of the drug were joint and muscle pain, headache, fatigue, diarrhea, throat pain, nausea, flu, low white blood cell count, fungal infections and reactions at the injection site.

The drug also comes with a more serious warning, as well. In a total of six clinical trials totaling about 6,200 participants, six suicides were reported by people receiving Siliq. People with a history of suicide attempts or depression had an increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior.

Because of these events, the labeling for Siliq will include a Boxed Warning, and the drug will only be available through a restricted REMS (Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy) program. In order to prescribe it, doctors must be certified with the program and must counsel patients about this risk. Patients must also agree to seek medical attention should they experience new or worsening mood changes, anxiety or suicidal thoughts.

A causal association between Siliq and increased risk of suicidal ideation and behavior has not been established. Fried, a dermatologist and clinical psychologist, points out that psoriasis itself can be associated with mental health problems.

“Effective treatment has consistently shown reduction in the incidence and severity of depression and reduced likelihood of suicide,” says Fried. He adds that the data on Siliq suggests that it is not only effective in treating psoriasis, but that many patients experience improvement in anxiety and depression, as well.

Siliq, like other psoriasis medications, also affects the immune system. It can raise patients’ risk of infections and shouldn’t be used by people with certain chronic conditions, such as Crohn’s disease or active tuberculosis infections. People should also avoid immunizations with live vaccines while being treated with Siliq.

“Patients and their health care providers should discuss the benefits and risks of Siliq before considering treatment,” said Dr. Julie Beitz, director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, in an agency press release.

The drug’s recommended dosage schedule is an injection once a week for the first three weeks, followed by an injection every other week. Valeant Pharmaceuticals, Siliq’s manufacturer, says that pricing information is not available at this time, and expects to begin sales and marketing in the second half of 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This is a strong point for the story. In the second paragraph, it states that the drug will be sold with a “black box warning” because of “an association with suicidal thoughts and behaviors” among those who took it. It goes further, later on, by saying, “The most common side effects of the drug were joint and muscle pain, headache, fatigue, diarrhea, throat pain, nausea, flu, low white blood cell count, fungal infections and reactions at the injection site.”
As well, the story spends at least two additional paragraphs discussing the link between use of the drug and suicide, and finally, it cites its effect on the immune system and how it should not be taken by people with some chronic conditions, such as Crohn’s disease.
(For more on the checkered history of this drug’s side effects as noted in clinical trials, see this same criterion in our news release review for the FDA approval of Siliq.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - A new, longer-lasting “morning-after” pill to prevent unwanted pregnancy appears to work with no unexpected side effects, U.S. health regulatory staff said in documents released on Tuesday.

Data shows the one-pill treatment, called ella and made by French drugmaker HRA Pharma, is effective when taken as many as five days after unprotected sex, Food and Drug Administration staff reviewers said in documents released ahead of a public meeting on the drug scheduled for Thursday.

At the meeting, an FDA panel of outside experts will decide whether to recommend the agency approve the emergency contraceptive for the U.S. market. If approved, Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc would sell the drug in the United States.

HRA Pharma’s drug, approved last year in Europe under the name ellaOne, has re-ignited debate over “morning-after” pills in the United States, where reproductive issues are a constant political issue.

Women’s health advocates have welcomed the potential for another contraceptive option, but some critics contend the drug is more akin to the abortion pill, sold by Danco Laboratories as Mifeprex and also known as RU-486 or mifepristone.

Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd sells a rival product, called Plan B, a two-pill regimen with generic competition from Watson’s Next Choice. Teva also sells a one-pill version of Plan B.

Both versions of Plan B, which are available over the counter for women at least 17 years of age, have only been proven to work for up to 72 hours after intercourse.

“There is a medical need for an efficient emergency contraceptive product which acts consistently over a prolonged time period,” HRA Pharma said in a separate document released by the FDA.

The drugmaker has said its pill, also known by its chemical name ulipristal, works primarily by preventing ovulation of a woman’s egg. But the drug’s effect on the lining of the uterus — critical for a fertilized egg to develop — may also play a role, according to its label in Europe.

The agency’s reviewers also said the company’s studies showed no unexpected side effects in women, although reports of nausea, headache and abdominal pain were common. It was not clear what effect the drug had, if any, when a woman still became pregnant despite taking it, they added.

“Data on pregnancy outcomes after EC (emergency contraceptive) failure with ulipristal were too limited to draw any definitive conclusions regarding the effect of ulipristal on an established pregnancy or fetal development,” they wrote.

Emergency contraceptive pills have been available in the United States for more than a decade.

Plan B, or levonorgestrel, was first approved in 1999. Efforts in 2001 to make it available without a prescription stirred fierce opposition from conservatives, and the bid stalled under the George W. Bush administration. Democrats angered by the delay threatened to block Bush’s nominee to run the FDA. Easier access to the drug won approval in 2006.

HRA is not seeking to sell ella without a doctor’s prescription.

Advocates for women’s health have applauded the possibility of additional contraceptive options, saying a longer-lasting product could help women who want to avoid pregnancy.

For ella, “while you’re going to have to go and get a prescription for it, it gives you a little bit more leeway in terms of putting your ability to put your life on hold and get this healthcare need taken care of,” said Amy Allina, program and policy director for the National Women’s Health Network.

Cost is also an issue. With Plan B sold over the counter, most women have to pay for the drug themselves — roughly $50 — rather than have their health insurance cover it, Allina said.

Anti-abortion groups oppose HRA Pharma’s drug, saying it is closer chemically to mifepristone than Plan B and pressing the FDA to reject the product.

Like mifepristone, ella is a type of drug known as a selective progesterone receptor modulator (SPRM) that interferes with the hormone progesterone, which is critical for pregnancy.

If it is approved, it should be clearly labeled as an abortifacient, which would limit its distribution, the American Association of Pro Life Obstetricians & Gynecologists said in a letter to the FDA earlier this month.

“There is no doubt that ulipristal acts an abortifacient because the drug blocks progesterone receptors at three critical areas,” an action that “interferes with the hormone action of progesterone to prepare the endometrium for implantation and to support the early pregnancy,” the group wrote.

Proponents agree that ella is similar chemically to mifepristone but say the dose given does not interfere with a pregnancy already underway.

“There’s just no evidence that it causes abortion,” said Baylor College of Medicine professor Paul Fine, who also serves as medical director for Planned Parenthood in Houston and Southeast Texas.

On Thursday, the FDA’s advisers will weigh HRA Pharma’s data and offer recommendations before the agency later makes its approval decision.

Watson shares were up 50 cents, or 1.2 percent, to $43.20 in morning trade. Teva shares were up 6 cents to $53.34 in New York.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentions that the FDA found no unexpected adverse events and describes the side effects of the drug including nausea, headache and abdominal pain as "common." The package insert for EllaOne describes these side effects as affecting more than 10% of users. It would have been helpful if the story had cited that stat. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With a cure rate approaching 90 percent, acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) - the most common type of childhood cancer - is often hailed as one of the "success stories" of modern cancer treatment. But up to 20 percent of patients with a high risk of relapse are not cured. That could change with the results from a clinical trial co-led by investigators from NYU Langone Medical Center, which shows giving high doses of a commonly-used chemotherapy drug increases the survival rate for these patients.

The high-dose methotrexate protocol outlined in the study - along with a parallel finding that the steroid decadron is beneficial for younger (but not older) patients - has quickly become the standard practice for the treatment of high-risk ALL patients in North America, the researchers report in the April XX issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

For more than 50 years, ALL patients have been treated with a combination of steroids and methotrexate, among other agents. Patients classified as high risk for relapse--those with a high white blood cell count or who are more than 10 years old--are treated with a standard phase of therapy where methotrexate is given in a gradual, escalating dosage. The current study showed that an alternative schedule of high-dose methotrexate was superior. Prior to the release of the initial study results, which were first presented last year at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), the standard of care for high-risk ALL patients in North America was escalating methotrexate.

"One of the improvements in outcome for ALL overall has been using methotrexate in a more intense fashion, by giving higher doses," said senior investigator William L. Carroll, MD, the Julie and Edward J. Minskoff Professor of Pediatrics, director of the Stephen D. Hassenfeld Children's Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders at NYU Langone and director emeritus of NYU Langone's Perlmutter Cancer Center. "We designed this study to compare high dose and escalating methotrexate to determine the best way to use this drug to increase the survival of high-risk ALL patients."

This was a large-scale study involving pediatric cancer centers across the country. More than 3,000 patients with high-risk ALL were enrolled in the randomized clinical trial, which was run by the Children's Oncology Group, a multi-institutional clinical trials consortium supported by the National Cancer Institute. The investigators found that patients in either arm responded very well overall to treatments, but those in the high dose group had a significantly better outcome, by 5 to 6 percent, which translated into a significantly decreased relapse rate for these patients.

The clinical protocol also examined how to best use a steroid formulation called decadron to treat high-risk ALL patients. Steroids as a class of drugs are one of the most effective medications in the treatment of ALL. Previous studies by the Children's Oncology Group showed that in standard risk ALL patients--those with low white blood cell counts or under 10 years of age--decadron prevented relapse in both the spinal fluid and in the bone marrow. Decadron, however, can increase the infection rate, particularly in high-risk ALL patients, when given for the full 28-day induction period.

During this clinical trial, the investigators decreased the duration of decadron from 28 days to 14 to determine if patients could avoid the side effect of increased infection while still benefiting from the steroid's anti-leukemic effects. They found that patients 10 years and older saw no benefit from decadron, and, in fact, were at much higher risk for a debilitating bone condition called osteonecrosis. Patients under 10 years of age, however, did benefit from the shorter decadron exposure with no increased side effects.

"The improvement in cure rates for ALL over the last few decades, for the most part, has not come through the introduction of new medications, but through using existing medications in new ways, in terms of their dose and schedule," Dr. Carroll said. "This clinical trial illustrates that despite what seem to be remarkable outcomes for kids with ALL, we have not reached a plateau. The outcomes are getting better and better."

Dr. Carroll's co-authors are Eric C. Larsen at Maine Children's Cancer Program, Scarborough, ME; Meenakshi Devidas and Si Chen at the University of Florida; Wanda L. Salzer at the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Fort Detrick, MD; James B. Nachman at the University of Chicago; Elizabeth A. Raetz at the University of Utah; Mignon L. Loh at the Benioff Children's Hospital and the University of California, San Francisco; Leonard A. Mattano Jr. at HARP Pharma Consulting; Catherine Cole at Princess Margaret Hospital for Children and University of Western Australia; Alisa Eicher at Doernbecher Children's Hospital, Portland, OR; Maureen Haugan at Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago; Mark Sorenson at University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics; Nyla A. Heerema and Julie M. Gastier-Foster at The Ohio State University School of Medicine; Andrew A. Carroll at the University of Alabama at Birmingham; Michael J. Borowitz at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions; Brent L. Wood at University of Washington; Cheryl L. Willman at University of New Mexico; Naomi J. Winick at University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas; and Stephen P. Hunger at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

The research was supported by the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this category a satisfactory rating largely due to the release including information that patients 10 and older receiving dexamethasone “were at much higher risk for a debilitating bone condition called osteonecrosis,” although we would have been happier if that greater risk would have been quantified. However, the published study explains that there were toxicity problems beyond that of dexamethasone and the release would have been stronger including that information as well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ninety-nine people developed dementia over the course of the study, including 71 cases of Alzheimer’s disease. The average level of DHA among all the participants was 3.6 percent of all fatty acids, and the top 25 percent of the population had values above 4.2 percent. People in this top one-quarter in DHA levels had a 47 percent reduced risk of developing dementia, even after controlling for body mass index, diabetes, hypertension, smoking status and other known or suspected risks. Risk reduction was apparent only at that top level of DHA — those in the bottom three-quarters in DHA level showed no detectable difference in risk.

People who ate two or more servings of fish a week reduced their risk for dementia by 39 percent, but there was no effect on the risk for dementia among those who ate less than that.

The finding that DHA alone reduces risk, the authors write, is consistent with earlier data showing high levels of DHA in healthy brain tissue and low levels in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease.

Dr. Ernst J. Schaefer, the lead author of the study, was cautious in interpreting the results.

“This study doesn’t prove that eating fish oil prevents dementia,” he said. “It’s an observational study that presents an identified risk factor, and the next step is a randomized placebo-controlled study in people who do not yet have dementia.” Dr. Schaefer is chief of the Lipid Metabolism Laboratory at Tufts University.

The study was financed in part by Martek, a concern that manufactures DHA, and one author received a grant from Pfizer, France.

Eating fish is not a guarantee of having high levels of DHA. In fact, fish intake accounted for less than half of the variability in DHA levels. Other dietary intake and genetic propensities probably account for the rest. Dr. Schaefer pointed out that the kind of fish consumed is important. Fatty fish, he said, is best, and frying will cause DHA to deteriorate.

Supplements may be an additional source of DHA, but an editorial in the same issue, by Dr. Martha Clare Morris, an associate professor of medicine at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago, points out that there are no published human studies of the effects of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation. The Food and Drug Administration does not endorse DHA or fish oil capsules, but recognizes doses of up to 3 grams a day of fish oil as generally safe. High intakes of fish oil can cause excessive bleeding in some people.

Dr. Morris writes that there are few human studies examining the effect of mercury intake from eating seafood, and it is not known if the risks of eating fish outweigh the benefits.

But, she adds, epidemiological studies consistently show positive health effects from fish consumption on mortality, cardiovascular risk factors and, now, dementia.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned potential harms from fish oil consumption and included speculation on potential harms from fish consumption.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A one-time treatment with Luxturna, the first US Food and Drug Administration-approved gene therapy for an inherited disorder, will cost $425,000 per eye.

Spark Therapeutics Inc., the Philadelphia-based maker of voretigene neparvovec, announced Wednesday in a statement that it reached an agreement in principle with Harvard Pilgrim and affiliates of Express Scripts to make the one-time treatment available to patients with a rare genetic defect that often leads to blindness.

The mutation affects both eyes, usually at the same pace, so most patients would need treatment for both eyes, a Spark Therapeutics spokeswoman said.

In some cases, the gene therapy will be available under an "outcomes-based rebate arrangement." The company also stated that its proposal to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the government program that covers about 100 million Americans, would allow installment payments for the drug.

"For a one-time therapy, like Luxturna, a non-traditional payment and distribution model is necessary to ensure needs of all parties -- patients, payers and providers -- are addressed," said Jennifer Luddy, a spokeswoman for Express Scripts.

At least one patient advocate disagrees.

"The new payment models announced today are merely a way to disguise a price that is simply too high," David Mitchell, president and founder of Patients For Affordable Drugs, said in a statement . "Spark Therapeutics is charging as much for Luxturna as they think they can get away with."

One-time-only treatments for rare genetic disorders are still unique, he noted.

The drug is intended for patients with retinal dystrophy due to a mutation of the RPE65 gene. This rare genetic defect causes severe visual impairment beginning in infancy and can eventually lead to blindness. The company believes the total "population in the US, Europe and select additional markets in the Americas and Asia/Pacific is up to approximately 6,000 individuals" who have the mutation targeted by Luxturna, explained Monique da Silva, a spokeswoman for Spark Therapeutics.

The drug will be available in the United States in early spring, with an estimated 1,000 to 2,000 people in the US standing to benefit from this treatment, according to Spark.

Luxturna is only the third gene therapy approved for use in the United States; two others were also approved in 2017. This is the first to correct an inherited genetic mutation.

Luxturna is a liquid that is injected directly into the eye with a microscopic needle during a surgical procedure. The drug supplies a third gene -- a normal RPE65 gene -- to cells in the retina, a layer of tissue lining the back of the eye. This third version of the gene does not remove or replace the two mutated genes causing the disease, which remain inside the cells. However, the normal gene delivered by the treatment is able to function within the retinal cells and correct vision problems.

In the phase 3 clinical trial, 27 out of 29 participants -- 93% -- who received the gene therapy demonstrated a gain in functional vision as assessed by a mobility test performed in a maze, according to the company. Risks of the treatment include cataracts, elevated eye pressure, retinal tears and holes and inflammation.

The company's offer of unusual payer models, including rebates and installment payments, will "help ensure patients' individual financial situation does not hinder access to treatment," da Silva said.

"New technologies such as gene and cell therapies hold out the potential to transform medicine," FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb said in a statement announcing the August approval of Kymriah, considered to be the first gene therapy to be approved for the US market.

Kymriah is a leukemia treatment made by pharmaceutical giant Novartis. Similar to Luxturna, Kymriah is a one-time treatment, and its price tag is $475,000. However, Novartis said this price will not be charged to patients who do not respond within a month of treatment.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned potential harms of the therapy. We do think the story should have mentioned that we don’t know much about the long-term effects and safety of using this technology, however.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When teens want to sleep in on a school day, they’re not being lazy. For one, teens need more sleep than adults: about eight or nine hours a night, compared with about the six or seven their parents require. Teens, biologically, really do crave sleep.

Which is a problem when it comes to education. Most high schools start before 8 am to help parents get to work by 9 am. Early school start times also give kids more time for after-school activities like sports or theater.

But that has consequences: Around 69 percent of high school students get less than eight hours of sleep on a school night, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which puts these teens at risk of negative impacts on health.

There may be a simple fix: Start schools at a later time.

This is a solution supported by both the America Medical Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics. The AMA urges schools to start no earlier than 8:30 am. In 2014, the Academy of Pediatrics wrote that “the urgency and the magnitude of the problem of sleep loss in adolescents” warranted big changes in school start times.

But it’s not a foregone conclusion that later start times will ensure teens sleep more. Later start times could lead teens to go to bed even later. Or parents might still wake them up early. When it made its recommendation, the Academy of Pediatrics admitted “it is clear that additional research is needed to further document the effects of changes in school start times over time.”

Well, there’s some new (but still incomplete) evidence that later start times do help teens get more sleep.

A new meta-analysis in the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine analyzed 18 studies on start times. It finds that when school starts up to an hour later, students typically do get around 19 minutes more sleep, on average. When start times are delayed more than an hour, that average increases to 53 minutes of extra sleep.

The study also found some preliminary evidence that later school start times were associated with better mental health outcomes. Only five of the 18 studies included these measures, but in two of them, later start time was associated with better (self-reported) feelings of depression and irritability.

More work needs to be done to confirm these findings. But even if later school start times only improve sleep time, that’s a positive step for public health. Because if later school start times can truly help students sleep better, the research suggests that better sleep would lead to major improvements to their health and well-being.

Teens tend to be night owls, and forcing them to be early birds can mess with their health

Teens tend to go to sleep a bit later and wake up a bit later than the average adult — something called a “delayed” sleep phase. For most teens, it means their whole biological clock is shifted, and if they wake up too early, their body will be out of sync with the rest of the world. “Every neurotransmitter, hormone, and chemical in the body cycles with the daily rhythm," Philip Gehrman, a sleep researcher and clinician at the University of Pennsylvania, told me earlier in the year.

When your body clock is off from society’s, scientists call it “social jet lag.” And like the jet lag from a long journey, it messes with your body.

Studies of adults find that social jet lag is associated with higher BMI, insulin resistance, depression, and a higher likelihood to engage in dangerous behaviors like smoking. And the group of people most at risk for social jet lag? Teens.

In a tightly controlled lab study, 24 healthy adult participants* who had their sleep shifted by one hour each day (simulating jet lag) started to look prediabetic after a three-week trial. Their resting metabolic rates dropped 8 percent. "Assuming no changes in activity or food intake," that "would translate into ~12.5 pounds increase in weight over a single year," the study, published in Science Translational Medicine in 2012, concluded.

People with a lot of social jet lag also tend to get fewer hours of sleep, which exacerbates these same health problems. On top of that, short sleep reduces powers of perception, concentration, and judgment. There’s some evidence that when students sleep better, they perform better in school as well.

Delaying school start times is easier said than done

As Vox’s Libby Nelson has reported, very few schools have actually adopted this reform. This map, which reflects the most recent CDC data available, shows that across the country, schools still start very early.

There are some understandable reasons why. Nelson writes:

And even though the evidence is mostly in favor of increasing school start times, it isn’t a slam dunk quite yet.

There are some limitations to mention about the new meta-analysis. The studies mostly used self-reported measures of sleep duration. (More objective measures — like those obtained from Fitbit-like wristbands — are more accurate.) And many of the studies were short in duration, comparing sleep duration in snapshots before and after a school made a switch. More data would show whether the impact of school start time on sleep waned or improved over time.

“The aggregated quality of the evidence,” the study reports, “is only moderate.” The researchers also found no effect on academic performance. Furthermore, two of the studies found evidence that earlier start times were associated with increased vehicle accidents involving the teens. Being tired in the morning can be a dangerous distraction while on the road.

In all, the researchers call for more rigorous data on the topic. As schools change their start times, they write, researchers should sweep in to collect information on students’ sleep in a standardized way.

Regardless, it’s a promising area for study. Because if later school start times can truly help students sleep better, the research suggests that better sleep would lead to major improvements to their health and well-being.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: There are some drawbacks associated with delaying school start times, and the story does a good job of discussing them.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a major change, the American Heart Association said Monday that hands-only CPR - rapid, deep presses on the victim's chest until help arrives - works just as well as standard CPR for sudden cardiac arrest in adults.

Experts hope bystanders will now be more willing to jump in and help if they see someone suddenly collapse. Hands-only CPR is simpler and easier to remember and removes a big barrier for people skittish about the mouth-to-mouth breathing.

"You only have to do two things. Call 911 and push hard and fast on the middle of the person's chest," said Dr. Michael Sayre, an emergency medicine professor at Ohio State University who headed the committee that made the recommendation.

Hands-only CPR calls for uninterrupted chest presses - 100 a minute - until paramedics take over or an automated external defibrillator is available to restore a normal heart rhythm.

This action should be taken only for adults who unexpectedly collapse, stop breathing and are unresponsive. The odds are that the person is having cardiac arrest - the heart suddenly stops - which can occur after a heart attack or be caused by other heart problems. In such a case, the victim still has ample air in the lungs and blood and compressions keep blood flowing to the brain, heart and other organs.

A child who collapses is more likely to primarily have breathing problems - and in that case, mouth-to-mouth breathing should be used. That also applies to adults who suffer lack of oxygen from a near-drowning, drug overdose, or carbon monoxide poisoning. In these cases, people need mouth-to-mouth to get air into their lungs and bloodstream.

But in either case, "Something is better than nothing," Sayre said.

The CPR guidelines had been inching toward compression-only. The last update, in 2005, put more emphasis on chest pushes by alternating 30 presses with two quick breaths; those "unable or unwilling" to do the breaths could do presses alone.

Now the heart association has given equal standing to hands-only CPR. Those who have been trained in traditional cardiopulmonary resuscitation can still opt to use it.

Sayre said the association took the unusual step of making the changes now - the next update wasn't due until 2010 - because three studies last year showed hands-only was as good as traditional CPR. Hands-only will be added to CPR training.

An estimated 310,000 Americans die each year of cardiac arrest outside hospitals or in emergency rooms. Only about 6 percent of those who are stricken outside a hospital survive, although rates vary by location. People who quickly get CPR while awaiting medical treatment have double or triple the chance of surviving. But less than a third of victims get this essential help.

Dr. Gordon Ewy, who's been pushing for hands-only CPR for 15 years, said he was "dancing in the streets" over the heart association's change even though he doesn't think it goes far enough. Ewy (pronounced AY-vee) is director of the University of Arizona Sarver Heart Center in Tucson, where the compression-only technique was pioneered.

Ewy said there's no point to giving early breaths in the case of sudden cardiac arrest, and it takes too long to stop compressions to give two breaths - 16 seconds for the average person. He noted that victims often gasp periodically anyway, drawing in a little air on their own.

Anonymous surveys show that people are reluctant to do mouth-to-mouth, Ewy said, partly because of fear of infections.

"When people are honest, they're not going to do it," he said. "It's not only the yuck factor."

In recent years, emergency service dispatchers have been coaching callers in hands-only CPR rather than telling them how to alternate breaths and compressions.

"They love it. It's less complicated and the outcomes are better," said Dallas emergency medical services chief Dr. Paul Pepe, who also chairs emergency medicine at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.

One person who's been spreading the word about hands-only CPR is Temecula, Calif., chiropractor Jared Hjelmstad, who helped save the life of a fellow health club member in Southern California

Hjelmstad, 40, had read about it in a medical journal and used it on Garth Goodall, who collapsed while working out at their gym in February. Hjelmstad's 15-year-old son Josh called 911 in the meantime.

Hjelmstad said he pumped on Goodall's chest for more than 12 minutes - encouraged by Goodall's intermittent gasps - until paramedics arrived. He was thrilled to find out the next day that Goodall had survived.

On Sunday, he visited Goodall in the hospital where he is recovering from triple bypass surgery.

"After this whole thing happened, I was on cloud nine," said Hjelmstad. "I was just fortunate enough to be there."

Goodall, a 49-year-old construction contractor, said he had been healthy and fit before the collapse, and there'd been no hint that he had clogged heart arteries.

"I was lucky," he said. Had the situation been reversed, "I wouldn't have known what to do."

"It's a second lease on life," he added.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The American Heart Assocation recommendations and the Circulation report provide contraindications for compression-only CPR, which the segment properly notes.
The report and recommendations cite no other risks of compression-only CPR. The published study cites the possibility that some unidentified subgroup of patients may benefit from traditional CPR, but says no research has demonstrated this.
Rib fractures are a potential harm, and the story could have mentioned this. Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study could change the way doctors treat patients at high risk for skin cancer. It doesn't involve any high-priced new pharmaceuticals -- the key may be an over-the-counter vitamin supplement that costs less than $10 a month.

Researchers found that a form of vitamin B3 called nicotinamide could help reduce the chance of skin cancer recurring in patients who've had it before. (Another popular form of Vitamin B3 called niacin was not used in this study.)

For the study, researchers in Australia looked at nearly 400 people who had had at least two non-melanoma skin cancers. They found patients who took vitamin B3 twice a day cut their chances of developing new skin cancers by 23 percent.

"That's a dramatic number," Dr. David Agus, director of USC's Norris Westside Cancer Center, told "CBS This Morning." "It could make a major impact."

Dr. Jae Jung, a dermatologist at City of Hope cancer center in Duarte, California, agreed. "If you can reduce the new skin cancer rates for these patients, it would be an enormous benefit," she told CBS News.

How does it work? Sunlight's ultraviolet (UV) rays can damage the DNA in skin cells, increasing the risk for skin cancer. Researchers say vitamin B3 gives skin cells an energy boost -- "turns back on the immune system," in Agus's words -- helping them repair the damage.

Nearly 5 million people are treated for skin cancer in the U.S. each year, and the Skin Cancer Foundation says 1 out of 5 Americans will develop skin cancer in their lifetime.

The two most common forms of the disease, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, can usually be treated successfully. The most dangerous type, melanoma, occurs in about 73,000 people in the U.S. each year and kills more than 9,900.

One patient who could benefit from the vitamin treatment is Charity Wiese, who has been diagnosed with skin cancer more than two dozen times in the last five years. She said she's had "quite a few on the top of my head, a few on the back of my head, one behind each ear," even though she tries to stay out of the sun. Wiese had leukemia as a teenager and underwent radiation therapy, which put her at high risk for skin cancer later in life.

Wiese thinks the vitamin study sounds promising. "I am absolutely willing to try it and hope for the best," she said.

Doctors involved in the study are excited by their findings on vitamin B3 nicotinamide. "It's safe, it's almost obscenely inexpensive, and it's already widely commercially available," Dr. Diona Damian, the senior author of the study and a professor of dermatology at the University of Sydney, told HealthDay.

But she said more reserach is needed to see if everyone benefits from it. "It's not something we'd recommend at this stage for the general population," Damian said. She also noted that the benefits appear to wear off when patients stop taking the supplements.

Results of the study are being presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology later this month.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: We’re told via the study’s author that twice-daily nicotinamide is “safe,” but that it’s “not something we’d recommend at this stage for the general population.” The author’s claims to safety can’t be verified without a look at the actual study data (which haven’t been published yet), but since the references we’ve consulted generally support the idea that adverse effects are minimal, we’ll give the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- When it comes to shedding pounds and improving or eliminating type 2 diabetes, gastric bypass surgery may be better than other surgical weight-loss procedures, two new studies find.

But obese patients should be careful to choose surgeons who have performed a high volume of these procedures before committing, said Dr. Guilherme M. Campos, lead author of one of two papers appearing in the February issue of the Archives of Surgery.

Gastric bypass and lap-banding are the two most common surgical weight-loss procedures performed in the United States. The former involves stapling the stomach so food has to bypass a section of the small intestine, meaning you get full faster and less food gets absorbed into the gut.

Lap-banding, introduced in 2001, involves separating the stomach into two sections with a band so, simply speaking, eating too much becomes more difficult. "It's a diet with a seatbelt," said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of bariatric surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City and Northern Westchester Hospital in Mt. Kisco, N.Y.

In a third type of weight-loss procedure, known as sleeve gastrectomy, surgeons remove part of the stomach.

The study led by Campos compared weight loss and diabetes outcomes in 100 patients who underwent gastric bypass surgery with 100 patients who underwent lap-banding. Gastric bypass is considered riskier and more technically demanding than the band.

All patients were morbidly obese (with a body-mass index higher than 40), and 34 in each group had type 2 diabetes.

Although Campos is now an associate professor of surgery at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison, he conducted the study while at the University of California, San Francisco.

In the bypass group, patients lost an average of 64 percent of their excess weight, vs. 36 percent for those in the lap-banding group. Three-quarters of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery saw their diabetes improve or resolve, vs. only half in the other group.

The average cost of a bariatric surgery is nearly $30,000, according to a recent study from Johns Hopkins University.

Like all surgeries, weight-loss surgery carries its own set of possible risks, including bleeding, blood clots, infection and leaks from sites where body tissues are sewn or stapled together, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Later complications may include malnutrition, hernias and a tendency in about one in 10 people to regain much of the weight they lost as a result of the procedure.

In Campos' study, roughly equal numbers of patients in each group experienced complications after one year (12 percent in the gastric bypass group compared to 15 percent in the lap-banding group); these included infection, internal bleeding and blood clots, but no deaths. More people in the bypass group had complications right after the surgery. More of those undergoing lap-banding, however, needed repeat surgeries (13 percent vs. 2 percent).

The second study, conducted in Taiwan and led by Dr. Wei-Jei Lee of the Min-Sheng General Hospital, involved randomly assigning 60 obese (but not morbidly obese) patients with type 2 diabetes to receive gastric bypass surgery or sleeve gastrectomy.

Almost all of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery (93 percent) had their diabetes resolved, vs. only half in the other group (these numbers declined to 57 percent and 0 percent after a year).

Those in the gastric bypass group also lost more weight, and there were no serious complications in either group.

There are various theories to explain why gastric bypass may be superior, including one that attributes the success to changes in hormones that control the metabolism of blood sugar.

And certain procedures may still be preferable for certain patient populations, added Roslin, such as bands for patients with lower BMI who don't have so many metabolic challenges.

"Everyone thinks that all weight-loss operations are the same, even the doctors and the surgeons. [But] they're different, and they have different resolutions of comorbidities and probably should be used for different indications," he said.

An editorial accompanying the studies noted the results should be interpreted with caution since longer-term data is not yet available.

Visit the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery for more on weight-loss procedures.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Unlike the LA Times, this story attached a number to the risk of complications observed during the study. It would have been interesting to see some discussion of the seriousness of these problems, as some data suggest that short-term complications with gastric bypass are more grave than those with the band, while longer-term complications with the band may be more frequent and serious. This story mentioned that there were no deaths in either group in the bypass vs. band study, but as with the competing coverage, it didn’t explain that there are well established differences in mortality risk associated with each procedure. We’ll award a passing grade, but the story could have done better here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Using chest scans to screen for lung cancer in people who’ve never smoked and have no symptoms might help catch cancers early and decrease the disease’s death toll, suggests a new study from Japan.

But experts say the findings likely don’t apply in non-Asian countries, where the majority of all lung cancers are found in people who smoke — and where using computed tomography (CT) scans to screen for lung cancer in smokers has recently been a controversial topic.

Moreover, they warn that while regular screening might help doctors catch cancer earlier, it also comes with a high price tag and added risks to patients.

CT scanning uses X-rays and computers to produce a clearer image than traditional X-ray techniques, but CT also uses higher radiation doses to generate those images.

Everybody agrees that CT “does find the early stage lung cancer,” said Dr. Heidi Roberts, a lung cancer researcher from Women’s College Hospital, Toronto who wasn’t involved in the new study. Early-stage cancer is easier to treat and has a higher survival rate.

The new study provides further evidence of that. Researchers led by Dr. Ryoichi Kondo of Shinshu University Hospital in Matsumoto looked back at outcomes for close to 500 non-smoking lung cancer patients whose cancer was caught by CT scan screening, or by standard X-ray screening — another strategy for catching cancer early — or when patients came into the doctor with lung symptoms.

Most of the tumors found via CT scans were small, whereas those found through X-ray screening or in patients with symptoms were more often further advanced, according to the findings published in the journal Lung Cancer.

Five years after their diagnosis, 95 percent of people whose cancers were found through a CT scan were still alive, compared to 73 percent diagnosed with an X-ray and 40 percent of patients who had not been screened and whose symptoms led to discovery their disease.

East Asian countries are more likely to regularly screen non-smokers for lung cancer because biological differences seem to put Asians at a higher risk than other non-smokers, researchers explained.

Non-smokers without symptoms generally are not screened for lung cancer in the U.S.

There and in Canada, the lung cancer debate has centered around how often to screen smokers, and until what age screening should be done, Roberts said.

In another study published by Kondo and colleagues — this one looking at lung cancer screening in smokers — five-year survival rates were also highest in those screened with CT scans.

That’s consistent with the findings of the National Lung Screening Trial in the U.S., which in November released data — published online in the New England Journal of Medicine last week — showing that 20 percent fewer middle-aged heavy smokers died of lung cancer when they were screened annually with a CT scan compared to a standard, less detailed chest X-ray.

Lung cancer kills more people in the U.S. than any other cancer — over 150,000 each year.

The problem with frequent screening is not only its cost — CT scans typically run a few hundred dollars each — but that each scan exposes a person to radiation, which also slightly increases cancer risks over time with repeated scans.

And screening comes with an inherent risk of false-positives — scans which suggest a lung cancer that turns out not to be there.

Dr. Christine Berg, one of the leaders of the U.S. screening studies, said that generally about a quarter of chest CT scans show some kind of abnormality — but 96 percent of those abnormal scans turn out not to be lung cancer. While doctors ruled out cancer, those patients would have undergone further tests, sometimes including biopsies, which can cause complications including infection and bleeding.

And for some patients, “if you really weren’t going to benefit from the screening...that complication is something you may not have faced,” Berg said. “Those are some of the things I worry about.”

Her study showed that 300 middle-aged smokers would need to be screened with CT scans to prevent one death from lung cancer.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally-supported expert panel, has said there isn’t enough evidence for it to recommend screening for lung cancer in symptom-free people using CT scans or other methods.

Berg and Roberts both told Reuters Health that more research is needed to see if there might be hints in the blood or genes of smokers that could tell doctors which had the highest risk for lung cancer — and which would get the most out of routine CT screening.

“We now have a technology that can detect (lung cancer) early enough to make some impact,” Berg said. But, “it’s not a home run, and it clearly has these limitations.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: No quantification of what may have been observed in the study, but adequate general caveats were given:
“… each scan exposes a person to radiation, which also slightly increases cancer risks over time with repeated scans.
And screening comes with an inherent risk of false-positives — scans which suggest a lung cancer that turns out not to be there.
Dr. Christine Berg, one of the leaders of the U.S. screening studies, said that generally about a quarter of chest CT scans show some kind of abnormality — but 96 percent of those abnormal scans turn out not to be lung cancer. While doctors ruled out cancer, those patients would have undergone further tests, sometimes including biopsies, which can cause complications including infection and bleeding.
And for some patients, “if you really weren’t going to benefit from the screening…that complication is something you may not have faced,” Berg said. “Those are some of the things I worry about.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - The inexpensive tests that look for hidden blood in a person’s stool are effective for colon cancer screening, a study out Tuesday confirms.

The findings, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, give some extra weight to fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) as a valid option for early detection of colon cancer.

Experts generally recommend that people at average risk of colon cancer start screening tests for the disease at age 50. And they can pick from a number of tests that have all been found to cut the risk of dying from colon cancer.

Along with stool tests — done once a year at home — the choices include two invasive procedures: colonoscopy done every 10 years and flexible sigmoidoscopy done every five years.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally supported expert panel, recommends that people at average risk of colon cancer choose any of the three methods.

FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be a sign of colon cancer or pre-cancerous growths called polyps. Positive results on the screen prompt a follow-up colonoscopy to investigate the source of the blood.

Advances in the stool tests in recent years have made them more effective. A newer version called immunochemical FOBT (iFOBT) is supposed to zero in on colon growths better than an older version known as guaiac FOBT — which often picked up bleeding originating in the upper digestive tract, such as from a stomach ulcer.

Immunochemical FOBT is now largely replacing the older test. But there’s been surprisingly little evidence that it really is highly “specific” to colon cancer, according to Dr. Yi-Chia Lee of National Taiwan University Hospital, one of the researchers on the new study.

So for their study, the researchers followed nearly 2,800 adults who all volunteered to have iFOBT, a colonoscopy and an upper endoscopy to check for problems in the upper digestive tract.

They found that of 28 people confirmed to have colon tumors after a colonoscopy, all but one had also a positive iFOBT result.

“It means that almost every case with colon cancer can be identified by iFOBT,” Lee told Reuters Health in an email. “It is a strong support to iFOBT as an effective screening tool.”

The researchers also found that iFOBT had “specificity” for colon cancer of close to 90 percent, meaning the test would accurately give a negative result to almost 90 percent of people who did not have colon cancer.

Of three study participants who were found to have cancers of the stomach or esophagus, for instance, none had a positive result on the iFOBT test.

Like any screening test, iFOBT does have a risk of false-positive results, which leads to unnecessary invasive testing in some people. In this study, about 10 percent of all participants had a false-positive finding on the stool test.

Among the risk factors for false-positives the authors identified were the use of anticlotting drugs and low levels of the iron-rich molecule hemoglobin in the blood.

In practice, a positive iFOBT result would be followed by colonoscopy, in which a scope is used to investigate the interior of the colon.

Whether used for first-line screening or as a follow-up, colonoscopy has the advantage of allowing doctors to spot and remove pre-cancerous growths called polyps — which means the test can prevent cases of colon cancer.

But as far as cutting the risk of death from colon cancer, stool testing is similarly effective, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

And it’s much cheaper: iFOBT is more expensive than the older stool tests, but it is still roughly $30. A screening colonoscopy averages around $3,000.

The downside of iFOBT being specific to colon tumors is that it is not useful for catching cancers of the stomach or throat.

That’s particularly important in Asia, where those cancers are common.

Lee said researchers there are looking into whether combining iFOBT with the older guaiac test is useful for catching cancers in the lower and upper digestive tract — and whether adding a third stool test, which looks for the ulcer-causing bacteria H. pylori, can help as well. Infection with H. pylori is associated with increased risks of stomach and throat cancers.

In the U.S., cancers of the upper digestive tract are relatively uncommon. The average American has a one in 200 chance of developing esophageal cancer, while the risk of stomach cancer is one in 114.

In contrast, Americans’ lifetime risk of colon cancer is about one in 19, according to the American Cancer Society. More than 50,000 Americans died of the disease in 2010.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: Unlike many stories on screening tests, this one included information on false positive findings and the need for further testing. Story was careful to include the fact that in the study 10% of all participants had a false-positive finding on the stool test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CINCINNATI--Following a concussion or mild traumatic brain injury (TBI), patients may suffer from light sensitivity or photophobia, making it challenging to return to normal activities. The sensitivity may also trigger or exacerbate headaches.

While sunglasses can provide some relief from photophobia, wearing them all the time is not always a practical solution, nor is it pleasant for patients to live in a dark room for days at a time. A new study from the University of Cincinnati (UC), published online this week in the Journal of Athletic Training, assessed the use of colored lenses in post-concussion patients and found wearing certain color-tinted sunglasses may be a good alternative to dark sunglasses.

"While sunglasses can provide some relief, they are not very practical indoors or in low light environments," says Joe Clark, PhD, professor in the Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine at the UC College of Medicine and lead author of the study. "What is needed is a light mitigation strategy that can be readily employed indoors, which can optimize relief in those who suffer from photophobia, or light sensitivity."

Clark and researchers at the College of Medicine assessed visual symptoms of 51 concussion patients and used frames with varying colored lenses to find out if certain hues provided relief from photophobia.

"We found that 85 percent of patients reporting photophobia had relief of the symptoms with one or more colors-- blue, green, red and purple--with no reported adverse events," Clark says.

"Sensitivity to light can be common and impact activities of daily life suggesting that light mitigation might improve quality of life in many of these patients. Photophobia is a common symptom for patients following traumatic brain injury. Our goal in this study was to provide medical staff like athletic trainers with a method and means to assess and subsequently provide relief to an athlete who may be experiencing symptoms of photophobia," Clark adds.

The goal is to help the concussion patient feel better as the brain heals. "We compare the colored glasses to being like a brace or cast but for the brain," he says. "It is temporary but prevents further injury or pain."

At least 3.8 million people in the United States sustain a concussion or traumatic brain injury every year, many not for the first time. As with many other health conditions, the presentation of concussion symptoms can vary greatly--while some individuals exhibit very little to no change in functionality and may report no symptoms at all, others may report confusion, headache, decreased balance and vision disturbances including blurry vision, trouble focusing and sensitivity to light.

Photophobia is so common that many neurosurgical intensive care units consider it standard operating procedure to keep lights dimmed in rooms containing TBI patients says Clark.

In addition to trying colored-lens sunglasses, the article suggests other ways to mitigate photophobia including wearing a wide-brimmed hat when outdoors, adjusting digital screen and device settings to an appropriate hue and brightness or purchasing filters for screens. However, the researchers noted, they do not recommend wearing colored glasses while driving. Certain colors make seeing stop lights or emergency vehicle lights difficult.

"We believe that an athletic trainer, in consultation with team physicians, may find it useful to apply this photophobia assessment and recommend colored glasses to his or her athlete," Clark says. "The use of the colored glasses in the high school, college or other setting can allow a person to engage in some medically approved activities, while minimizing the risk of symptom exacerbation. We believe the use of the colored glasses that provide photophobia mitigation has added benefits superior to dark sunglasses, especially for indoor lighting."

Additional researchers on the study include Jon Divine, MD, a professor in the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery at the UC College of Medicine and head team physician for University of Cincinnati Athletics.

There was no funding used for this study.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release says that there were no reported side effects while wearing colored glasses. It recommends against wearing colored glasses while driving since “certain colors make seeing stop lights or emergency vehicle lights difficult.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a big step towards developing a test that can tell people if they have cancer long before the first symptoms show up.

The blood test detected the majority of cancers in people with four of the biggest cancer killers: breast, colon, lung and ovarian cancer, the team at Johns Hopkins University said.

The test is a long way from being used to screen for cancer, but the study shows a way to get there, the team reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

“There is a lot of excitement about liquid biopsies, but most of that has been in late-stage cancer or in individuals where you already know what to look for,” said Dr. Victor Velculescu, professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins University Kimmel Cancer Center.

“The surprising result is that we can find a high fraction of early-stage patients having alterations in their blood,” said Velculescu, who led the study team.

It was not a slam dunk, but the test found cancer in the blood of more than half the patients who had been diagnosed with stage 1 cancer. It was even more accurate in finding late-stage cancers, but the goal would be to catch cancer in its earliest, easiest-to-treat stage.

There were no false positives in 44 people who did not have cancer, they said. That's important, said Dr. Wyndham Wilson of the National Cancer Institute, because there is no point detecting cancer in people if the cancer is not going to actually cause trouble.

"You don’t want to go screening people for hallmark (cancer) mutations unless you absolutely know that when you find it, that there is a tumor there and that it is a tumor that needs to be treated," said Wyndham, who was not involved in the study.

Sometimes, early-stage tumors or precancerous growths just go away -- attacked by the immune system or because they don't thrive for other reasons.

Several different liquid biopsies are already on the market, used to help track whether cancer treatments are working. But there’s nothing yet that can detect cancer in someone who has not yet been diagnosed.

It’s easy to find tumor mutations if you know what to look for. “The challenge was to develop a blood test that could predict the probable presence of cancer without knowing the genetic mutations present in a person’s tumor,” Velculescu said.

“We have used this approach to examine 58 cancer-related genes,” the team wrote in their report. The method involved deep sequencing – sequencing DNA 30,000 times over to look for mutations in DNA from tumor cells that floats in the blood.

Cancer patients had more of this DNA in their blood, the team found.

They identified 62 percent of the patients with stage I cancer – four out of eight colon cancer patients, and 90 percent of colon cancer patients with stage II, III or IV disease.

They got a positive in 45 percent of the lung cancer patients with stage I disease, 67 percent of ovarian cancer patients with stage I disease and 67 percent of breast cancer patients with stage I disease.

While that's good, it's not a great result. The test still missed a large percentage of cancers and will need much improvement, Velculescu said.

It will also have to be tried in larger groups of patients, and patients with different cancers. The first goal would be to try it in people at high risk of cancer but no symptoms yet – such as smokers, or people with cancer-causing gene mutations like BRCA mutations, Velculescu said.

Wyndham said it will be important to study such tests in large groups of people who have not had cancer diagnosed, to see if it can truly be used to screen asymptomatic people for cancer. And then it will have to be shown that using the test allows doctors to intervene sooner and help people.

Catching cancer in its earliest stages could save many lives. Cancer is the No. 2 killer overall in the United States.

”The survival difference between late stage and early stage disease in these cancers would account for more than a million lives each year worldwide,” Velculescu said.

The genetic sequencing is also expensive right now – on the order of several thousand dollars for the 30,000 repeats the team did. But costs are coming down steadily, he said.

Velculescu said Johns Hopkins had patented this test, and Velculescu is himself the founder of a company that does liquid biopsies for advanced cancer patients called Personal Genome Diagnostics.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has been very skeptical of blood tests that claim to diagnose disease before people have symptoms.

The agency has chastised a company called Pathway Genomics over its "liquid biopsy" test , saying the company had not shown the $699 test worked as advertised.

It’s also warned other gene testing companies but finally gave 23andMe the go-ahead to market its home DNA test – which does not include any cancer screening – in April.

Cancer screening is still often a tricky issue.

Currently, colon cancer can be detected very early with colonoscopies, and even stopped before pre-cancerous growths get out of control. But colonoscopies are uncomfortable and carry a small risk of injury.

Mammograms can detect early breast cancer, Pap smears can detect cervical cancer or pre-cancerous changes and a type of specialized chest x-ray called a spiral CT can detect lung cancer. There’s a debate over the usefulness of screening for prostate cancer but blood tests and physical exams can indicate some men at high risk.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story is dealing with a proposed new blood test for early-stage cancer, so it would require a blood draw.  While the risks of problems with that is small, the larger risk is from false positives or false negatives from the test.  The story says, “There were no false positives in 44 people who did not have cancer, they said.”  It also points our that the test didn’t detect the cancer in all cases, giving readers a reasonable expectation of risk of harms from wrong results.
Ideally the story would have included comments from a researcher not involved with the study about the sensitivity and specificity of such tests (factors that determine false-positive and false-negative rates), and how they would perform in a larger population.  The other risk here is overdiagnosis–finding cancers that don’t need to be treated.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
February 28, 2017 - For infants with congenital malformations of the ear, a treatment system called EarWell can gently reshape the ear--avoiding the pain and cost of later surgery, reports a study in the March issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery®, the official medical journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS).

But treatment must begin early--preferably within the first three weeks after birth, according to the study by ASPS Member Surgeon H. Steve Byrd, MD, and colleagues of Pediatric Plastic Surgery Institute, Dallas. Dr. Byrd comments, "The EarWell system is effective in eliminating or reducing the need for surgery in all but the most severe congenital ear malformations."

The researchers review their experience with nonsurgical correction of congenital ear malformations in 175 infants. The EarWell system is a relatively simple technique for molding and reshaping the ear, taking advantage of the increased malleability of the ear cartilage in newborns. For best results, treatment should start within the first three weeks after birth, or correspondingly later in infants born prematurely.

The technique and length of EarWell treatment varies according to the type and severity of the infant's ear deformity. Dr. Byrd and colleagues present a classification system and technical details for plastic surgeons to follow in evaluating the best treatment for specific types of malformations.

For most infants in the study, both ears were treated, for a total of 303 ears. Ninety-eight percent of infants had relatively mild "constricted"-type ear deformities. EarWell treatment started at an average age of 12 days and continued for 37 days, including an average of six follow-up visits to the plastic surgeon's office.

EarWell treatment was highly successful in correcting or reducing the severity of congenital ear malformations. Results were judged good to excellent in 97 percent of ears with one simple deformity and 88 percent with more complex "mixed" deformities. About 70 percent of ears with constricted malformations were graded as having no deformity after treatment.

Complications consisted mainly of skin injuries that healed without further problems. In eight cases, treatment had to be stopped because of an allergic reaction to the adhesive tape used.

While the EarWell system is not new, the report is the largest study of congenital ear malformations treated with this approach--including a standardized approach to treatment and assessment of the results. The results strongly support its use, especially in infants with deformities and less-severe malformations.

But lack of awareness of this nonsurgical alternative is a key limiting factor. "The opportunity for early treatment can be hampered by a failure to convince pediatricians that the majority of misshapen newborn ears do not self-correct," Dr. Byrd and coauthors write. They also point out that EarWell is highly successful in the treatment of prominent ears--a condition that commonly goes unnoticed by parents and pediatricians, but is likely to get worse as the child grows.

"While we can operate on ears later in the patient's life, waiting not only increases the surgery's difficulty and expense, but may expose the child to teasing, bullying, and loss of self-esteem," comments Editor-in-Chief Rod J. Rohrich, MD, in a featured video on the Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery website. "If your baby has any type of ear deformity, plastic surgeons can help with or without surgery. Discuss non-surgical, ear molding alternatives with your pediatrician, and consult with a board-certified plastic surgeon...the earlier the better!"

Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® is published by Wolters Kluwer.

Click here to read "Classification of Newborn Ear Malformations and their Treatment with the EarWell Infant Ear Correction System."

Article: "Classification of Newborn Ear Malformations and their Treatment with the EarWell Infant Ear Correction System" (doi: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000003150)

For more than 70 years, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® (http://www. ) has been the one consistently excellent reference for every specialist who uses plastic surgery techniques or works in conjunction with a plastic surgeon. The official journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® brings subscribers up-to-the-minute reports on the latest techniques and follow-up for all areas of plastic and reconstructive surgery, including breast reconstruction, experimental studies, maxillofacial reconstruction, hand and microsurgery, burn repair, and cosmetic surgery, as well as news on medico-legal issues

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons is the largest organization of board-certified plastic surgeons in the world. Representing more than 7,000 physician members, the Society is recognized as a leading authority and information source on cosmetic and reconstructive plastic surgery. ASPS comprises more than 94 percent of all board-certified plastic surgeons in the United States. Founded in 1931, the Society represents physicians certified by The American Board of Plastic Surgery or The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.

Wolters Kluwer is a global leader in professional information services. Professionals in the areas of legal, business, tax, accounting, finance, audit, risk, compliance and healthcare rely on Wolters Kluwer's market leading information-enabled tools and software solutions to manage their business efficiently, deliver results to their clients, and succeed in an ever more dynamic world.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2015 annual revenues of €4.2 billion. The group serves customers in over 180 countries, and employs over 19,000 people worldwide. The company is headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands. Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

Wolters Kluwer Health is a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry. For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly addresses the vast majority of the complications discussed in the journal article, which is enough to earn it a satisfactory rating. However, the release does not mention the possibility of infection. There was only one case identified in the article, but it is also the most significant of the complications that cropped up over the course of the (retrospective) study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 6, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Cancer patients who have ovarian tissue removed and stored for later transplantation have a chance at a successful pregnancy, a new study finds.

Powerful chemotherapy and radiation treatments for cancer can impair a woman's fertility. This new study shows that ovarian tissue transplants are safe and effective and pose little risk of the cancer coming back, the Danish researchers said.

"This procedure is gaining ground worldwide as an optional fertility treatment for fertile female cancer patients who after cancer treatment most likely will be infertile," said lead researcher Dr. Annette Jensen, from the Laboratory of Reproductive Biology at Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen.

With this procedure, many women who survive cancer should be able to become pregnant and have healthy children, Jensen said.

Of 32 women who had ovarian tissue frozen and transplanted in this study, 10 women -- or 31 percent -- had a child, she said.

Many young cancer patients today can expect to live a normal lifespan. Their focus shifts from survival to quality-of-life, explained senior researcher Dr. Claus Yding Andersen, a professor of human reproductive physiology at the University of Copenhagen. "Here, fertility is very important to many young women," he said.

"The tissue restores ovarian organ function, and women regain menstrual cycles and sex hormone levels that will avoid menopause," Andersen added.

Dr. Avner Hershlag, chief of the Center for Human Reproduction at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., called the new research "innovative and exciting."

Simultaneous advances in cancer treatment and reproductive medicine have made these scientific leaps possible, he said.

However, Hershlag said he would like to see a pregnancy rate above 31 percent. "The pregnancy rate with frozen embryos is close to 50 percent, and results are getting better," he said, referring to another option for women hoping for a future pregnancy. "It remains to be seen which method is better."

The Danish report was published Oct. 7 in the journal Human Reproduction.

For the study, the researchers reviewed the outcomes of 53 transplantations of thawed ovarian tissue in 41 Danish women. The investigators followed the women for 10 years, looking at ovarian function, fertility and safety.

The women's average age when the tissue was removed and frozen was nearly 30. Average age of the first transplant was 33.

Thirty-two of the women attempted pregnancy. Ten were successful and had at least one child -- 14 children in all.

Eight children were conceived naturally, and six with the help of in vitro fertilization, the researchers reported.

Two women had abortions, one because she was separating from her partner and the other because her breast cancer recurred. Another woman had a miscarriage, the researchers said.

For three of the mothers, more than 10 years had passed since the ovarian tissue transplantation. In six cases, it was more than eight years. And for 15 of the women, transplantation had taken place more than five years earlier, the researchers said.

Although three women had a relapse of their cancer, these relapses did not appear related to the tissue transplantation. And no cancer developed in the transplanted tissue, Jensen said.

"So some of these women will still be able to have more children and avoid menopausal symptoms," she said, noting two more pregnancies have been reported to her laboratory since the study's publication.

Not all women are eligible for ovarian tissue transplants, however. "In particular, we have not performed transplants in patients who have suffered from leukemia, because the ovarian tissue may harbor cancer cells," Jensen said.

For more on fertility and cancer treatments, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story just barely mentions the risk – which it says is not increased – of a return of cancer. Since that’s likely the main concern with this procedure, we’ll go ahead and award a Satisfactory. But we’d add that women who have their own ovarian tissue removed and then reimplanted in a new surgery could potentially have complications of those procedures (all surgeries carry some risk). No such complications are addressed in the study that’s the basis for this story, and it’s not clear if adverse effects (beyond cancer recurrence) were tracked by the study authors. We wish the story had asked about, and covered, those potential harms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEWTOWN, Pa., Sept. 20, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- KVK Tech, Inc. announced today that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved Lomaira™ (phentermine hydrochloride USP) 8 mg tablets CIV, a low-cost, low-dose prescription medicine used for a short period of time (a few weeks) for weight reduction in adults with an initial body mass index* (BMI) of 30 or more (obese) or 27 or more (overweight) with at least one weight-related condition such as controlled high blood pressure, diabetes, or high cholesterol. Lomaira should be used together with regular exercise and a reduced-calorie diet.

Lomaira is the only strength of phentermine hydrochloride that can be taken up to three times a day before meals. The limited usefulness of agents of this drug class (anorectics), including Lomaira, should be measured against possible risk factors inherent in their use.

"At KVK Tech, we are committed to developing high-quality, FDA-approved medicines that address unmet medical needs, while ensuring affordable options for all appropriate patients. With Lomaira, we're giving physicians and patients access to a low-cost, low-dose version of a weight-reduction medicine, phentermine, that has been prescribed by physicians for over 50 years. Appropriate patients can take Lomaira up to three times a day, before meals – not just in the morning as with the higher dose formulations of phentermine," said Anthony Tabasso, President and Chief Executive Officer of KVK Tech. "We developed Lomaira with this dosing flexibility and affordability in mind."

Phentermine hydrochloride, an appetite suppressant, is the most commonly prescribed drug for weight loss. Over 7 million prescriptions are written for phentermine yearly by a wide range of healthcare professionals (HCPs), including obesity medicine specialists, family practitioners, endocrinologists, internists and cardiologists. 1

Phentermine hydrochloride is typically prescribed in doses ranging from 15 to 37.5 mg and taken before or within a few hours of breakfast. The usual adult dose of Lomaira is one tablet three times a day 1/2 hour before meals. The butterfly-shaped tablet is scored to facilitate administering one half of the usual dosage for patients not requiring the full dose, enabling doctors and patients to work together to customize a weight-loss treatment plan to best meet each patient's needs. Dosage should be individualized to obtain an adequate response with the lowest effective dose. Phentermine is not recommended for use in pediatric patients 16 years of age or younger. Late evening medication should be avoided because of the possibility of resulting insomnia.

Lomaira is reasonably priced to ensure that cost does not create a hurdle, despite the fact that two-thirds of Americans pay out-of-pocket for their weight-loss prescription medications. Through KVK Tech's , eligible patients will pay no more than 50¢ per tablet for the duration of treatment.

"Obesity is a chronic metabolic disease that must be managed appropriately to reduce the risk of serious health conditions. Many physicians have used phentermine to help patients as part of a comprehensive weight-management plan. Now, the flexibility in dosing with Lomaira allows doctors to personalize dosing. They can prescribe a lower dose, a good option for some patients. They can also prescribe up to three times a day, which is particularly helpful when patients struggle to control their appetite in the afternoon," said Donna Ryan, MD. "Regrettably, many patients are still not covered by insurance for weight-loss medications and the low cost for Lomaira makes it an affordable treatment option."

In relatively short-term clinical trials, adults with obesity who were instructed in dietary management and treated with "anorectic" drugs (appetite suppressants) lost more weight on the average than those treated with placebo and diet. It has not been established that the primary action of such drugs in treating obesity is one of appetite suppression since other central nervous system actions, or metabolic effects, may also be involved. 2

"Even modest weight loss can dramatically improve risk and health," continued Dr. Ryan. "It is not necessary to lose a lot of weight to get a lot of benefit." Losing five to 10 percent of total body weight is likely to produce health benefits, such as improvements in blood pressure, blood cholesterol, and blood sugars.3

Some side effects of phentermine that have been reported include pulmonary hypertension, valvular heart disease, palpitations, increased heart rate or blood pressure, insomnia, restlessness, dry mouth, diarrhea, constipation and changes in sexual drive. These are not all of the potential side effects of phentermine. See Full Prescribing Information.

Lomaira is anticipated to be available by the end of September 2016. As with all KVK Tech products, Lomaira will be exclusively manufactured and packaged in the United States, in the strictest accordance with FDA, DEA, and DEP guidelines.

*Body Mass Index (BMI) measures the amount of fat in the body based on height and weight. BMI is measured in kg/m2.

3 Benefits of Modest Weight Loss in Improving Cardiovascular Risk Factors in Overweight and Obese Individuals With Type 2 Diabetes; Diabetes Care, July 2011. Rena R. Wing, Wei Lang, Thomas A. Wadden, Monika Safford, William C. Knowler, Alain G. Bertoni, James O. Hill, Frederick L. Brancati, Anne Peters, Lynne Wagenknecht, and the Look AHEAD Research Group

Don't take LomairaTM if you have a history of cardiovascular disease (e.g., coronary artery disease, stroke, arrhythmias, congestive heart failure or uncontrolled high blood pressure); are taking or have taken a monoamine oxidase inhibitor drug (MAOI) within the past 14 days; have overactive thyroid, glaucoma (increased pressure in the eyes), agitation or a history of drug abuse; are pregnant, nursing, or allergic to the sympathomimetic amines such as phentermine or any of the ingredients in Lomaira.

Taking phentermine with other drugs for weight loss is not recommended. Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH), a rare fatal lung disease, has been reported in patients who had taken a combination of phentermine and fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine for weight loss. The possible association between phentermine use alone and PPH cannot be ruled out. Patients should report immediately if they experience any decrease in the amount of exercise that they can normally tolerate, shortness of breath, chest or heart pain, fainting or swelling in the lower legs.

Serious heart valve problems or disease have been reported in patients taking a combination of phentermine and fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine for weight loss. The possible role of phentermine has not been established, therefore the possibility of an association between heart valve disease and the use of phentermine alone cannot be ruled out.

If your body becomes adjusted to the maximum dose of phentermine so that its effects are experienced less strongly, the maximum dose should not be exceeded in an attempt to increase the effect.

Caution is advised while engaging in potentially hazardous activity such as driving or operating machinery while taking phentermine. Phentermine has the potential to be abused. Keep Lomaira in a safe place to prevent theft, accidental overdose, misuse or abuse. Using alcohol with phentermine may result in an adverse drug reaction.

Phentermine can cause an increase in blood pressure. Tell your doctor if you have high blood pressure, even if it's mild. If you are taking medicines for type 2 diabetes, your doctor may have to adjust these medicines while taking phentermine.

Some side effects of phentermine that have been reported include pulmonary hypertension, valvular heart disease, palpitations, increased heart rate or blood pressure, insomnia, restlessness, dry mouth, diarrhea, constipation and changes in sexual drive. These are not all of the potential side effects of phentermine. For more information, ask your doctor or pharmacist.

To report negative side effects of prescription drugs, contact FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or visit www.fda.gov/medwatch.

KVK is a leader in the development and manufacture of high-quality, FDA-approved medicines that address unmet patient needs. Founded in 2004, KVK takes pride in its ability to advance medical care and offer low-cost alternatives in response to today's healthcare challenges. All of KVK's products are made in the U.S.A. in a state-of-the-art facility in Newtown, PA. KVK is committed to maintaining its entire business operations in America, as it continues to build strong, lasting relationships with the nation's largest pharmacy chains, wholesalers and distributors.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: This release lists nine separate possible side effects of the use of the drug in question and then adds to that the statement that, “These are not all of the potential side effects of phentermine.”  It then offers seven additional paragraphs with cautions, contraindications and warnings pertaining to taking the drug, all under the heading of “Important Safety Information.”  Readers will at least be informed, if not alarmed, after reading.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have stopped a study of a new lung cancer drug, saying it’s so effective they want to offer it to all the patients in the trial.

The drug, Keytruda, is the same drug that former president Jimmy Carter says helped stall advanced melanoma that had spread to his brain.

Keytruda was being tested for the first time in 305 lung cancer patients who had not been treated at all yet. The researchers wanted to see how it worked against the standard chemotherapy cocktails.

It worked at least as well if not better than the chemo, so the researchers have stopped the study to give everyone a chance to take Keytruda, Merck, the company that makes the drug, said.

It helped patients live longer overall and helped them live longer without their tumors growing or spreading, Merck said.

The details are not available yet. “We look forward to sharing these data with the medical community and with regulatory authorities around the world,” said Dr. Roger Perlmutter, president, of Merck Research Laboratories.

Independent committees look at the details of the patients and how well they are doing in drug trials like these. It was one of these independent committees that recommended stopping the trial based on what they saw but that doesn't necessarily mean they shared the details with the company or anyone else.

"I suspect the findings were significant enough that this will be a practice-changing finding," Dr. Pasi Janne, lung cancer specialist at Harvard Medical School and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, told NBC News.

Cancer research goes forward in slow steps. In tests of new drugs, patients always get either the very best therapy already available, or the new drug. Often they get both. Usually, cancer drugs are only tested at first in patients who have tried everything else available and their cancer has come back, anyway.

So it’s an important break for a company if its drug is the first one a patient gets and it works better than the so-called standard of care.

The company now can ask the Food and Drug Administration if it will approve Keytruda to use as the first treatment a lung cancer patient tries.

The FDA has given speedy approval to several new drugs in a class called checkpoint inhibitors, including Keytruda.

They treat cancer by stopping tumor cells from cloaking themselves against the normal, healthy immune system response.

They work on the principle that it's not where cancer starts that matters, but the genetic mutation that causes the cancer. So a lung tumor in one patient may look like the melanoma in another.

Keytruda — known generically as pembrolizumab — targets the activity of genes called PD-1 (anti-programmed-death-receptor-1) and PD-L1. The interaction between the two genes lets some tumors escape detection and destruction by immune system cells.

PD-1 stops immune cells from attacking normal healthy cells by mistake. Tumor cells make PD-L1 turn on PD-1 when immune cells approach.

This trial only included patients whose tumors cells made a lot of PD-L1. That is only a portion of people with lung cancer - 25 percent in one recent trial.

A rival drug, Bristol-Myers Squibb’s Opdivo, works in a similar way to Keytruda and it has slightly different approval from the FDA for how it should be used.

Related: Keytruda Keeps Some Patients Alive For Three Years

"Immunotherapy is a whole new way of treating cancer, including lung cancer," said Janne, who was not involved in the study. "Having seen patients benefit who failed existing therapies, now doing well on these new therapies, is fantastic."

Keytruda, approved October last year for lung cancer and in 2014 for melanoma, is pricey – costing about $150,000 a year for a course of treatment. It’s approved for use with a specific test for PD-L1 activity.

The new drugs are less toxic and more precise than standard chemotherapy. But they are not free of side-effects. Some are severe and can damage the lung, colon, liver, kidneys, hormone-producing glands and the brain, the FDA says.

Lung cancer is the top cancer killer in the U.S. It’s diagnosed in more than 220,000 people a year and it killed nearly 160,000 people last year, according to the National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story says about the whole class of drugs to which Keytruda belongs, “The new drugs are less toxic and more precise than standard chemotherapy. But they are not free of side-effects. Some are severe and can damage the lung, colon, liver, kidneys, hormone-producing glands and the brain, the FDA says.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 19, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- New research finds that a minimally invasive surgical procedure to treat hernias results in less chronic pain and a faster recovery when compared to a traditional approach.

One expert, however, said the older strategy may still be the best option in some cases.

"It's not one-size-fits-all," said Dr. L. Michael Brunt, a professor at Washington University in St. Louis. "One repair isn't appropriate for all circumstances."

Hernias occur when part of an internal organ, such as the intestines, bulges out through muscle. At issue are the surgical approaches that physicians use when a patient suffers from a hernia in the groin.

The procedures are designed to reduce the bulge of the hernia and make a patch so it doesn't protrude again. "It's as if you had a leak in a tire that's ballooned out," Brunt said. "You'll patch it to prevent it from continuing to protrude."

The study, led by researchers at Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, examined two procedures.

One procedure, known as total extraperitoneal inguinal hernioplasty, is performed under a general anesthetic and uses a laparoscopic approach through a small opening. It was developed in the 1990s, Brunt said.

The other approach is older and is performed through a 2- to 2.5-inch incision in the groin, Brunt said. It can be done under local anesthesia. The study authors didn't examine a third approach, known as "patch and plug," he said.

In the study, researchers randomly assigned 660 hernia patients to one of the two surgical procedures. Almost all the patients were men, and their average age was around 55.

The researchers followed up with 75 percent of the patients after an average period of five years.

Hernias recurred in 5 percent of laparoscopic and 8 percent of the traditional-procedure patients. Recurrences decreased to 0.5 percent and 4 percent, respectively, if the procedures were performed by experienced surgeons.

After five years, 28 percent of those who had the traditional procedure reported chronic pain, compared to 15 percent of the laparoscopic group.

The study "confirms what a lot of surgeons who do both procedures know already," Brunt said. "There's less pain and a bit of a faster recovery from the laparoscopic procedure."

Still, "the vast majority of patients do well, regardless of the approach," he said.

Why use the traditional approach if the laparoscopic technique is better in some ways? The traditional approach may be appropriate when it's too risky to place patients under general anesthesia, Brunt said, such as in elderly patients and those with multiple health problems.

Brunt said the costs of the two procedures are comparable, although the laparoscopic procedure may cost more.

The findings appear in the March issue of the Archives of Surgery.

For more about hernias, try the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story explained that the less invasive surgery might not be appropriate for patients who face increased risk from general anesthesia, including the elderly or those with multiple health problems. We’ll rule this satisfactory, but the story could also have noted that the less invasive procedure produced a higher rate of operative complications than the standard procedure (6% vs. 2%).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Cannabidiol, which is found in marijuana plants, reduced the number of convulsive seizures in children with a severe and often fatal epilepsy disorder, according to research published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine . Among children taking cannabidiol, the decrease in the frequency of convulsive seizures -- which involve a loss of consciousness, stiffened muscles and jerking movements -- was 23 percentage points greater than the decrease in seizures among children taking a placebo.

The study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled human trial, which is considered the gold standard test for any new medicine.

GW Pharmaceuticals, a company that is developing cannabidiol medicines, helped subsidize the study.

"After 3,800 years of cannabis use for epilepsy ... we finally have solid evidence," said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, lead author of the study and director of NYU Langone's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center. His own previous research indicates that cannabis was used as early as 1800 B.C. in Sumeria to treat epilepsy; neurologists of the Victorian period used Indian hemp, which is rich in cannabidiol, for the same purpose.

Despite the generally positive results, most study participants reported side effects that included vomiting, fatigue, diarrhea and some liver issues.

A total of 120 patients with Dravet syndrome, ranging in age from nearly 2 to 18 years old, were randomly assigned to receive either an oral solution of cannabidiol or a placebo for a 14-week period.

"Dravet syndrome is a severe childhood-onset epilepsy that causes multiple kinds of seizures, developmental delays, speech and language problems, behavioral issues and movement and balance problems," said Brandy Fureman, vice president of research and new therapies at the Epilepsy Foundation. She was not involved in the new study.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that disrupts electrical communication between neurons in the brain. Considered a spectrum disorder, different epilepsy syndromes are defined by clusters of symptoms or features and treated accordingly.

Existing epilepsy medications usually don't work for patients with Dravet, so "up to 20% of these children die from seizures before age 20 years," Devinsky explained.

Within the study, individual participants experienced convulsive seizures at a rate ranging from four per month, on average, to 1,717 per month.

During the 14-week study, frequency of convulsive seizures decreased from an average of 12.4 to 5.9 per month in the cannabidiol group, compared with 14.9 to 14.1 in the placebo group. On average, the change in seizure frequency amounted to a 39% decrease for the cannabidiol group patients, compared with a roughly 13% decrease among the placebo group.

Five percent of the children became entirely seizure-free during the 14-week study. Overall, parents in the cannabidiol group felt that they witnessed "significantly greater" positive changes in their children than parents in the placebo group.

However, there was a downside. Most (93%) of the cannabidiol patients reported side effects, though three-quarters of the placebo group patients did as well. Nine out of 61 cannabidiol group patients dropped out of the study, eight of them because of side effects, compared with just three of the 59 placebo group patients.

"Tiredness (somnolence or fatigue) was most common; others were decreased appetite, diarrhea and vomiting," Devinsky explained.

Based on the overall results, Devinsky believes CBD should be evaluated for epilepsy types beyond Dravet syndrome, which is caused by a genetic mutation and affects about one in 20,000 to 40,000 children in the United States.

"No one study decides an issue; the sample size is still relatively small (because this is a rare syndrome and so hard to study large numbers of cases) and the duration of treatment so far has been relatively short," Hall, who was not involved in the research, wrote in an email.

Still, Hall said the research, which carefully measured safety and efficacy for a "substantial" number of children, showed "clear evidence of benefits in reducing seizure frequency and severity over the duration of the trial."

"Interestingly, it looks similar to our other seizure medications in terms of efficacy and tolerability," Porter said. "So, sadly, not a home run for most patients but another tool in our treatment regimen."

The marijuana plant is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance. Scientific researchers studying cannabidiol must meet federal security requirements and follow federal practices. Some scientists have said these federal requirements have slowed research supporting medicinal benefits of the plant.

Porter believes the study may open the door to having "more thoughtful discussions with our patients about the efficacy and the side effects" of cannabidiol. "Hopefully, the FDA will see this as a sign it should be moved off of Schedule I. If it stays on Schedule I, we will have trouble getting it to our patients when it does become available."

Changing the schedule of a drug falls to the Drug Enforcement Administration or the Department of Health and Human Services. An interested party, such as a drug company, may also petition for the process to begin. The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institute of Drug Abuse provide guidance to the DEA when reviewing scientific evidence on which to base a schedule change.

He noted that generating more evidence of effective use is "a good thing."

The University of Queensland's Hall believes that boundaries between medical use of cannabinoids and the recreational use of cannabis by adults should not be blurred. "If future clinical trials confirm these promising results, then appropriate regulation will enable the drug to be safely used for medical purposes," he said.

The Epilepsy Foundation's Fureman said, "before publication of this trial, much of the clinical evidence about CBD's effects on people's seizures was uncontrolled and anecdotal." She added that the new study is "critically important" for the epilepsy community, which believes a CBD-based medical product would be a first-in-class therapeutic option.

On the need for more scientific research, all these experts agree.

As Devinsky said, "natural substances are not necessarily safe and effective. They need to be evaluated rigorously."
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story nicely refers to the harms up high and then returns to them in greater detail later in the piece. It also does something we see too rarely, which is mention how many patients dropped out of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - More research is suggesting that heavy smokers may benefit from screening for lung cancer, to detect tumors in their earliest stages.

A new study finds that regular smokers who received three-dimensional X-rays to look for the presence of early tumors had a significantly lower risk of dying over a 10-year period.

The results are in keeping with those of a much larger study published last month, which showed that these 3-D X-rays, or CT scans, reduced the death rate among 53,000 current and former heavy smokers by 20 percent compared with screening using regular chest X-rays. That previous finding was “very good news in the field,” said Dr. Bruce Johnson of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute, who treats lung cancer patients and reviewed the results for Reuters Health.

This latest study, published in the journal Lung Cancer, looked at death rates in a different, smaller population of heavy smokers, and estimated that those who received up to two CT scans would have between a 36 and 64 percent lower risk of dying, compared to those who went unscreened.

The data are “consistent” with earlier studies but there are still many issues to resolve regarding lung cancer screening, Johnson said.

For one, scientists haven’t yet worked out how often to screen people, and when to start. It is not clear when or how guidelines for lung cancer screening could be drawn up, and until they are, insurers including government programs such as Medicare are unlikely to pay the average $300 cost of a scan.

Furthermore, an April study showed that 21 percent of a patient’s initial lung CT scans show suspicious lesions that turn out not to be cancer, but lead to needless invasive follow-up procedures and radiation exposure, as well as stress and anxiety for patients and their families.

The high so-called “false positive” rate is an issue, said Dr. James Hanley of McGill University, who also reviewed the findings for Reuters Health, but many mammograms also find lesions that turn out to be benign. And for lung cancer, doctors know there is a high false-positive rate and have a set protocol to follow in order to determine which lesions are dangerous, added Johnson.

Lung cancer kills 1.2 million people a year globally and it will kill 157,000 people in the United States alone this year, according to the American Cancer Society.

Tobacco use accounts for some 85 percent of lung cancer cases in the U.S., and one estimate puts a smoker’s lifetime absolute risk of developing lung cancer between 12 percent and 17 percent. Five-year survival rates for lung cancer are low.

In recent years, CT scans, in particular, have been promoted by some hospitals and advocacy groups for lung cancer screening, even though studies had not yet shown definitively whether such screening saves lives.

In 2006, Dr. Claudia Henschke, currently based at Mount Sinai School of Medicine and Arizona State University, caused a stir when she published a study concluding that 80 percent of lung-cancer deaths could be prevented through widespread use of spiral CT.

Her ideas were controversial to start with, especially when other researchers found her work had been paid for by a tobacco company.

In the current study, funded in part by manufacturers of CT scanners (along with government and other sources), Henschke and her colleagues compared outcomes for nearly 8,000 smokers and former smokers who volunteered to undergo CT scans to outcomes in two sets of people with smoking histories who were not scanned.

The three groups of people had some important differences, such as in average age and how long and heavily they had smoked, so the researchers had to use mathematical tools to try to eliminate the influence of those differences, said Hanley. For instance, to compare death rates, the researchers tracked how many people died among those who were screened, then pulled out all the people with similar underlying characteristics in the other two groups and looked at their death rates, Hanley explained.

A total of 64 people died in the screened population, the authors report — but applying the death rate among people with the same underlying characteristics in one of the unscreened populations, they estimated that the number of deaths would have been 100. This translates into a 36 percent lower risk of dying among the screened population.

Applying the same methods to the other unscreened population, the authors estimated that screening was associated with a 64 percent lower risk of dying.

Overall, research is suggesting that CT scans of people at risk of lung cancer might make a dent in cancer mortality, and it’s possible that more frequent screening might make an even bigger dent, Hanley noted. “If screening is going to work, you’ve got to keep at it.”
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: 


While too many news reports take a “why not?” attitude toward medical screening tests, this story confronts some of the potential harms. It refers to a recent report that more than one in five “initial lung CT scans show suspicious lesions that turn out not to be cancer, but lead to needless invasive follow-up procedures and radiation exposure, as well as stress and anxiety for patients and their families.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most Americans hear “colorectal cancer screening” and think “colonoscopy” — the unpleasant cleanse, the snakelike scope, the wobbly ride home. It’s a process that’s undeniably inconvenient, yet one we’re told is unquestionably necessary.

That’s a shame. Because although colonoscopy certainly has its advantages, direct evidence that it’s the best way to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer is not one of them. And the drawbacks of colonoscopy — including the time commitment, not-so-fun preparation, expense and small chance of harm — are probably keeping some people from participating in colorectal cancer screening.

According to public health experts, that’s a bad thing. The United States Preventive Services Task Force says the net benefit for screening adults age 50-75 is “substantial,” adding that colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in the country. But as of 2012, just 65 percent of eligible adults were being screened as recommended, and almost 28 percent had never been screened.

Among those who are screened, colonoscopy is by far the most popular method in the U.S. But there is a menu of options beyond colonoscopies — and they’re not necessarily any better or worse, according to the USPSTF’s recently finalized updated recommendations for screening among average-risk adults. The group said that while some tests are backed by more evidence than others, it found no head-to-head studies suggesting any strategy — including colonoscopy — is better than another. “Choose the one that fits your preferences and lifestyle,” said Douglas Owens, a physician and member of the task force.

Included on the list are two cheap, at-home poop tests intended to be done annually: the guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) and a more sensitive test called the fecal immunochemical test, or FIT. Both look for tiny amounts of blood in the stool that might be shed by cancer or polyps. You get one from your doctor, take a poop sample at home, and then return the sample to the doctor. Only if you get a positive result do you need to have a colonoscopy. (These are different from a new stool-based DNA test, which while on the USPSTF’s list is much more expensive and has been studied less.)

Of the two, Richard Wender, a physician and chief cancer control officer of the American Cancer Society, said the FIT is preferable, both because it’s more accurate and because it requires only one poop sample and no changes in diet. It costs about $25 or less and when done every year, the USPSTF’s models estimate, it will avert 20-23 deaths from colorectal cancer per 1,000 people screened. (Wender doesn’t recommend the OTC tests that are available.)

That’s comparable to the two “scope” tests on the USPSTF’s list, flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy, which have the advantage of both detecting and removing precancerous polyps in one procedure. (Flexible sigmoidoscopy, which looks at the lower part of the large intestine, has been shown by randomized trials to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer but isn’t reimbursed as well as colonoscopy and is on the decline in the U.S.)

Colonoscopy is the most popular test in the U.S. In addition to its polyp-removing ability, if you have a negative test, you don’t have to come back for another 10 years. There is indirect evidence it reduces colorectal cancer deaths, in the form of a large study following people who did and didn’t get the test over time. And it seems logical that if sigmoidoscopy cuts colorectal cancer deaths, the more extensive colonoscopy must provide a similar benefit. But that’s not yet been proved by randomized controlled trials. Based on the available evidence and its modeling, the USPSTF estimates it reduces deaths from colorectal cancer by 22-24 per 1,000 people screened.

But that lack of trial data is why the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care earlier this year recommended against using colonoscopy as a first-line screening method. “They were very clear: We’re going to stick to the evidence, and right now we don’t have evidence for colonoscopy,” said Aasma Shaukat, section chief of gastroenterology in the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Colonoscopy also has plenty of downsides. It’s expensive, running upward of $1,000. (The test is covered without cost sharing as preventive care under the Affordable Care Act.) Most people prefer to have sedation during the procedure, which means time off from work and finding a ride home. There’s variation in the quality of the test, depending on who’s doing it. There’s a small but real risk of harm, such as a perforation.

So why do so many people prefer it to the poop test? For many, because they’ve been told it’s the best test to get. A 2012 study found primary care physicians overwhelmingly said they thought it was the best colorectal screening option. Katie Couric’s on-air colonoscopy in March 2000 boosted awareness and increased colonoscopy rates. There’s also a “more is better” attitude when it comes to medicine among many people, said Shaukat. And colonoscopies are well-reimbursed for the physicians who perform them. Hospitals have focused on marketing colonoscopies rather than alternative tests.

No one is arguing colonoscopy is a bad test. It just hasn’t been shown to be better than an annual FIT, said James Allison, a clinical professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California-San Francisco. He said the public health message is slowly changing to reflect that. The 80% by 2018 campaign from the National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, for example, which aims to increase the rate of screening, emphasizes a suite of options. “People are very motivated to get screened when they hear colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer-related death and if they know there are tests that are affordable and can be done at home,” said Wender.

So if you want a colonoscopy after talking with your physician and digging into all its pros and cons — fantastic. But if you prefer something less invasive but more frequent, you can test your poop every year without feeling like you’re opting for, um, No. 2.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story gets a Satisfactory rating here since it does mention that with colonoscopy, there’s “a small but real risk of harm, such as a perforation” from the screening test.
But, as with all screening methods, there is the possibility of false positives or false negatives with the at-home tests which could produce either false confidence or needless worry, not insignificant issues.  We would have liked the story even better had it mentioned these factors.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Treating gum disease reduced symptoms of prostate inflammation, called prostatitis, report researchers from Case Western Reserve University School of Dental Medicine and the Departments of Urology and Pathology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.

Previous studies have found a link between gum disease and prostatitis, a disease that inflames the gland that produces semen. Inflammation can make urination difficult.

"This study shows that if we treat the gum disease, it can improve the symptoms of prostatitis and the quality of life for those who have the disease," said Nabil Bissada, chair of Case Western Reserve's Department of Periodontics and the new study's corresponding author.

The researchers reported their findings in the Dentistry article, "Periodontal Treatment Improves Prostate Symptoms and Lowers Serum PSA in Men with High PSA and Chronic Periodontitis." Naif Alwithanani, a graduate student in the dental school, led the investigation as part of his residency in periodontics.

Bissada explained that gum disease not only affects the mouth, but is a system-wide condition that can cause inflammation in various parts of the body. The dental school has previously found a link between gum disease and fetal deaths, rheumatoid arthritis and heart disease.

Researchers studied 27 men, 21 years old and older. Each had had a needle biopsy within the past year that confirmed inflammation of the prostate gland, and a blood test that showed elevated prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels--possible signs of inflammation and cancer.

The men were assessed for symptoms of prostate disease by answering questions on the International-Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) test about their quality of life and possible urination issues.

Researchers found 21 of the 27 participants had no or mild inflammation, but 15 had biopsy-confirmed malignancies. Two had both inflammation and a malignancy.

The men also had to have at least 18 teeth and were examined for signs of gum disease, such as increased levels of inflammation and bleeding and/or loose teeth due to attachment and bone loss.

All the men had moderate to severe gum disease, for which they received treatment. They were tested again for periodontal disease four to eight weeks later and showed significant improvement.

During the periodontal care, the men received no treatment for their prostate conditions. But even without prostate treatment, 21 of the 27 men showed decreased levels of PSA. Those with the highest levels of inflammation benefited the most from the periodontal treatment. Six participants showed no changes.

Symptom scores on the IPSS test also showed improvement.

Bissada is now conducting follow-up research to support the first study's findings. He hopes to make periodontal treatment a standard part of treating prostate disease, much like cardiac patients are often encouraged to visit their dentist before undergoing heart procedures and a dental checkup is advised for women who are pregnant or considering pregnancy.

Case Western Reserve dental researchers Nishant Joshi, Catherine Demko and Robert Skillicorn; and University Hospitals Case Medical Center researchers Donald Bodner, Lee Ponsky, Sanjay Gupta and Gregory T. MacLennan contributed to the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The release clearly assumes readers will understand there is potential harm from untreated gum or prostate disease and that is probably reasonable. It might have described the risks and limitations of repeated PSA screening and biopsies (which can lead to false-positive results and unecessary treatment), but we don’t think that was an essential part of this analysis. Nonsurgical treatment of periodontal disease has a low potential for harm, something the release could have mentioned. The release does point out the risk to heart patients and pregnant women of untreated periodontal disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The policy response to the opioid epidemic is frequently framed as a conflict: If you pull back the opioid painkillers that led to the epidemic, you are going to harm the pain patients who use these opioids to treat their pain. In effect, you’re trading one problem (addiction) for another (undertreatment of chronic pain).

A new study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, however, offers a cause for optimism: Reviewing the research so far, it found that it may be possible to reduce doses for patients in long-term opioid therapy and improve their pain outcomes. So doctors can potentially pull back the opioids that launched the current drug overdose crisis and still successfully treat pain patients.

Now, by this latest study’s own admission, the evidence is of generally poor quality. Most of the studies reviewed were of poor methodology or sample size, while only a few were of “fair” or “good” quality. The review also only looked at patients who volunteered to taper off opioids, meaning this research does not prove that involuntarily pulling patients off the drugs will lead to similar outcomes.

Suffice to say, then, a lot more research is necessary before this issue is settled.

But the new study does offer a glimmer of hope in a fairly grim opioid epidemic: Maybe it is possible to reduce the amount of dangerous opioids that patients are consuming and still alleviate people’s pain.

For the latest review of the evidence, researchers looked at 67 studies that collectively provided data on more than 12,000 pain patients who were weaned off at least some opioids. Though the researchers found a lot of studies to pool from, they generally graded these studies as “very low” in quality and methodology.

Researchers then identified the studies — none of which were graded as “good” quality — that evaluated pain-related outcomes for patients after long-term opioid therapy was tapered. Focusing on the “fair-quality” studies, they found that after opioid dose reductions, patients on average saw improved pain, function, and quality of life.

The authors provide a few possible explanations for this: Perhaps the non-opioid pain treatments, such as physical therapy and meditation, that accompanied dose reductions simply produced better results than the opioids did. Maybe the opioids themselves caused problems that negatively impacted function or quality of life, “such as constipation, fatigue, poor sleep, and depressed mood.” It’s possible that opioid dose reduction also resolved what’s known as opioid-induced hyperalgesia, “a paradoxical response in which patients receiving opioids become more sensitive to painful stimuli.”

Or, the researchers suggested, the observational studies simply showed reverse causation — “that is, patients successfully tapered opioids because pain severity decreased.”

The findings do not mean that doctors can now simply yank patients off opioids and expect them to get better. For one, the reviewed studies generally looked at the results of tapering, when patients are slowly weaned off opioid painkillers — a process that, Stanford psychiatrist Anna Lembke told me, can take months or even years.

Crucially, the studies also looked at what happened when these reductions in opioid doses were paired with alternative treatments, including alternative medicines like acupuncture, interdisciplinary pain programs, and medication-assisted treatment for addiction. This is very, very different from a situation in which a patient is taken off opioids and effectively left stranded without any other form of care.

As the researchers readily admit, the study also had several major limitations. Most of the studies analyzed were of poor quality — meaning there’s a serious need for better research in this area. And the studies only evaluated voluntary reductions in opioid doses; it’s entirely possible that involuntary reductions in opioid doses would lead to sharply different outcomes.

“We should be cautious in interpreting the findings,” Joseph Frank, lead author of the study, told me. He emphasized that more research needs to be done to fill “important gaps” in our knowledge. He added, “I want patients and their doctors to use caution in applying this.”

A few pain patients will still benefit from opioids

One of the study’s implications is that opioids actually aren’t a good treatment for chronic pain. This isn’t new. As the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention concluded in its 2016 summary of the research, there are simply no good long-term studies looking at the effects of opioids on long-term pain outcomes, while there are many studies showing that long-term opioid use can lead to bad results in other areas, including addiction and overdose.

That does not mean opioids are never an effective treatment for chronic pain.

As addiction and pain experts often tell me, health care can vary vastly from patient to patient. Some patients feel worse on opioids, while others report quick pain relief. Some patients experience grueling withdrawal if taken off opioids, while for others the symptoms are much less severe. Some patients are at unusually high risk for addiction, while many — most, in fact — aren’t. And so on.

In a few cases, then, opioids will still be the best answer for some individual chronic pain patients. When prescribed carefully on a schedule that works to diminish the excessive buildup of tolerance, they can work for some people. But as Stanford pain specialist Sean Mackey emphasized to me, opioids should not be a first-line treatment due to the risks, and alternatives should be tried first.

This, then, is another key caveat to the study: Its findings shouldn’t be applied to every patient. Like much of health care, each case will typically require individual evaluations to see what works.

“There are people who do well with tapering [opioids],” Stefan Kertesz, an addiction researcher at the University of Alabama Birmingham who was not involved in the study, told me. “There are people who do not do well with tapering.”

But the study suggests that getting some patients off opioids could improve their pain outcomes. The key is convincing patients that this truly can work so they buy into the treatment and genuinely follow through with it — and making non-opioid treatments for pain accessible enough that patients see them as realistic options.

Alternative pain treatments need to be made more accessible

The reality, though, is non-opioid pain treatments are often out of reach for many Americans. Patients may not have insurance to cover the treatment. Even if they do have insurance, their health plan might not cover comprehensive pain care. And even if they do have insurance and their health plan covers pain treatments, there may not — particularly in rural areas — be a nearby pain clinic or doctor who can actually provide the care these patients are seeking.

This is something the study’s authors readily acknowledge.

“It’s an important part of this challenge,” Frank said. “These non-opioid strategies that were tested in these research studies are not adequately available. Several of the studies were done in pain centers where they have expert programs, and those just are not widespread.”

In fact, the lack of access to non-opioid strategies may be one big reason that doctors resorted to opioids in the first place. The drugs offered an easy answer — if ultimately an ineffective one — to the many problems doctors faced, including patients who had complicated pain problems that physicians didn’t fully understand and tight schedules driven by the current demands of the health care system that made it hard to take the time to work through a patient’s individual problems. (More on all that in my interview with Lembke.)

To address this, Frank argued that patients need better access to pain treatments. And doctors, especially primary care doctors who are frequently the first people patients see in the health care system, also need to be better trained to deal with chronic pain.

These solutions could help a lot of people: According to one study from the Institute of Medicine, 100 million US adults suffer from chronic pain. The opioid epidemic shows that if this care isn’t made available, patients may end up resorting to drugs that can literally get them killed — or, as has been reported in other tragic cases, they may kill themselves once the pain grows too bad. (The newest study, however, noted that there is no good research yet looking at these two potential outcomes if pain patients are taken off opioids.)

“Not only do we lack the data, but I have seen and heard of countless cases of overdose and suicide from people who have been involuntarily discontinued,” Kertesz said, emphasizing this is strictly based on anecdotal observations. “One day in June, in my inbox were 42 deaths.”

The findings show the balancing act of opioid policy: Even if doctors need to pull back opioids, they must be careful to ensure patients suffering from debilitating pain and other problems can still meet their other care needs.

It’s not just pain care. When dealing with opioid users who are addicted, doctors and policymakers also need to ensure that addiction treatment is available. Otherwise, these patients will likely try to find another source of drugs — even if it means resorting to a riskier opioid, such as heroin or fentanyl, to satisfy their cravings.

There’s good evidence this happened to many — but not all — opioid painkiller users: A 2014 study in JAMA Psychiatry found 75 percent of heroin users in treatment started with painkillers, and a 2015 analysis by the CDC found people who are addicted to painkillers are 40 times more likely to be addicted to heroin.

The fundamental problem is many of these patients don’t get addiction treatment once they lose access to painkillers or before they progress to heroin or fentanyl. Without the option of treatment, opioid users’ only answer to averting dependence-induced withdrawal becomes harder drugs. Yet based on a 2016 report by the surgeon general, only 10 percent of Americans with drug use disorders get specialty treatment.

That doesn’t mean that reducing prescriptions is a mistake. By stopping doctors from unscrupulously prescribing the drugs, governments can potentially stop opioids from flowing to new users who didn’t really need the drugs and could have developed addictions had they been allowed to get painkillers.

But the reduction has to be paired with increased access to addiction care — and it frequently hasn’t been.

Beyond addiction treatment, Kertesz argued that policymakers should also address some of the underlying conditions that drive addiction. He emphasized the need for broader mental health care, given that people often have mental health issues that can make addiction more likely.

“Who is at higher risk — John with PTSD and a dose of 10 milligrams a day, or James, who has no PTSD and is on 200 milligrams a day?” Kertesz said. Based on his reading of the data, “it’s John with PTSD on the 10 milligrams.”

But as is true for addiction and pain treatments, adequate mental health care is also out of reach for many patients — showing just another way that the US health care system isn’t built to adequately address the full needs of patients.

All of this shows why the policy solution to the opioid epidemic isn’t as easy as simply pulling back prescription opioids: To avoid exacerbating existing problems or causing new ones, policymakers need to consider the other needs of people who were perhaps getting opioids they didn’t really need.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The harms are addressed right away: Come off opioids too quickly, and patients can suffer by having little recourse to deal with chronic pain. Some even resort to illicit drugs or commit suicide. One of the study’s authors is also quoted as recommending doctors and patients to exercise caution if tapering is being attempted, and another explains that not all patients respond the same way (and do poorly with tapering).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Why Tortillas May Hold The Key To Healthier Babies

One of the great public-health success stories of the past couple of decades can be found in your cereal bowl.

Since 1998, the Food and Drug Administration has required that breakfast cereals, breads, rice, pasta and other grain products made with enriched flour come fortified with folic acid. When consumed by women before and during early pregnancy, this B vitamin plays a critical role in preventing severe brain and spinal cord defects. Thanks to mandatory fortification, the number of babies born in the U.S. with neural tube defects has dropped by roughly 35 percent — or about 1,300 babies a year — since the 1990s.

"The story of folic acid is one of the great public health stories of — ever," says Dr. R.J. Berry, who works with the Division of Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

But there's one notable exception to this success story — Hispanic women — and researchers think the reason may lie in a staple of their diet: tortillas.

Under current FDA rules, tortillas, corn chips and other foods made with corn masa flour can't be fortified with folic acid. So a coalition of groups including the March of Dimes Foundation and the National Council of La Raza has petitioned the FDA to change its stance and allow corn masa flour to be fortified with folic acid.

According to the March of Dimes, about 3,000 pregnancies in the U.S. are affected by neural tube defects each year. The rates are highest among Hispanics: Latina women are roughly 20 percent more likely to have a baby with a neural tube defect compared to non-Latina white women.

The exact cause of this discrepancy isn't known. Researchers say there may be genetic factors that predispose the children of some Hispanic women to neural tube defects. But they suspect diet is also a factor: "Part of the reason was that these groups just weren't consuming the same level of wheat flour products. Instead, they were consuming corn masa flour products, because that was the staple grain in that diet," says Cynthia Pellegrini, senior vice president of public policy and government affairs at the March of Dimes.

Research has shown that women who consume at least 400 micrograms of folic acid daily have a significantly reduced risk of having a pregnancy affected by neural tube defects — including spina bifida, which can involve paralysis, and anencephaly, in which large parts of the brain are missing. The catch: Folic acid is only protective if consumed in the earliest weeks of pregnancy.

"Most women, by the time they know they're pregnant, they've already passed that critical window," says Dean Appling, a biochemistry professor at the University of Texas at Austin. "If they had a problem with folic acid, it would be too late at that point to prevent the birth defect."

Mandating fortification helps ensure that women are getting enough folic acid even before they know they need it. And studies suggest that fortifying corn masa with folic acid could prevent an additional 40 to 120 cases of neural tube defects among babies born to Hispanic mothers each year.

So why does the FDA currently ban dosing corn masa flour with folic acid? It all has to do with nixtamalization, the process by which tough corn kernels are softened by soaking in an alkaline solution, usually of slaked lime. The process, which hails from ancient Mesoamerica — what's now Mexico and Central America — dates back thousands of years. It renders the corn more pliable for grinding into masa flour and gives the masa its distinctive aroma and flavor.

But the FDA worries that this alkaline treatment could also "affect the stability of added folic acid," the agency told The Salt in a statement. "The FDA is concerned that the breakdown of folic acid in corn masa flour could yield a substance that raises concerns about safety."

The March of Dimes and others first petitioned the FDA to allow added folic acid in corn flour masa in 2012. As part of its review, the FDA asked the petitioning groups to study whether folic acid would stay stable in corn masa flour.

The petitioners filed the results of that study in October. Michael Dunn, the Brigham Young University food scientist who led the study, cannot comment on the test results while they're under FDA review, but he has previously called them encouraging. As The Seattle Times has reported, Dunn's early results suggested no loss of folic acid in fortified masa after three months of storage.

The March of Dimes' Pellegrini says she believes the FDA will respond to the results of Dunn's study later this month. But the FDA might have more questions related to the study before making a final ruling.
QUESTION: Does the story adequately explain/quantify the harms of the intervention?
EXPLANATION: The story discusses the FDA’s worry that a chemical used on corn flour could interact with the corn masa flour. It quotes the FDA which says: “The FDA is concerned that the breakdown of folic acid in corn masa flour could yield a substance that raises concerns about safety.” It would have been nice for the story to explain more clearly what concerns are raised — this seems pretty vague — but we’ll give the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
