<|startoftext|>
Hoping to reduce her thighs and midsection without the risks and inconvenience of liposuction, she paid $2,300 for six treatments from a chiropractor in the Denver area. Even though she continued to diet and work out, she had no change in her thighs, belly and hips. Her doctor offered her three more sessions at no cost. Still, no change.

Since most aesthetic medicine is elective, and not covered by insurance, marketing plays a major role in capturing the minds and wallets of consumers. The concern is that promoting innovations for indications that the Food and Drug Administration hasn’t approved will fuel patient expectations that clinical data may not substantiate.

Zeltiq Aesthetics, based in Pleasanton, Calif., is a cautious wallflower that aims to get the data behind its device approved by the F.D.A. before it makes too rowdy an entrance to the party. Its slogan is “More Science. Less Fat.”

Meanwhile, Erchonia Medical, based in McKinney, Tex., has aggressively marketed its Zerona laser as “the first non-invasive body contouring procedure to effectively remove excess fat” even though it has yet to receive F.D.A. clearance to promote this use. (In general, the F.D.A. must sanction a medical device for a specific use before a company can market that use. But doctors are free to use devices off label. )

Nonetheless, a brochure for Zerona states patients can collectively “lose up to 9 inches without the pain or down time of surgery.” Nationwide, medical spas, chiropractors, cosmetic surgeons, plastic surgeons and dermatologists now offer Zerona for $1,700 to $3,800 for six sessions. Part of the reason the device has made inroads during these strapped times is that doctors don’t buy it outright, but pay per use.

So how is Zerona supposed to work? The low-level laser causes “fat to seep out of a cell, almost like a balloon being struck by a needle,” said Ryan Maloney, medical director for Erchonia Medical. The fat enters the lymphatic system, and is eventually used as energy, Dr. Maloney said.

Zeltiq uses controlled cooling to target and eliminate fat cells, a process called selective cryolipolysis. Skin isn’t damaged, but subcutaneous fat, which is more sensitive to targeted cold, begins a two-month death march soon after exposure to Zeltiq.

Doctors on the advisory board for Zeltiq Aesthetics have put the word out about it on television news segments. But at this stage, the company itself has been careful not to promote its device directly to consumers since its F.D.A. clearances for, say, pain reduction during dermatologic treatments don’t encompass fat reduction. Gordie Nye, the chief executive, sent an e-mail message declining to be interviewed for this article.

The company has clinical data that has been submitted to the F.D.A. for approval, according to a few doctors who were principal investigators. Data relayed at a meeting of the American Society of Dermatologic Surgery showed a 22 percent reduction of the fat layer as measured by ultrasound.

Erchonia Medical has published the results of its clinical trial in Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. Thirty-five patients in the treatment group lost an average of 3.5 inches total in hips, thighs and their midsection according to the company’s clinical trial. The company has promoted Zerona as “a new body-sculpting procedure designed to remove fat and contour the body without invasive surgery.” But the F.D.A. has not sanctioned marketing this use. It has cleared the Zerona laser for pain reduction 24 hours after breast augmentation or as a way to decrease the pain associated with recovering from liposuction.

In general, Karen Riley, a spokeswoman for the F.D.A., said “it is considered off-label promotion if you are marketing to the public a use that has not been cleared.” Steven Shanks, the president of Erchonia Medical, said, “Since we use the exact same power for liposuction and breast augmentation, we self-certified the device.” He said that in January 2009, the company had applied for a 510K clearance — which is based on the notion that an older device is substantially equivalent to a new one — and had yet to receive it. (Such a delay is atypical, Ms. Riley said, adding, “most 510Ks are cleared within six months.”)

Last month, Dr. Robert B. Seltzer, a dermatologist in Pasadena, Calif., ran an advertisement in The Los Angeles Times for an informational seminar that called Zerona “the holy grail.” In a phone interview, however, he said, “I’m not 100 percent convinced” and planned to return his Zerona if he didn’t continue seeing results in his patients. (So far 5 out of 6 have been pleased.)

After reviewing Erchonia Medical’s clinical study, Dr. Brian M. Kinney, a plastic surgeon in Los Angeles, said, “I can’t prove that it works.” His concerns are that the tape measure method of gauging circumferential changes “isn’t consistently reliable.” What’s more, study participants and the placebo group were assessed only two weeks after their last treatment, not long enough to measure adequately whether results last.

Dr. Kinney doesn’t have a Zerona or a Zeltiq cooling device, though in the case of the latter, he said, “it is well documented that freezing fat tissue aggressively enough can lead to fat necrosis,” or, fat dying, over a few months.

Patient selection for any body contouring procedure is crucial, said Dr. Jeffrey M. Kenkel, vice chairman of plastic surgery at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. Dr. Kenkel, who recently replicated results of Zerona’s clinical trial in 12 of his patients, doesn’t offer Zerona to obese patients, or to ones who have had surgery in the area they want treated. “It’s critical to be evaluated by a doctor,” he said.

Success is also dependent on diet and exercise, he said. If you’re sedentary and not eating healthy food, he said, then once fat is leaked after Zerona treatments, “your body will just store it again.”

How the body rids itself of fat, and how quickly, after any noninvasive body slimming procedure is unclear, said Dr. Lawrence S. Bass, a plastic surgeon in Manhattan who started using a Zeltiq device last July. That includes, he said, forthcoming devices like UltraShape and LipoSonix, which employ ultrasound waves to single out fat. It’s a “sticking point with the F.D.A. with all these things,” he said. Dr. Bass was not a clinical investigator for Zeltiq, but he said, “I’m convinced both on the science and clinical experience, it’s able to eliminate fat noninvasively.”

Nadine Tosk, a publicist for Zeltiq, explained that the rollout of the device was “very limited right now.” Dr. Jeffrey Dover, a dermatologist in Chestnut Hill, Mass., who advises Zeltiq and participated in its clinical trial, said a few board-certified plastic surgeons and dermatologists were “handpicked” because “we know they do good work.” Restraint is key, he said, because a doctor could apply Zeltiq to “the same spot” in the same day, which isn’t how it’s meant to be used. Hourlong treatments are best spaced out by two months, said Dr. Dover, who charges $700 per spot.

That said, a doctor with a Zeltiq device isn’t hard for patients to find. More than five dozen “Zeltiq specialists” can be found by ZIP code at body-contouring.com, which is a patient guide not sponsored by manufacturers of body-slimming devices. Dr. Jason N. Pozner, a plastic surgeon in Boca Raton, Fla., appears topless in a YouTube.com video that shows his left flank being suctioned and cooled as he reads his Kindle. (His partner, Dr. David J. Goldberg, was an investigator for Zeltiq.)

Ms. Bonvouloir hasn’t given up on Zerona. Recently, she paid $2,100 for six treatments at Parker Day Spa in Parker, Colo. This time, each session is followed by a massage that supposedly speeds the release of fat. “I still have three more sessions,” Ms. Bonvouloir wrote in an e-mail message. “Again, they are convinced I will lose some inches. I’d like to know when!!!”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a solid job describing the amount and type of evidence supporting the devices’ efficacy–it’s mainly anecdotes, doctors’ casually reported cases, and some preliminary research. The story is usefully framed with the following statement: "It is too early, however, for consumers to know how effectively either device works."
About Zerona, we learn that an article showing some benefit has been published in a journal called Lasers in Surgery and Medicine. An independent source later calls the validity of those findings into question. We also learn that the FDA has not approved marketing the device for its claimed benefits of fat-zapping.
About Zeltiq, we learn that data has been submitted to the FDA for approval. We also learn that promising data was reported at a medical meeting. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 9, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Scientists report positive results in early testing of a wireless pacemaker that's placed in the heart instead of being connected to it via wires from the upper chest.

There are still many questions regarding the pacemaker, produced by Nanostim Inc. It's only been implanted in a few dozen people who were studied for a matter of months, limiting information about its long-term use and safety. It's also not clear when the pacemaker may be publicly available, and its cost is unknown. And the existing version of the device won't work for most pacemaker patients because it lacks some key features.

Still, a new company-funded study shows that "this is now a possibility" that could reduce infections and the severity of pacemaker surgery, said study author Dr. Vivek Reddy, director of the Cardiac Arrhythmia Service at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City. "This is going to be the future," he said.

Pacemakers zap the heart with low levels of electricity when the heartbeat becomes too fast, too slow or too irregular. Some are combined with defibrillators, which give the heart a major jolt when needed.

Currently, pacemakers include two components: a battery-powered generator that produces the electrical "prompts" that the wires deliver to the heart when needed, Reddy said. These wires can break or become infected, he explained, making the idea of a wire-free pacemaker appealing.

The new pacemaker is about the size of a AAA battery and provides jolts to one chamber of the heart, Reddy said. Most people with pacemakers require jolts to both chambers, so the pacemaker in its current form wouldn't work for them.

In the new study, researchers implanted the pacemaker in 32 people for the first time through a puncture in the skin; in 10 patients, they had to reposition it. The researchers reported positive results at up to three months. However, one patient died of a stroke while convalescing after suffering a heart injury during implantation and another had the pacemaker replaced with a defibrillator.

Why get a wire-free pacemaker? "For patients with heart problems, this could potentially mean fewer infections related to leads and less discomfort during the implant procedure," Reddy said. And children who get pacemakers wouldn't face chest scarring, he added.

Dr. Saman Nazarian, a cardiologist and assistant professor of medicine at Johns Hopkins Hospital, said the findings are promising and "the new technology has enormous potential." He expects the pacemaker "will likely be utilized for some select patients" after more testing.

Still, he said, the new device will probably be more expensive than other pacemakers, and may pose special risks of its own.

Dr. Harish Doppalapudi, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, added that there are unanswered questions regarding replacement of the new pacemakers.

"When the battery of the implanted leadless pacemaker is exhausted, a new implant is necessary, with all the potential risks associated with this," Doppalapudi said. "It is not known if it will be feasible to safely retrieve the old device. If the old device is left in place, it is not known what the long-term effects of this will be."

Study author Reddy has received grant funding from Nanostim, and works for the company as a consultant. He also has received stock options from the company.

The study was to be presented Wednesday at the Heart Rhythm Society annual meeting in Denver. Findings presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

For more about pacemakers, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story included enough appropriate cautions about the limitations of the evidence.  For example:
“There are still many questions regarding the pacemaker. It’s only been implanted in a few dozen people who were studied for a matter of months, limiting information about its long-term use and safety. It’s also not clear when the pacemaker may be publicly available, and its cost is unknown. And the existing version of the device won’t work for most pacemaker patients because it lacks some key features.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 25, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Acupuncture might help reduce the hot flashes that frequently affect prostate cancer patients while they're on hormone therapy, a small study suggests.

The findings don't confirm that the ancient Chinese discipline relieves hot flashes, and only 14 men participated in the study, which was conducted by researchers at New York Methodist Hospital and Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University.

Still, "our study shows that physicians and patients have an additional treatment for something that affects many men undergoing prostate cancer treatment and actually has long-term benefits, as opposed to more side effects," said lead author Dr. Hani Ashamalla, a radiation oncologist at New York Methodist Hospital, in a news release from the American Society for Radiation Oncology.

Acupuncture, a popular form of alternative medicine, involves inserting ultra-thin needles into the skin.

"We are now designing a randomized clinical trial to further evaluate acupuncture after prostate cancer treatment," Ashamalla added.

Hormone therapy designed to reduce levels of testosterone in the body is one of the standard treatments for prostate cancer. However, about half of patients who undergo hormone therapy suffer from hot flashes similar to those that women experience during menopause.

"It is a definite nuisance. I've seen reports that upwards of 60 percent of men will get hot flashes," said Dr. Stephen Freedland, an associate professor of urology and pathology at Duke University, in an interview. "Usually it's mild and self-limiting and improves with time. But there are some men who really have it bad."

In the study, researchers followed 14 men who were taking hormone therapy for prostate cancer and suffered from hot flashes.

They received acupuncture twice a week for 30 minutes over four weeks. Their reported level of hot flashes dropped markedly.

The question is whether the acupuncture reduced the hot flashes or a placebo effect played a role, said Freedland, who's familiar with the study findings.

It's also possible, he said, that the symptoms went away on their own, which commonly happens to men on hormone therapy.

However, "clearly these men described getting better, and it happened over a very short period of time," he said. "The symptoms don't (normally) get better by that much that quickly."

The study, published in the April issue of the International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics, also found that acupuncture relieved the heart palpitations and anxiety often associated with hormone therapy for prostate cancer.

For more about prostate cancer, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Adequate.
The story mentioned that this was a very small study – only 14 men.  And it turned to an independent expert who opined that the placebo effect could have been at play or that the symptoms simply went away on their own.
It could have explained that this study design–apparently just a case series without a control group–provides results of very limited validity.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have developed a new HPV (human papilloma virus) vaccine which protects against nine types of the virus - seven of which cause most cases of cervical cancer. The new vaccine offers significantly greater protection than the current vaccine, which protects against only two cancer causing types of HPV.

A pivotal international clinical trial compared the safety and efficacy of the new vaccine, Gardasil 9, with the current vaccine, Gardasil, in more than 14,200 women aged between 16 and 26 years old. The findings indicate that if uninfected populations are vaccinated with Gardasil 9, approximately 90 per cent of all cervical cancers worldwide could be prevented.

Published in the New England Journal of Medicine, the study found that, among uninfected women, Gardasil 9 was 97 per cent effective at preventing high-grade cervical, vulvar and vaginal disease caused by HPV 31, 33, 45, 52 and 58, and was equally effective as the current Gardasil vaccine in preventing diseases caused by HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18.

Professor Jack Cuzick of Queen Mary University of London, who co-authored the report and participated in the design and analysis of the study, and served on the Trial Advisory Board, comments: "This is a significant achievement. The new vaccine, Gardasil 9, is not only safe but will offer greatly improved protection against cervical and other cancers. Eventually this will mean less screening is needed, as women will have greater protection from the outset.

"Gardasil 9 offers the potential to increase overall cervical cancer prevention from 70 to 90 per cent, nearly eliminating this cancer among vaccinated women. However, it's crucial to remember that vaccination must be done before exposure to the virus. Our focus for prevention must be on girls aged 12-13, as the current UK vaccine programme is doing, but the vaccine may also be appropriate for women 25-45 as part of a screening appointment."

Until late last year, there were two available vaccines to protect against HPV related disease (Cervarix and Gardasil). The UK currently uses Gardasil which protects against four HPV types and offers about 70 per cent protection against cervical cancer, and also significantly reduces the risk of other types of cancer and genital warts.

However, researchers have been trying to find methods to completely eliminate cervical cancer and other HPV related disease and by adding five more cancer related HPV types. The development of the new Gardasil 9 vaccine makes an important step in that direction.

HPV is the most common sexually transmitted virus. Many people infected with HPV clear it from their systems with no lasting health concerns and some types of the virus are low risk, causing warts or verrucas. However, other types are high risk, causing cervical cancer (and less commonly vulvar, vaginal, penile, anal, and throat cancers). Almost all cases of cervical cancer occur as a result of infection with high risk types of HPV.

Cervical cancer is still the fourth most common cancer in women, with over 500,000 cases and 250,000 deaths per year worldwide. In the UK around 3,000 women a year are diagnosed with cervical cancer and in 2011 there were around 970 deaths.

In the UK, all girls aged 12 to 13 are offered HPV vaccination as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme.

Professor Jack Cuzick concludes: "Following these important findings, this vaccine has been licenced in the USA and approval is currently being sought in the UK and other countries. It is encouraging that the Joint committee on Vaccines and Immunisation is reviewing Gardasil 9 in light of this new evidence."

This clinical trial was funded by Merck.

Charli Scouller 

PR Manager (School of Medicine and Dentistry) 

Queen Mary University of London 

c.scouller@qmul.ac.uk 

Tel: 020 7882 7943

Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) is one of the UK's leading universities, and one of the largest institutions in the University of London, with 20,260 students from more than 150 countries.

A member of the Russell Group, we work across the humanities and social sciences, medicine and dentistry, and science and engineering, with inspirational teaching directly informed by our research - in the most recent national assessment of the quality of research, we were placed ninth in the UK (REF 2014).

We also offer something no other university can: a stunning self-contained residential campus in London's East End. As well as our home at Mile End, we have campuses at Whitechapel, Charterhouse Square and West Smithfield dedicated to the study of medicine, and a base for legal studies at Lincoln's Inn Fields.

We have a rich history in London with roots in Europe's first public hospital, St Barts; England's first medical school, The London; one of the first colleges to provide higher education to women, Westfield College; and the Victorian philanthropic project, the People's Palace based at Mile End.

QMUL has an annual turnover of £350m, a research income worth £100m, and generates employment and output worth £700m to the UK economy each year.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release notes that the vaccine has been approved by the US FDA on the basis of the study being reported on. It also provides some information about the study itself, noting that it was a “clinical trial [comparing] the safety and efficacy of the new vaccine, Gardasil 9, with the current vaccine, Gardasil, in more than 14,200 women aged between 16 and 26 years old. ” Ideally we should have been told it was a randomized double blind study and the study duration was 6 months. Some detail about the demographics of the women in the study would also have been helpful. However, we think the release provides enough information for readers to be assured of the study’s overall quality.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Giving babies and toddlers antibiotics when doctors are certain they have ear infections can help speed up their recovery, supporting current treatment guidelines for children between the ages of 6 months and 23 months.

However, antibiotics do come with significant side effects including diarrhea, rashes, yeast infections and vomiting. Overuse of drugs also contributes to antibiotic resistance, so careful selection of who should take antibiotics is necessary according to 2 studies published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine.

According to one of the studies, ear infection, or acute otitis media, is the most frequently diagnosed illness in children in the United States, and most children with these ear infections are routinely given antibiotics.

But just 2 months ago, a new study confirmed practice guidelines from 2004, which recommend that children older than 2 with a confirmed diagnosis of an acute ear infection do not need to be given antibiotics because the drugs do not significantly speed up recovery.

The foundation for the "watchful waiting" treatment recommendation instead of taking drugs is based on this and previous studies that did not have very many children under age 2 in the clinical trials. This made concluding that the same treatment works in the youngest age group very difficult.

These 2 new studies were designed to provide the research to fill the gap, and clarify treatment recommendations for babies and toddlers. The children in these latest trials had their ear infections confirmed by experts (otoscopists). Researchers found that the youngsters who received a placebo did not recover as quickly as those getting the amoxicillin-clavulanate, an antibiotic that has been shown to be effective for earaches.

However the differences were not huge. In the United States study, 80% of the children on antibiotics felt better on the seventh day of treatment; 74% of the children taking a placebo also felt better on the seventh day.

Dr. Jerome Klein, a pediatric infectious disease specialist from Boston University's Medical School, says in an accompanying editorial that these two studies resolve the controversy over giving antibiotics versus watchful waiting in kids with confirmed ear infections.

"More young children with a certain diagnosis of acute otitis media recover more quickly when they are treated with an appropriate antimicrobial agent," Klein wrote.

Dr. Richard Rosenfeld, who is a professor and chairman of otolaryngology at SUNY Downstate and Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn, New York, has been charged with reviewing the 2004 American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines for treating ear infections. He, too, has been eagerly awaiting the results of these 2 studies.

One of the strengths of both studies, Rosenfeld said, is that the researchers took the time to make a solid diagnosis. Only children who really had ear infections were included in the trials. But Rosenfeld doesn't see the results as black and white as Klein.

"Medicine is about gray zones and balancing the risks and benefits," Rosenfeld says. "Parents and doctors need to understand what the benefits and what the downside of treatments are."

"If you received a placebo and you have a 74% chance of having symptoms go away or improvement [of illness]" – compared with the 80% in the antibiotic group ... "as a parent, how impressed are you about a 6% difference?" In treatment outcomes for pain, there was no difference, he notes.

In both studies, children taking the real drugs had more side effects. The study authors caution about the overuse of these drugs and the risk of antibiotic resistance. The Finnish noted that limiting use of antibiotics may reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and increase the chance the future use of antibiotic will be effective.

Rosenfeld says it's never wrong to prescribe an antibiotic for a well-diagnosed ear infection. "If the child has high fever, severe ear pain, the child is really miserable, has a fever or draining from the ear or double ear infection and is under 2 years old, then prescribing antibiotic is probably the right thing to do."

But waiting to take the antibiotic isn't a bad idea either. He says he frequently writes a prescription for parents but tells them to hold off from filling it for 3 days. If the child still has symptoms 3 days later, then they should get the antibiotic and start giving it to their child. If you do that, 2 out of 3 parents don't fill out the prescription."

Which is why he says what to do is still not clear-cut. He also points out that if antibiotics don't relieve a child's pain, pain medications will.

Rosenfeld believes these latest studies reinforce an important message: "It's an opportunity for a conversation with your pediatrician." Parents need to weigh the benefits of what antibiotics can do in terms of killing the bacteria (if the ear infection is caused by a bacteria and not a virus) and the side effects their child may have to endure, as well as the possibility that exposing bacteria to antimicrobials may make the drugs less effective in the future.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story takes a much more careful approach to examining the evidence than the competing Washington Post blog. Examples:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For years pregnant women have been warned about eating tuna because of concerns about mercury exposure. But a federal panel has reignited the debate about the benefits and risks of eating tuna and other seafood during pregnancy.

Experts agree that seafood is a rich source of important nutrients, and that most of us don’t eat enough of it. Fish is rich in omega-3 fatty acids, B vitamins, iodine, selenium and vitamin D. And numerous studies show that the nutrients in fish are particularly important for brain development in fetuses and nursing infants.

As part of a sweeping review of nutrition recommendations, the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee recently reiterated the current seafood guidelines: Americans should eat a wide variety of seafood. The report also acknowledges the risk of mercury exposure from certain kinds of seafoods, and notes that women who are pregnant, nursing or may become pregnant should avoid certain kinds — tilefish, shark, swordfish and king mackerel — because of their high mercury content.

The panel withheld a recommendation about tuna, second only to shrimp in popularity in the United States. Current guidelines from the Food and Drug Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency warn pregnant and nursing women to limit tuna consumption to six ounces per week.

The advisory committee has recommended that these agencies “re-evaluate” their stance on tuna for pregnant women. In the report, the panel argues that albacore tuna is a “special case.” They noted that even when women ate double the recommended weekly amount of tuna, the benefits far outweighed the risks. “All evidence was in favor of net benefits for infant development and (cardiovascular disease) risk reduction,” the panel wrote.

The suggestion that pregnant women can eat more white albacore tuna — the type of tuna typically used in canned tuna — has upset advocacy groups that have called for increased warnings about mercury on tuna packaging.

“Tuna is responsible for nearly seven times more mercury exposure than the four high-mercury fish that the Federal Food and Drug Administration advises pregnant women not to eat,” said Michael Bender, director of the mercury policy project, in a statement. “So why would the proposed 2015 dietary guidelines recommend that pregnant women eat more of it?”

But Dr. Steve Abrams, a panel member involved in the seafood recommendations and medical director of the Neonatal Nutrition Program at Baylor College of Medicine, said that while women need to be aware of the types of fish they are eating, the evidence is strong that fish consumption by mothers is good for the brains of their babies.

“The goal of the dietary guidelines is to give people a healthy way to eat and not to include or exclude certain foods,” said Dr. Abrams. “The benefit of having (omega-3 fatty acids) in your diet really exceeds the likely risk of contamination. The point is that you should have a variety of types of seafood and not limit yourself to one type, and variety includes canned tuna.”

Alice Lichtenstein, senior scientist and director of the Cardiovascular Nutrition Laboratory at Tufts University said the panel hasn’t suggested that pregnant women eat more tuna. “The issue of fish contamination is a moving target and you need very current data,” said Dr. Lichtenstein. “It may be that the issue is re-evaluated and there is no change.”

Mercury levels in our oceans are on the rise due to an increase in industrial mercury emissions. Plants, plankton and tiny fish that have absorbed small amounts of mercury are eaten by larger fish. Over time, large fish sharks and swordfish accumulate high levels of mercury. As a result, health officials recommend fish like sardines, salmon, tilapia and trout that are lower on the food chain and have accumulated less mercury in their tissue.

The benefits of fish consumption on a developing fetus are clear. In a Harvard study of 135 mothers and infants, researchers tracked fish consumption during pregnancy and tested the mother’s hair to measure her mercury exposure. They found that for each weekly serving of fish the mother ate while pregnant, her baby’s score on visual recognition memory tests increased an average of four points. At the same time, a baby’s score dropped by 7.5 points for every one part per million increase in mercury found in the mother’s hair sample. The babies who scored highest on the memory tests were those whose mothers had consumed two or more servings of fish each week during their pregnancy, but were tested to have very low mercury levels.

Health officials have long worried about balancing warnings about mercury against the obvious benefits of consuming more fish. Currently fewer than one in five Americans eats the recommended two servings a week of fish. About one-third eat one serving of seafood weekly and nearly half of us eats very little seafood or none at all.

This fall Consumer Reports issued a lengthy paper on fish and mercury exposure, noting the special concerns about canned tuna due to its popularity. Six ounces of canned tuna contains 60 micrograms of mercury compared to just 4 micrograms of mercury in a six-ounce serving of salmon, according to Consumer Reports. (A six-ounce serving of swordfish contains 170 micrograms, the magazine said. )

For people who want to safely eat more seafood, the magazine recommended shrimp, scallops, sardines, salmon, oysters, squid and tilapia as the lowest-mercury seafood. Also low are haddock, pollock, flounder and sole, Atlantic croaker, crawfish, catfish, trout, Atlantic mackerel, crab and mullet. In addition to the usual warnings about high mercury fish, Consumer Reports added marlin and orange roughy to the list. They suggested limiting consumption of grouper, Chilean sea bass, bluefish, halibut, black cod, Spanish mackerel and fresh tuna.

To find out more about mercury in seafood, go to the Got Mercury? calculator created by the Sea Turtle Island Restoration Network at seaturtles.org/programs/mercury/.

 

 For more fitness, food and wellness news, “like” our Facebook page.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story cites the 2005 study on the benefits (and risks) of fish consumption during pregnancy. It also links to the relevant report from the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee, and to the current FDA and EPA advisories on fish consumption. Overall, we think the treatment of the evidence was satisfactory, but we’d like to have seen more detail. As noted above, we’d like to see the evidence suggesting that tuna specifically is better for health than other fish species. And while the 2005 study is a good example, it’s just one small piece of evidence among many that have been collected on this topic. What kinds of studies are these? What are their strengths limitations? Delving deeper into those details would perhaps help illuminate why there’s so much controversy on this topic.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 14, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A weight-loss pill called lorcaserin not only helps people drop pounds but does so with few side effects, new industry-funded research reports.

A potential player in fighting the obesity epidemic, lorcaserin is a new type of weight-loss drug that works by acting on serotonin, a chemical associated with feelings of well-being and feeling full, and does not appear to increase blood pressure or cause any other heart problems, according to the researchers, whose work was sponsored by the drug manufacturer.

"In this long-term study of lorcaserin for treating patients for obesity, there was good weight loss, outstanding safety profile and the drug was extremely well-tolerated," said lead researcher Dr. Steven Smith from the Translational Research Institute for Metabolism and Diabetes in Winter Park, Fla.

"As patients are looking for additional options and physicians are looking for new tools, [lorcaserin] provides us with a look into the future for what's going to be available for helping patients lose weight," he added.

The report is published in the July 15 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, and was sponsored by Arena Pharmaceuticals, of San Diego, Calif., which used its own doctors as part of the study group.

The drug is one of three new anti-obesity drugs being considered for approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. On Thursday, an FDA advisory panel is expected to review Qnexa, made by Vivus, from a combination of phentermine and topiramate. It helped patients in clinical trials lose as much as 13 percent to 15 percent of body weight.

FDA briefing documents posted online Tuesday acknowledged Qnexa's effectiveness in helping patients lose weight, but said the review panel should take into account a number of potential nervous system and psychiatric side effects, the Associated Press reported.

The third new drug is Orexigen Therapeutic's Contrave, which is a combination of the antidepressant Wellbutrin and the addiction drug naltrexone.

For the lorcaserin study, Smith's team randomly assigned 3,182 obese or overweight people to lorcaserin or placebo. Patients took lorcaserin twice a day for a year and also took part in diet and exercise counseling.

After one year, 47.5 percent of those taking lorcaserin had lost 5 percent or more of their body weight. "That's about 20 pounds," Smith said.

Among those taking the placebo, only 20.3 percent had achieved that amount of weight loss, the researchers found.

After the first year, people taking lorcaserin were randomized to lorcaserin or placebo for an additional year. Among people who stayed on lorcaserin, 67.9 percent were able to maintain the weight loss they had seen in the first year. Among those who were switched to a placebo, 50.3 percent were able to maintain their weight loss, Smith's group reported.

Smith's team noted that for those taking lorcaserin, there was no increase in heart valve problems as had been seen with the discredited diet drug Fen-Phen. However, common side effects included headache, dizziness and nausea.

Dr. Arne Astrup, from the department of human nutrition at the University of Copenhagen in Denmark and author of an accompanying journal editorial, said that "the trial on lorcaserin provides evidence of a safe weight-loss medication, that seems to provide benefits in terms of reducing risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease."

Also, it does not have the same problems as the previous weight-loss drugs, Fen-Phen (Phentermine), Acomplia (rimonabant) or Meridia (sibutramine), which had been associated with heart problems, he said.

"If weight-loss drugs are tailor-made to hit only the right receptor, based on physiological knowledge, it seems to be possible to develop weight-loss medications that do not possess any serious adverse effects," Astrup added.

However, one expert was not sold on this new drug.

"What's most impressive about this two-year clinical trial is how unimpressive it is," said Dr. David L. Katz, director of the Prevention Research Center at Yale University School of Medicine.

Nearly half of the people dropped out in the first year, he pointed out, and by year two, more than half the remainder had also dropped out.

"Among those who remained, lorcaserin produced relatively modest weight loss when combined with diet and exercise counseling, and that weight loss was maintained in over half of the participants only so long as they kept taking the drug. And the paper made no mention of the costs attached to long-term pharmacotherapy," Katz added.

"This close look at lorcaserin reaffirms that better daily use of feet and forks holds far greater promise for meaningful, sustainable and affordable weight control than pharmacotherapy," Katz said.

According to the Associated Press, lorcaserin will be reviewed by an FDA panel in September, and Contrave will be reviewed in December.

For more on losing weight, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There’s a troubling sentence in this story that doesn’t appear in the other coverage, "The report is published in the July 15 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, and was sponsored by Arena Pharmaceuticals, of San Diego, Calif., which used its own doctors as part of the study group." If that’s true, that is something that should have been explored, at least in a sentence or two. Doctors studying themselves seems to defy the whole concept of a double-blind, placebo-controlled, purely scientific study. At the same time, this story does a better job than the other two of making sense of the research for three reasons. 
Despite our feelings that the limitations of the study could have been emphasized even more, we’ll judge this one satisfactory – especially in light of the competition. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A simple blood test may help gauge prognosis and tailor treatments for women who have been diagnosed with early stage breast cancer.

The test, described in the June 6 online edition of The Lancet Oncology, measures how many tumor cells are circulating in the blood. In the new study, if even one cell was detected in the bloodstream, a woman had a greater chance of her cancer recurring and of dying.

"This may help with prognosis and staging of the cancer and, in the future, with targets for breast cancer treatments," said study lead author Dr. Anthony Lucci, a professor of surgery at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston.

Commenting on the findings, Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said, "We are moving into a state where we're looking at a person's individual tumor and this is another way to do that, potentially leading to treatment."

Whether or not cancer has spread to the lymph nodes is currently the best way to predict survival in women with breast cancer. Even so, a substantial number of patients whose cancer has not spread to the lymph nodes will have a recurrence while some of those who do have lymph-node involvement won't relapse.

Blood tests similar to the one investigated in this study have been found to be useful to gauge how well patients who already have metastatic cancer will do.

For this study, researchers counted circulating tumor cells in 302 breast cancer patients who were about to undergo surgery but who hadn't yet received chemotherapy.

Circulating tumor cells were detectable in about one-quarter of the participants, the investigators found. Fifteen percent of these individuals had a relapse and 10 percent died during a five-year follow-up, compared with 3 percent and 2 percent, respectively, of patients who did not have circulating tumor cells.

The more tumor cells a woman had in her bloodstream, the higher the likelihood of relapsing or dying, according to the report.

Although the test may not be far off in terms of clinical practice, "we need additional studies," Lucci said.

One area for study is how well these circulating cells predict recurrence and death in patients who have already had chemotherapy.

Currently, the American Society of Clinical Oncology does not recommend that clinicians measure circulating tumor cells in patients.

And in an accompanying comment article, Justin Stebbing, a professor in the department of surgery and cancer at Imperial College in London, said that "despite increasing evidence supporting the use of [circulating tumor cells] as biomarkers, how this information can be integrated into present practice is uncertain."

According to Bernik, though, "it makes sense that women who have circulating tumor cells would potentially be at higher risk of distant disease at some later date."

The problem is that just having circulating tumor cells may not be enough information to foretell the future, she noted.

"The cells also need to have a propensity to grow elsewhere," she said. "Not every cancer cell becomes a metastatic cancer cell. Hopefully, gaining the ability to tell which cells are more likely to spread potentially could guide therapy," Bernik added.

According to Lucci, circulating tumor cells are also showing promise in predicting melanoma prognosis, so the method may be "effective in several different tumor systems."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There was adequate discussion of the evidence – and the limitations of the evidence at this point.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Low-dose lithium reduced involuntary motor movements - the troubling side effect of the medication most commonly used to treat Parkinson's disease (PD) - in a mouse model of the condition that is diagnosed in about 60,000 Americans each year. The third in a series of studies from the Andersen lab involving PD and low-dose lithium, the results add to mounting evidence that low-doses of the psychotropic drug could benefit patients suffering from the incurable, degenerative condition.

This study, published online in Brain Research, involved Parkinsonian mice that were given Carbidopa/Levodopa (sold as Sinemet®), a drug used to boost levels of the neurotransmitter dopamine, which is lost in PD. While the medication remains the single most effective agent in the management of PD symptoms, long-term use causes its own side effects, among them abnormal involuntary movements or AIMS. Buck professor and senior scientist Julie Andersen, PhD, says AIMS become problematic for 30 percent of patients after four to six years of treatment with Sinemet, with 90 percent of patients suffering from the complication after nine years of chronic use. "For patients these side effects are just as devastating as the freezing that is associated with PD." "In our mice we saw significant behavioral improvement."

In this study, Andersen and her team dosed the mice with an amount of lithium equivalent to about a quarter of what humans receive for the treatment of psychiatric diseases. Researchers found that lithium boosted the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase which increases dopamine synthesis via the inhibition of calpain-1, an enzyme that normally reduces dopamine synthesis.

In earlier studies, Andersen's team found that low-dose lithium was protective in two different mouse models of PD. Treatment in mice with a human mutation for PD began when the animals reached late middle-age, the human equivalent of about 60, which is the average age of onset of Parkinson's in humans. "We clearly saw a prevention of the motor difficulties we would expect to see in the animals," said Andersen. "The treatment also protected the area of the brain that is normally damaged by Parkinson's."

Plans for a clinical trial of low-dose lithium for PD patients are in early stages. "This study suggests potential therapeutic benefit in PD," said David K. Simon, MD, PhD, Associate Professor of Neurology at Harvard Medical School in Boston. Simon chairs the Scientific Review Committee for the Parkinson's Study Group, a not-for-profit network of Parkinson's Centers. "One caveat is that other agents that have shown clear efficacy in this model of PD have subsequently failed to show benefit in clinical studies in PD (e.g. CoQ10, creatine, and pioglitazone). However, this study provides additional evidence on top of prior work from Dr. Andersen's lab and others that lithium may have therapeutic potential in PD, which is a hypothesis that should be tested in clinical trials," he said.

Lithium is a naturally occurring element, not a 'developed' molecule like most medications. It was approved by the FDA for the treatment of bipolar disorder in 1970 and has shown to be effective for treating mood disorders and suicidal thoughts. Previous studies suggest that at low doses lithium has a protective effect in other neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's and Huntington's.

Citation: The combination of lithium and L-Dopa/Carbidopa reduces MPTP-induced abnormal involuntary movements (AIMs) via calpain-1 inhibition in a mouse model: relevance for Parkinson's disease therapy.

This work was supported by grants from National Institutes of Health 5P20GM103653-02; RL! NS062415

Other Buck Institute contributors include: Rebecca R. Riley and Anand Rane. Corresponding author Y. Hwan Kim, a former member of the Andersen lab, is now in the Department of Biological Sciences, Delaware State University, Carol A. Lazzara, from Delaware State University also contributed to the work.

The Buck Institute is the U.S.'s first independent research organization devoted to Geroscience - focused on the connection between normal aging and chronic disease. Based in Novato, CA, The Buck is dedicated to extending "Healthspan", the healthy years of human life and does so utilizing a unique interdisciplinary approach involving laboratories studying the mechanisms of aging and those focused on specific diseases. Buck scientists strive to discover new ways of detecting, preventing and treating age-related diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, cancer, cardiovascular disease, macular degeneration, osteoporosis, diabetes and stroke. In their collaborative research, they are supported by the most recent developments in genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics and stem cell technologies. For more information: http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: On its own, the headline of this news release is misleading: “Low-dose lithium reduces side effects from most common treatment for Parkinson’s disease.” Any reader would take this to mean that we’re talking about humans with Parkinson’s disease, when the research was done in mice with an induced form of the disease. That being said, we applaud the release for clarifying in the very first sentence that we’re talking about mice — something that’s not often done in news releases. We also think the excellent comments of Dr. Simon provided some clarity and placed the study into the right context.  “This study suggests potential therapeutic benefit in PD…..One caveat is that other agents that have shown clear efficacy in this model of PD have subsequently failed to show benefit in clinical studies in PD (e.g. CoQ10, creatine, and pioglitazone). However, this study provides additional evidence on top of prior work from Dr. Andersen’s lab and others that lithium may have therapeutic potential in PD, which is a hypothesis that should be tested in clinical trials,” So, although the headline alone would be given an unsatisfactory rating, the immediate and extensive clarifications about the quality of evidence saved the day.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Tens of thousands of kids may benefit from cholesterol-lowering medication, but no one would know because screening guidelines exclude too many children, U.S. doctors said Monday.

In a report published in the journal Pediatrics, they call for screening of all children, expanding one set of current recommendations that target only those whose parents or grandparents have heart disease or high cholesterol. Another existing set of guidelines doesn’t call for screening in any children.

Screening all children would “identify a number of children who are of very significant risk of premature heart disease,” said Dr. William Neal of West Virginia University in Morgantown, who led the new study.

Neal said treating youth with cholesterol-lowering drugs, the so-called statins, would curb the risk that they went on to develop heart problems in middle age. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Western world.

Based on data from West Virginia, Neal and colleagues found that more than one percent of all fifth-graders had cholesterol levels that warranted drug treatment. But a third of those children didn’t have relatives with heart disease or high cholesterol, and so wouldn’t have been screened under the current guidelines, issued by the government’s National Cholesterol Education Program.

“I have gradually become convinced that universal screening in children is not only preferable, but necessary,” said Neal. He added that although universal screening would be expensive, it would save a lot of money later on if heart disease could be prevented.

But not all scientists agree that screening is a good idea. For example, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, currently doesn’t recommend routine cholesterol screening in any children.

“Unfortunately, there is no evidence that starting a ten-year-old on cholesterol-lowering drugs will prevent heart disease 40 years later,” said Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, a member of the task force.

He said statin treatment in children was still controversial, and that no long-term safety data existed.

The new study tapped into data from more than 20,000 children who had been screened at public schools in West Virginia over five years.

More than seven in 10 school kids had first-degree relatives with heart disease, and about one percent of those had “bad” cholesterol (LDL cholesterol) levels that might require drug treatment in addition to diet changes and exercise, according to the researchers.

Yet among the kids without heart disease in their family, the percentage of children who might benefit from treatment was closer to two percent than to one, meaning that family history didn’t seem to make a difference.

“It is therefore prudent to implement universal screening in the pediatric population independent of family history,” the researchers conclude.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>




The story reports that the results are based on data from screening more than 20,000 school children in West Virginia. However, it does not discuss whether the results from this one state can be applied to the nation as a whole. The story also includes a clear statement from an independent expert that points out that there is no evidence that treating high cholesterol in children prevents heart disease later in life, thus helping readers to distinguish between a lab test result (elevated cholesterol) and an actual health outcome (heart disease.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DURHAM, N.C. - Most high-risk lung cancer patients might not need annual low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) screenings if they are cleared of disease in their initial test, according to a study led by a Duke Cancer Institute researcher.

The researchers found that even former heavy smokers appear to have a reduced incidence of lung cancer if their initial LDCT screening is negative, suggesting that less frequent screening might be warranted.

"This has significant public policy implications," said Edward F. Patz, Jr., M.D., the James and Alice Chen Professor of Radiology at Duke and lead author of a study published online March 21, 2016 in The Lancet Oncology journal. "Not screening patients annually could save millions in health care costs and spare patients the radiation exposure and the downstream effects of false positive screenings."

Patz and colleagues analyzed data from the National Lung Screening Trial, a large prospective study that randomly assigned former smokers to either receive three annual low-dose CT scans or three chest radiographs for the early detection of lung cancer. Patients were ages 55-74 who had smoked for the equivalent of 30 years (one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years, etc.).

The researchers identified study participants in the CT-scan group whose initial screening was negative. They then compared those patients to other CT-scan recipients whose screenings detected an abnormality to assess any differences in lung cancer incidence and lung cancer-specific deaths.

Of the initial 19,066 participants with a negative initial LDCT scan, 444 (2 percent) were diagnosed with lung cancer at the time of the last available follow-up. In the first year after a negative screen and before the scheduled first annual screen, 17 patients (0.09 percent of all initial negative LDCT participants) were diagnosed with lung cancer.

An additional 75 patients (0.4 percent of the initial negative group) were diagnosed with lung cancer between the first and second annual screening. The incidence of lung cancer at the first screen among those who were initially negative was 0.34 percent, compared to 1 percent of patients who were diagnosed during the baseline screening.

The researchers determined that eliminating the first annual screening after the initial negative test might have resulted in, at most, an additional 28 lung cancer deaths in the LDCT group (186 vs. 212 deaths per 100,000 per years) over the course of the study.

"Our analysis suggests that annual screens may not be warranted for patients who have had an initial negative scan, and future risk prediction and cost-effectiveness models could incorporate these data to improve screening guidelines," Patz said.

He added that improving the accuracy of LDCT screening for lung cancer would also significantly reduce the number of annual screens. Nearly 40 percent of LDCT patients in the National Lung Screening Trial had false positives sometime during the seven years the study examined

In addition to Patz, study authors include Erin Greco, Constantine Gatsonis, Paul Pinsky, Barnett S. Kramer, and Denise R. Aberle.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job describing how the researchers achieved their findings, the demographics of the patients involved, and the absolute numbers for outcomes (the small number of patients who encountered cancer following a clear initial CT scan). The release says that the researchers examined data taken from a large prospective study. It would have been good to spell out for readers that this study was retrospective — a re-analysis of components of a larger randomized controlled trial. The news release does allude to some of the limitations of the research stated in the discussion section of the published results. For example, the release makes note of the high incidence of false positives inherent in screening tests. The published report also states that the study could not clearly discern whether the low incidence of tumors in the group studied was due to early, slow growing tumors (“a direct effect of indolent biological behaviour”) or to volunteers being resistant to tobacco-induced lung injury. The lead study author is quoted in the release saying “improving the accuracy of LDCT screening for lung cancer would also significantly reduce the number of annual screens.”
Taken on the whole, we give the release a Satisfactory for this criteria.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
More than 35 million Americans are trying to quit smoking. Smoking cigarettes causes 480,000 premature deaths each year due mainly to a two-fold risk of cardiovascular disease and a 20-fold risk of lung cancer. In a commentary published in the current issue of the American Journal of Medicine, researchers from the Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine at Florida Atlantic University reassure clinicians and their patients that varenicline, whose brand name is Chantix, is a safe and effective way to achieve smoking cessation and that failure to use this drug has caused preventable heart attacks and deaths from cardiovascular disease.

In 2006, varenicline was approved as a safe and effective means to quit smoking and achieved permanent quit rates of approximately 25 percent. In 2009, however, varenicline received a black box warning by the FDA based on their adverse event reports of neuropsychiatric symptoms like depression and thoughts of suicide.

There were plausible alternative explanations including that nearly half of the subjects had psychiatric histories, 42 percent were taking psychotropic drugs and about 42 percent were suffering from depression. Nonetheless, since then, there has been a 76 percent decline in the number of prescriptions dispensed from a peak of about 2 million in the last quarter of 2007 to about 531,000 in the first quarter of 2014.

In their commentary, the FAU researchers emphasize that, until recently, the totality of randomized evidence on varenicline had been restricted to eight small trials, which did not demonstrate a hazard. The researchers caution that the reliable detection of small to moderate risks and benefits of drug therapies requires cogent data from large-scale randomized trials designed a priori to test the hypothesis.

Such a large randomized trial was recently completed that included both apparently healthy individuals as well as those with severe mental illness. The trial was conducted for 12 weeks on about 8,000 long-term smokers and included equal subgroups of those without as well as with psychiatric disorders. In subjects without psychiatric disorders, those treated with varenicline had less neuropsychiatric symptoms and in subjects without psychiatric disorders there were no increases in these symptoms. Both groups of participants assigned at random to varenicline achieved significantly higher abstinence rates at 12 weeks than those assigned to placebo, nicotine patch or bupropion. Just a few months ago, the FDA removed the black box warning from varenicline.

The commentary was coauthored by Dianna Gaballa, a fourth-year medical student; Joanna Drowos, D.O., M.P.H., an associate professor of integrated medical science and associate chair of the Department of Integrated Medical Science; and Charles H. Hennekens, M.D., Dr.P.H., the first Sir Richard Doll Professor and senior academic advisor to the dean, all in FAU's Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine.

"The existing totality of evidence suggests an urgent need to increase the use of varenicline in the general population as well as in those with serious mental illness who on average die about 20 years earlier than the general population, in part, because their smoking rates may be as high as 75 percent," said Hennekens.

Quitting smoking significantly reduces risks of cardiovascular disease beginning within a matter of months and reaching the non-smoker status within a few years, even among older adults. For lung and other cancers, however, reductions do not even begin to emerge for years after quitting and, even after 10 years, quitters achieve death rates only about midway between the continuing smoker and non-smoker.

"For reducing risks of cardiovascular disease it's never too late to quit, but to reduce risks of cancer, it's never too early," said Hennekens.

The authors speculate that if use of varenicline had not plummeted by 76 percent following the black box warning in 2009, perhaps 17,000 premature deaths from cardiovascular disease may have been avoided each year during the last few years. Public health efforts and effective cessation treatments including behavioral counseling and medication have resulted in a 14 percent decrease in smoking in the U.S. while the rates are markedly increasing in developing countries.

According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, heart disease is the leading killer among men and women causing approximately 600,000 deaths each year.

Among the numerous honors and recognitions Hennekens has received include the Ochsner Award for reducing premature deaths from cigarettes in 2014. From 1995 to 2005, Science Watch ranked him as the third most widely cited medical researcher in the world and five of the top 20 were his former trainees and/or fellows. In 2012, Science Heroes ranked Hennekens No. 81 in the history of the world for having saved more than 1.1 million lives. In 2016, he was ranked the No. 14 "Top Scientist in the World" with an H-index of 173.

About the Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine:

FAU's Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine is one of 145 accredited medical schools in the U.S. The college was launched in 2010, when the Florida Board of Governors made a landmark decision authorizing FAU to award the M.D. degree. After receiving approval from the Florida legislature and the governor, it became the 134th allopathic medical school in North America. With more than 70 full and part-time faculty and more than 1,300 affiliate faculty, the college matriculates 64 medical students each year and has been nationally recognized for its innovative curriculum. To further FAU's commitment to increase much needed medical residency positions in Palm Beach County and to ensure that the region will continue to have an adequate and well-trained physician workforce, the FAU Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine Consortium for Graduate Medical Education (GME) was formed in fall 2011 with five leading hospitals in Palm Beach County. In June 2014, FAU's College of Medicine welcomed its inaugural class of 36 residents in its first University-sponsored residency in internal medicine.

Florida Atlantic University, established in 1961, officially opened its doors in 1964 as the fifth public university in Florida. Today, the University, with an annual economic impact of $6.3 billion, serves more than 30,000 undergraduate and graduate students at sites throughout its six-county service region in southeast Florida. FAU's world-class teaching and research faculty serves students through 10 colleges: the Dorothy F. Schmidt College of Arts and Letters, the College of Business, the College for Design and Social Inquiry, the College of Education, the College of Engineering and Computer Science, the Graduate College, the Harriet L. Wilkes Honors College, the Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, the Christine E. Lynn College of Nursing and the Charles E. Schmidt College of Science. FAU is ranked as a High Research Activity institution by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. The University is placing special focus on the rapid development of critical areas that form the basis of its strategic plan: Healthy aging, biotech, coastal and marine issues, neuroscience, regenerative medicine, informatics, lifespan and the environment. These areas provide opportunities for faculty and students to build upon FAU's existing strengths in research and scholarship. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release is focused on a commentary, and it makes that clear. Commentaries are, effectively, opinion pieces — and we bore that in mind when reviewing this release. The commentary does rely, in large part, on the EAGLES study, and the release does a fair job of providing an overview of the study design. While the release does not address the shortcomings charged by the study’s critics, we would not necessarily expect to see that in a piece designed to promote a commentary. What’s more, that’s an issue we raised above under the “harms” criterion, and we don’t want to ding the piece for the same thing twice.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Oct. 6, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Cancer patients who have ovarian tissue removed and stored for later transplantation have a chance at a successful pregnancy, a new study finds.

Powerful chemotherapy and radiation treatments for cancer can impair a woman's fertility. This new study shows that ovarian tissue transplants are safe and effective and pose little risk of the cancer coming back, the Danish researchers said.

"This procedure is gaining ground worldwide as an optional fertility treatment for fertile female cancer patients who after cancer treatment most likely will be infertile," said lead researcher Dr. Annette Jensen, from the Laboratory of Reproductive Biology at Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen.

With this procedure, many women who survive cancer should be able to become pregnant and have healthy children, Jensen said.

Of 32 women who had ovarian tissue frozen and transplanted in this study, 10 women -- or 31 percent -- had a child, she said.

Many young cancer patients today can expect to live a normal lifespan. Their focus shifts from survival to quality-of-life, explained senior researcher Dr. Claus Yding Andersen, a professor of human reproductive physiology at the University of Copenhagen. "Here, fertility is very important to many young women," he said.

"The tissue restores ovarian organ function, and women regain menstrual cycles and sex hormone levels that will avoid menopause," Andersen added.

Dr. Avner Hershlag, chief of the Center for Human Reproduction at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., called the new research "innovative and exciting."

Simultaneous advances in cancer treatment and reproductive medicine have made these scientific leaps possible, he said.

However, Hershlag said he would like to see a pregnancy rate above 31 percent. "The pregnancy rate with frozen embryos is close to 50 percent, and results are getting better," he said, referring to another option for women hoping for a future pregnancy. "It remains to be seen which method is better."

The Danish report was published Oct. 7 in the journal Human Reproduction.

For the study, the researchers reviewed the outcomes of 53 transplantations of thawed ovarian tissue in 41 Danish women. The investigators followed the women for 10 years, looking at ovarian function, fertility and safety.

The women's average age when the tissue was removed and frozen was nearly 30. Average age of the first transplant was 33.

Thirty-two of the women attempted pregnancy. Ten were successful and had at least one child -- 14 children in all.

Eight children were conceived naturally, and six with the help of in vitro fertilization, the researchers reported.

Two women had abortions, one because she was separating from her partner and the other because her breast cancer recurred. Another woman had a miscarriage, the researchers said.

For three of the mothers, more than 10 years had passed since the ovarian tissue transplantation. In six cases, it was more than eight years. And for 15 of the women, transplantation had taken place more than five years earlier, the researchers said.

Although three women had a relapse of their cancer, these relapses did not appear related to the tissue transplantation. And no cancer developed in the transplanted tissue, Jensen said.

"So some of these women will still be able to have more children and avoid menopausal symptoms," she said, noting two more pregnancies have been reported to her laboratory since the study's publication.

Not all women are eligible for ovarian tissue transplants, however. "In particular, we have not performed transplants in patients who have suffered from leukemia, because the ovarian tissue may harbor cancer cells," Jensen said.

For more on fertility and cancer treatments, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of outlining the evidence. We are glad that the story included details about how many patients required fertility treatments after receiving their own tissue back years after its removal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATLANTA (Reuters) - A noninvasive procedure that freezes and kills problem-causing heart tissue was nearly 10 times better at eliminating a potentially serious heart rhythm disorder than conventional anti-arrhythmic drugs, researchers said on Monday.

A clinical trial of Medtronic Inc’s (MDT.N) cryoablation system looked at 245 patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, a condition marked by intermittent episodes of abnormal heart rhythm that causes the upper chambers of the heart to quiver.

A small pilot study funded by St. Jude Medical Inc STJ.N compared the two therapies in a sicker population of patients and also found that the procedure worked better than drugs.

Atrial fibrillation is the most common heart disorder, affecting 2.2 million Americans and 10 million people worldwide. It significantly raises the risk of stroke.

Patients in the Medtronic-sponsored trial who underwent the cryoablation procedure — which involves using a catheter to freeze away the heart tissue where the problem originates — was just as safe as drugs used to treat the condition and far more effective, meeting the study’s primary goal of eliminating atrial fibrillation one year after the procedure.

Dubbed Stop-af, the Medtronic trial showed that almost 70 percent of patients who had cryoablation remained free of the condition after one year, compared with just 7 percent of patients who received drug therapy, according to data presented at the American College of Cardiology meeting in Atlanta.

“This is the best data we have at this point in support of cryoablation (to treat atrial fibrillation),” said Dr. Douglas Packer of Mayo Clinic, the lead investigator of the study.

Over 3 percent of patients treated by cryoablation experienced a serious condition — a narrowing of the pulmonary vein in 7 out of 228 patients, one of whom required another procedure to widen the vein.

Damage or irritation to the nerve that controls the diaphragm was reported in 11 percent of the cryoablation procedures, but none of the cases was considered serious, with 98 percent resolved by the 12-month follow-up.

Complications related to the atrial fibrillation itself were also monitored. During the follow-up period, 97 percent of patients who got the procedure and 92 percent of the drug therapy patients did not suffer heart attack, stroke or death.

Less than 1 percent of patients treated with cryoablation were hospitalized for a recurrence of the disease, compared with 6 percent in the drug group.

Patients in the pilot study had advanced atrial fibrillation and tended to have other medical problems, such as high blood pressure, diabetes or coronary artery disease,

Packer, who also led the pilot study, dubbed Cabana, acknowledged that the main limitation of this study was its small size, but said it lays the foundation for a larger one.

He said the larger study, which will include 180 centers, is currently enrolling patients.

Anti-arrhythmic drugs eliminate atrial fibrillation in about half of all patients but can have adverse side effects.

Cryoablation is an alternative that is growing in popularity. Over the past decade, more patients have been referred for ablation procedures when drugs proved ineffective.

Catheter ablation involves inserting a thin tube into a blood vessel, usually through a site in the upper leg or neck, and then threading it though the body until it reaches the heart. When it reaches the area of the heart that causes abnormal rhythms, the tissue is ablated, or destroyed.

The procedure has been used to treat arrhythmias for years. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration initially cleared ablation catheters to treat arrhythmias, such as atrial flutter, but not atrial fibrillation.

Only Johnson & Johnson (JNJ.N) has an ablation device approved by U.S. health regulators specifically to treat atrial fibrillation.

The Medtronic device, which the company added to its portfolio with the 2008 acquisition of CryoCath, has been approved in Europe and Australia.

Medtronic shares were up 3.7 percent to $45.55 in late-morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There was adequate discussion of the evidence and that the main limitation of this study was its small size. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
As The Early Show medical correspondent Dr. Emily Senay explained Tuesday, calcium provides the building blocks necessary to make sure bones are dense and strong. Getting enough calcium early in life can reduce the risk of fracture and the bone-weakening condition osteoporosis later on.

Calcium supplements and vitamin D are regularly prescribed for bone health in post-menopausal women, who are at higher risk of osteoporosis as their estrogen levels decline.

Researchers raised new questions earlier this year about the effectiveness of calcium supplements when a study found only modest results in increasing bone mass for older women who took the supplements.

Now, says Senay, a study in the Archives of Internal Medicine shows calcium supplements do reduce the risk of fractures in elderly women, but only among those who take them regularly.

Researchers studied the effect of 600-milligram calcium supplements twice a day on women over 70 and found that only those women who took 80 percent or more of their pills were less likely to experience fractures. These women showed about a 10 percent chance of fracture, compared with 15 percent.

More than half of the women took their pills as directed, but women who didn't take them regularly had the same risk of fracture as those who took a dummy pill.

The message here, Senay says, is that calcium supplements are useful for bone health — but you should only take them if you do so regularly, as directed by a doctor.

The study earlier this year also found that women who took supplements regularly reduced their chance of fracture more than those who didn't.

Calcium recommendations vary according to age. The National Academy of Sciences says adults between 19 and 50 years old need 1,000 milligrams of calcium each day. Adults over 50 need 1,200 milligrams per day.

Four hundred international units of vitamin D are also recommended each day to help the body absorb calcium. It's important to note that calcium intakes on food labels are based on adult requirements of 1,000 milligrams per day. Anyone over 50 will need an additional 200 milligrams. The maximum recommended intake of calcium is 2,500 milligrams.

Remember, Senay urged: Most people can achieve the recommended calcium intake by eating three or four servings of dairy products and other foods that contain calcium per day. Supplements are an additional tool to be used when needed.

Other ways women can protect their bones as they age include weight-bearing exercise, and osteoporosis drugs for women at high risk for fractures. The drugs help them maintain strong bones

.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does provide information about the nature of the study being reported. The story explains that this was a large, controlled trial and that benefits of calcium were found only in the compliant group, not in the overall study sample. The story also explains why these results are different from recent results from the Women’s Health Initiative.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- An intrauterine device that releases a progestin hormone may be an effective treatment for younger women with early-stage uterine cancer, Italian researchers report.

By delaying a total hysterectomy, which is the usual treatment for endometrial cancer, the IUD allows women to remain fertile and possibly to have families, according to the study published online Wednesday in Annals of Oncology, the monthly journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology.

"The study was done to see if this was a viable option for younger women who want to preserve fertility," said Dr. Jamie Bakkum-Gamez, senior associate consultant in the division of gynecologic surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. "We see it as buying more time to have a family and, once that's completed, to have a hysterectomy."

"It's a very important trial," added Dr. Angeles Alvarez Secord, associate professor of gynecologic oncology at Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center in Durham, N.C. "I've been using [the IUD] clinically for several years now for this purpose in patients who desire future fertility and some patients who cannot undergo surgery or who are at high risk for surgical complications. It's a fantastic alternative to treat patients with these diseases, and this study will help doctors when they discuss [treatment options] with patients."

Bakkum-Gomez has also used the method in her practice and is conducting a study of the IUD, which was originally designed as a contraceptive device, for this purpose.

About 3 percent to 5 percent of women who get endometrial cancer, which affects the womb lining, are under the age of 40 and will lose their fertility if they undergo a hysterectomy. The majority of these women have not yet had children, according to background information in the article.

Although the IUD is not yet approved to treat endometrial cancer, it is approved and widely used to treat endometriosis and abnormal uterine bleeding.

While hysterectomy or removal of the uterus is the accepted treatment for this kind of cancer, doctors have been using the hormone in oral form for the past 20 years, but only for "well-selected groups of women," said Dr. Elizabeth Poynor, a gynecologic oncologist and pelvic surgeon with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Well selected," in this case, means those with early-stage disease who want to maintain their fertility, much like the group in this trial.

Oral hormone treatment to slow down the cancer's growth is a systemic therapy, however, and can have adverse side effects such as skin rashes, nausea and vomiting, headaches and abnormal uterine bleeding, according to background material accompanying the study.

The theoretical -- but still unproven -- advantage to this new IUD method, Poynor said, is that "there is a lower risk of systemic side effects . . . and that you may be giving higher doses of the drug directly into the uterus."

The authors followed 20 Italian patients from January 1996 to June 2009 with atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH), which often precedes the cancer, and 14 women with early-stage endometrial cancer confined to the inner layer of the womb.

Participants -- all of whom were between ages 20 and 40 -- had an IUD known as Mirena, which released levonorgestrel, inserted for a year. They also received monthly injections of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which halts estrogen production, for six months.

The IUD was removed at the end of the year if there was no evidence of cancer.

Ninety-five percent of women with AEH initially saw their lesions disappear completely, while 57.1 percent of women with early-stage cancer also responded completely to the treatment. (The disease progressed in one of the women with AEH and four of the women with early-stage cancer.)

Of the patients with AEH, four later relapsed and required further treatment; of the women with early-stage cancer, two who had an initial complete response relapsed. However, all the women were alive and seemingly cancer-free by the end of the study after further treatment (either the IUD and GnRH treatment or a hysterectomy), the study reported.

"They did show a higher recurrence or progression rate with endometrial cancer than with AEH and that is consistent with other data," said Bakkum-Gamez, who added that the IUD method would not be appropriate for later-stage cancers, which tend to be more aggressive.

No adverse effects from treatment were noted, according to the researchers, who declared no conflicts of interest.

In background material, the researchers stated the progestin-releasing IUD should be effective in treating AEH and also early endometrial cancer, as long as those patients were evaluated with laparoscopy, ultrasound and MRI to make sure their cancer had not spread and there was no simultaneous ovarian cancer.

Nine of the women in the study successfully delivered babies.

The National Cancer Institute has more on endometrial cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provides important details about the current study that help the reader evaluate the strength of the evidence. It even emphasizes that the new treatment approach is "still uNPRoven". 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Hochman presented the results yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart Association in Chicago. The study was also published online yesterday by The New England Journal of Medicine and will appear in the Dec. 7 issue.

Her report is the latest warning from researchers who suspect that stents are being overused and may even be causing heart attacks and deaths. Manufacturers sell $6 billion in stents a year, and hospitals charge $10,000 to $15,000 per patient to implant them.

The devices, which came into widespread use in the 1990s, are made of either bare metal or metal coated with a drug meant to help keep the artery from closing again. Recent studies have found that drug-coated stents can increase the risk of blood clots, even years after they are implanted.

Use of the drug-coated stents has fallen since last spring, but they still account for more than 80 percent of stents implanted in the United States.

Stents have been increasingly used in people with clogged arteries who are not having heart attacks, but some studies suggest that those patients would be better off taking drugs to reduce cholesterol, inflammation and clotting. The reasoning is that artery disease tends to be systemic and extensive, but stents can treat it only in tiny spots.

A million Americans a year have heart attacks, and half of them die, according to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. A common symptom is severe pain in the chest, left arm, jaw or back, but about a third of patients do not have chest pain. Symptoms may also include feeling faint, sweaty, short of breath or nauseated and having a sensation that the heart is pounding.

Clots are often the cause of heart attacks, and health authorities urge people with symptoms to go to the hospital immediately so that doctors can use balloons and stents, or clot-dissolving drugs, to try to prevent heart damage. But some patients do not realize what is happening, or do not want to believe it.

About a million angioplasties a year are performed in the United States, including those in heart attack victims and those in people with blocked arteries who have not had heart attacks. The study did not address the use of angioplasty and stents in people who have not had heart attacks.

Dr. Hochman emphasized that angioplasty was still the best treatment for many heart attack patients who go to the hospital early, within 12 hours of when the attack began. The people who generally do best are those who arrive at the hospital and have angioplasty within 90 minutes of the heart attack.

Opening a clogged artery in the early stages of a heart attack — “early angioplasty” — can restore blood flow and reduce damage to the heart muscle. It can sometimes save the muscle after 12 hours, but then doctors decide case by case whether it is worthwhile. About a third of heart attack patients show up after 12 hours.

After a few days have passed, though, there is little or no chance of preventing heart damage. But many doctors open the artery anyway, thinking it may still have long-term benefits and prolong the patients’ lives. In that situation, the procedure is called late angioplasty. It can be helpful in people who are still suffering from chest pain or have certain other complications from the heart attack.

But what about people who see a doctor more than a day later and are medically stable and free of chest pain? The new study tried to determine if late angioplasty could help them. Although angioplasty is not open surgery, it is an invasive procedure with risks, and the researchers wanted to know if there was any reason to put these patients through it when they seemed to be on the road to recovery. The study showed there was no need for the procedure.

The findings may come as a rude surprise to many cardiologists, who have come to believe that opening a blocked artery, even days or weeks after a heart attack, is bound to be good for patients.

Even Dr. Hochman was surprised by the results. She said she and her colleagues expected to find that angioplasty would reduce the risks of heart failure, subsequent heart attacks and death. But their theory failed the test.

“This is why we have clinical trials,” she said. She added that cardiologists were such strong believers in angioplasty that some major medical centers in the United States and Europe had refused to participate in her study, saying it would be unethical to let some patients go without the procedure for a study.

The 2,166 patients in the study had all suffered heart attacks 3 to 28 days before, caused by a completely blocked coronary artery. The median time since the heart attack was eight days. They were in stable condition and free of chest pain, and were picked at random to receive either heart medicines only or balloon treatment and stents with heart medicines. Most got plain metal stents, but about 8 percent got drug-coated ones. The researchers tracked their health for an average of three years.

There were no differences between the groups. They had the same rates of heart attack, death and heart failure. If anything, those who had angioplasty seemed to fare a bit worse than those who did not, but the differences were not statistically significant and might have been because of chance, Dr. Hochman said.

An expert not involved in the research, Dr. Steven E. Nissen, chairman of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic and president of the American College of Cardiology, said the study was independent and well conducted.

“Having an artery open ought to be good for you,” Dr. Nissen said. “Why not open it late? Like a lot of things in medicine, however, when you actually test it in an organized way, in a randomized, controlled trial, you find out it doesn’t work.”

He added, “It will change what I do.”

In an editorial accompanying the study in the journal, two other cardiologists say that late angioplasty may still be worthwhile for some patients. The ones who might benefit, they say, are a small minority — perhaps 10 to 15 percent — who cannot take the class of heart medicines known as beta blockers, which have been proved to increase survival after a heart attack.

A spokesman for Boston Scientific, the leading stent maker in the United States, said Dr. Hochman’s study would not have much impact because the findings applied to only a small subgroup of patients. But the company’s stock price dropped sharply yesterday morning when news of Dr. Hochman’s study first hit the news. It recovered by the end of the day, however, as analysts said the findings were likely to have little effect on stent use. By late afternoon, the rally had wiped out all the morning losses. Boston Scientific ended trading at $15.94, up 8 cents.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story described the design of the study, presented the results of the study and explained the significance of the observations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - When symptom-free people have heart scans to look for clogged arteries, they can end up with overtreatment and side effects, researchers said Monday.

In a study published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, they found people who had the scans were much more likely to be put on medications and undergo surgery than those who chose standard health screening.

The scans, called coronary computed tomography angiography or CCTA, produce a detailed image of the heart that reveals cholesterol buildups in the coronary arteries.

If they get big enough, such buildups may cut the blood flow and cause a heart attack. So in theory, treating them early on might help stave off some the more than 1.2 million heart attacks — a third of them fatal — that occur every year in the U.S.

Yet there’s no evidence that treating people based on heart scan results does any good, said Dr. John McEvoy, of Johns Hopkins Ciccarone Center for the Prevention of Heart Disease in Baltimore, who led the new study.

By contrast, it’s well known that the scans expose patients to a high dose of X-rays, which can increase their likelihood of developing cancer. And the dyes used to enhance the images cause kidney damage in a significant portion of people.

“Testing might lead to more harm than good,” McEvoy told Reuters Health, adding that heart scans may cost $600 or more.

His team looked at 1,000 Korean patients who chose to get a heart scan as part of a health screening program at Seoul National University Bundang Hospital.

The researchers compared those patients to closely matched individuals who opted to forgo the scans — not currently recommended by guidelines — and just get the standard health checkup.

More than a fifth of the patients who got scanned had cholesterol buildups in their arteries, also called atherosclerosis.

Three months later, these individuals were using cholesterol-lowering statins 34 percent of the time and blood-thinning aspirin 40 percent of the time. In those who tested negative for atherosclerosis or didn’t get scanned, less than 10 percent used the medications.

People who got scans also had more additional tests and major heart procedures.

The researchers expected that if the extra drugs and procedures were actually helpful, the treated people would have a lower rate of serious heart problems in the future.

But after another 18 months, there was no such difference. There was just one event in the 1,000 people who had CCTA (one case of hospitalization for chest pain) and one in the 1,000 people who didn’t (a heart-related death).

Currently, whether a patient gets statin or aspirin is based on risk factors such as their age, and how much cholesterol is in their blood. Both drugs have side effects, notably joint problems and bleeding ulcers.

Although the study can’t prove that getting a scan caused the extra medication use, the gap could not be explained by differences in risk factors for heart disease, such as cholesterol levels or smoking.

In an editorial, Dr. Michael S. Lauer of National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Maryland, said the new study serves as a reminder of the downsides of screening.

“Physicians cannot easily ignore diagnoses made with screening tests because it is impossible for them to determine whether their patients have real disease or pseudodisease,” Lauer notes. “Therefore, physicians prescribe tests, medications, procedures, or even surgical procedures, all of which carry inherent risks.”

McEvoy agrees. “With these new imaging techniques, we are left with the dilemma of what to do with the results,” he said.

Even when screening helps predict health problems down the road, Lauer adds, that doesn’t mean treatments are necessarily beneficial.

“Overdiagnosis is threatening to become an increasingly important public health problem because of the enthusiasm for and proliferation of unproven screening tests,” Lauer writes.

McEvoy said there have been several reports of doctors doing CCTA heart scans in healthy patients, although the practice is currently discouraged by the American Heart Association.

According to McEvoy, doctors should focus on patients’ lifestyle and traditional risk factors such as smoking and obesity.

SOURCE: bit.ly/lEEptL and bit.ly/kBzX6J Archives of Internal Medicine, online May 23, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Clear, succinct summary of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When teens want to sleep in on a school day, they’re not being lazy. For one, teens need more sleep than adults: about eight or nine hours a night, compared with about the six or seven their parents require. Teens, biologically, really do crave sleep.

Which is a problem when it comes to education. Most high schools start before 8 am to help parents get to work by 9 am. Early school start times also give kids more time for after-school activities like sports or theater.

But that has consequences: Around 69 percent of high school students get less than eight hours of sleep on a school night, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which puts these teens at risk of negative impacts on health.

There may be a simple fix: Start schools at a later time.

This is a solution supported by both the America Medical Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics. The AMA urges schools to start no earlier than 8:30 am. In 2014, the Academy of Pediatrics wrote that “the urgency and the magnitude of the problem of sleep loss in adolescents” warranted big changes in school start times.

But it’s not a foregone conclusion that later start times will ensure teens sleep more. Later start times could lead teens to go to bed even later. Or parents might still wake them up early. When it made its recommendation, the Academy of Pediatrics admitted “it is clear that additional research is needed to further document the effects of changes in school start times over time.”

Well, there’s some new (but still incomplete) evidence that later start times do help teens get more sleep.

A new meta-analysis in the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine analyzed 18 studies on start times. It finds that when school starts up to an hour later, students typically do get around 19 minutes more sleep, on average. When start times are delayed more than an hour, that average increases to 53 minutes of extra sleep.

The study also found some preliminary evidence that later school start times were associated with better mental health outcomes. Only five of the 18 studies included these measures, but in two of them, later start time was associated with better (self-reported) feelings of depression and irritability.

More work needs to be done to confirm these findings. But even if later school start times only improve sleep time, that’s a positive step for public health. Because if later school start times can truly help students sleep better, the research suggests that better sleep would lead to major improvements to their health and well-being.

Teens tend to be night owls, and forcing them to be early birds can mess with their health

Teens tend to go to sleep a bit later and wake up a bit later than the average adult — something called a “delayed” sleep phase. For most teens, it means their whole biological clock is shifted, and if they wake up too early, their body will be out of sync with the rest of the world. “Every neurotransmitter, hormone, and chemical in the body cycles with the daily rhythm," Philip Gehrman, a sleep researcher and clinician at the University of Pennsylvania, told me earlier in the year.

When your body clock is off from society’s, scientists call it “social jet lag.” And like the jet lag from a long journey, it messes with your body.

Studies of adults find that social jet lag is associated with higher BMI, insulin resistance, depression, and a higher likelihood to engage in dangerous behaviors like smoking. And the group of people most at risk for social jet lag? Teens.

In a tightly controlled lab study, 24 healthy adult participants* who had their sleep shifted by one hour each day (simulating jet lag) started to look prediabetic after a three-week trial. Their resting metabolic rates dropped 8 percent. "Assuming no changes in activity or food intake," that "would translate into ~12.5 pounds increase in weight over a single year," the study, published in Science Translational Medicine in 2012, concluded.

People with a lot of social jet lag also tend to get fewer hours of sleep, which exacerbates these same health problems. On top of that, short sleep reduces powers of perception, concentration, and judgment. There’s some evidence that when students sleep better, they perform better in school as well.

Delaying school start times is easier said than done

As Vox’s Libby Nelson has reported, very few schools have actually adopted this reform. This map, which reflects the most recent CDC data available, shows that across the country, schools still start very early.

There are some understandable reasons why. Nelson writes:

And even though the evidence is mostly in favor of increasing school start times, it isn’t a slam dunk quite yet.

There are some limitations to mention about the new meta-analysis. The studies mostly used self-reported measures of sleep duration. (More objective measures — like those obtained from Fitbit-like wristbands — are more accurate.) And many of the studies were short in duration, comparing sleep duration in snapshots before and after a school made a switch. More data would show whether the impact of school start time on sleep waned or improved over time.

“The aggregated quality of the evidence,” the study reports, “is only moderate.” The researchers also found no effect on academic performance. Furthermore, two of the studies found evidence that earlier start times were associated with increased vehicle accidents involving the teens. Being tired in the morning can be a dangerous distraction while on the road.

In all, the researchers call for more rigorous data on the topic. As schools change their start times, they write, researchers should sweep in to collect information on students’ sleep in a standardized way.

Regardless, it’s a promising area for study. Because if later school start times can truly help students sleep better, the research suggests that better sleep would lead to major improvements to their health and well-being.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job describing the meta-analysis of studies on later school start times, listing some of the limitations. It also lets us know more work needs to be done on the subject.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The first germs to colonize a newborn delivered vaginally come almost exclusively from its mother. But the first to reach an infant born by cesarean section come mostly from the environment — particularly bacteria from inaccessible or less-scrubbed areas like lamps and walls, and skin cells from everyone else in the delivery room.

That difference, some experts believe, could influence a child’s lifelong health. Now, in the first study of its kind, researchers on Monday confirmed that a mother’s beneficial microbes can be transferred, at least partially, from her vagina to her baby after a C-section.

The small proof-of-principle study suggests a new way to inoculate babies, said Dr. Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello, an associate professor of medicine at New York University and lead author of the report, published on Monday in Nature Medicine.

“The study is extremely important,” said Dr. Jack Gilbert, a microbial ecologist at Argonne National Laboratory who did not take part in the work. “Just understanding that it’s possible is exciting.”

But it will take further studies following C-section babies for many years to know to what degree, if any, the method protects them from immune and metabolic problems, he said.

Some epidemiological studies have suggested that C-section babies may have an elevated risk for developing immune and metabolic disorders, including Type 1 diabetes, allergies, asthma and obesity.

Scientists have theorized that these children may be missing key bacteria known to play a large role in shaping the immune system from the moment of birth onward. To replace these microbes, some parents have turned to a novel procedure called vaginal microbial transfer.

A mother’s vaginal fluids — loaded with one such essential bacterium, lactobacillus, that helps digest human milk — are collected before surgery and swabbed all over the infant a minute or two after birth.

An infant’s first exposure to microbes may educate the early immune system to recognize friend from foe, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

Friendly bacteria, like lactobacilli, are tolerated as being like oneself. Those from hospital ventilation vents or the like may be perceived as enemies and be attacked.

These early microbial interactions may help set up an immune system that recognizes “self” from “non-self” for the rest of a person’s life, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

In the United States, about one in three babies are delivered by C-section, a rate that has risen dramatically in recent decades. Some hospitals perform the surgery on nearly seven in ten women delivering babies.

An ideal C-section rate for low-risk births should be no more than 15 percent, according to the World Health Organization.

Dr. Dominguez-Bello’s study involved 18 babies born at the University of Puerto Rico hospital in San Juan, where she recently worked. Seven were born vaginally and 11 by elective C-section. Of the latter, four were swabbed with the mother’s vaginal microbes and seven were not.

Microbes were collected on a folded sterile piece of gauze that was dipped in a saline solution and inserted into each mother’s vagina for one hour before surgery. As the operations began, the gauze was pulled out and placed in a sterile collector.

One to two minutes after the babies were delivered and put under a neonatal lamp, researchers swabbed each infant’s lips, face, chest, arms, legs, back, genitals and anal region with the damp gauze. The procedure took 15 seconds.

Dr. Dominguez-Bello and her colleagues then tracked the composition of microbes by taking more than 1,500 oral, skin and anal samples from the newborns, as well as vaginal samples from the mothers, over the first month after birth.

For the first few days, ambient skin bacteria from the delivery room predominated in the mouths and on the skin of C-section babies who were not swabbed, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said.

But in terms of their bacterial colonies, the infants swabbed with the microbes closely resembled vaginally delivered babies, she found, especially in the first week of life. They were all covered with lactobacilli.

Gut bacteria in both C-section groups, however, were less abundant than that found in the vaginally delivered babies.

Anal samples from the swabbed group, oddly, contained the highest abundance of bacteria usually found in the mouth.

The results show the complexity of labor, said Dr. Alexander Khoruts, a microbial expert and associate professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota. “It cannot be simplified to a neat, effortless passage of the infant through the birth canal,” he said.

As the month progressed, the oral and skin microbes of all infants began to resemble normal adult patterns, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. But fecal bacteria did not, probably because of breast or formula feeding and the absence of solid foods.

The transfer fell short of full vaginal birth-like colonization for two reasons, Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. Compared to infants who spent time squeezed inside the birth canal, those who were swabbed got less exposure to their mother’s microbes.

And all infants delivered by C-section were exposed to antibiotics, which also may have reduced the number and variety of bacteria colonizing them.

A larger study of vaginal microbial transfer is underway at N.Y.U., Dr. Dominguez-Bello said. Eighty-four mothers have participated so far.

Infants delivered both by C-section and vaginally will be followed for one year to look for differences in the treated and untreated groups and to look for complications. Thus far the swabbing has proved entirely safe.

The procedure is not yet recommended by professional medical societies, said Dr. Sara Brubaker, a specialist in maternal and fetal medicine at N.Y.U. Until more is known, physicians are hesitant to participate.

“But it has hit the lay press,” she said. “Patients come in and ask for it. They are doing it themselves.”

Dr. Brubaker is one of them. When her daughter was born three and a half months ago, she arranged to have her baby swabbed.
• Let Me Tell You About My Big Baby

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story describes the study as small and proof-of-principle, although it arguably should have made more out of the fact that only four babies underwent the swabbing procedure. That’s a very small number. Nevertheless, we think the story injects enough caution to earn a Satisfactory rating. We liked that it spelled out the next phase of study to provide readers with a realistic sense of the scientific process.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ever since she was an infant, Reagan Roberts could not tolerate being anywhere near cow's milk. A mere sip would leave her vomiting and gasping for breath. If she were even touched by someone with milk on their hands, she would break out in hives and a bright red rash.

"We just had to keep her away from milk," said Reagan's mother, Lissa. "We couldn't have it around the house. At preschool she had to sit by herself. We brought her food to birthday parties. We couldn't go to restaurants. It was very hard."

Today, however, Reagan, 9, of Ellicott City, can drink as much milk as she wants and eat anything.

"She eats ice cream. She eats cheese. She eats yogurt. She drinks chocolate milk. She eats any food anybody else can," Lissa Roberts said. "It's a miracle."

Reagan is one of a small number of children who have undergone an experimental treatment that is showing promise for treating milk, peanut and other food allergies. The approach, known as oral immunotherapy, involves slowly desensitizing the immune system by painstakingly ingesting increasing amounts of whatever triggers the reaction.

"It's pretty encouraging," said Robert A. Wood, chief of pediatric allergy and immunology at Johns Hopkins, who led the study that Reagan participated in at the Hopkins Children's Center in Baltimore. "We've still got a long way to go, but I never thought we'd get this far."

Although the approach appears to be highly effective for some children with milk and peanut allergies, the researchers conducting the studies and others caution that much more research is needed to prove and perfect the approach and that it is far from ready for widespread use. No one should try the approach on his own, because the treatments themselves can trigger potentially life-threatening reactions.

"It's still very investigational," said Wesley Burks, chief of the division of pediatric allergy and immunology at Duke University, who has produced promising results in children with peanut allergies. "We're very hopeful. But there are lot of things we need to do to understand it better, make it more effective and make sure it's safe."

The strategy is being tested in a handful of small studies that are part of a surge of research in a field that for years showed little progress.

"There's been a substantial uptick in the amount of research," said Marshall Plaut of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which has more than doubled the funding for food-allergy research since 2007. "I think it's time to be cautiously optimistic."

In addition to the oral immunotherapy studies, scientists are in the early stages of testing an experimental suppository, a Chinese herbal remedy and variations of oral immunotherapy that might be safer and more effective.

"There's definitely been a spike in the amount of work going on," said Hugh A. Sampson, a professor of pediatrics, allergy and immunology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York who leads a federally funded consortium studying food allergies. "Five years ago there was almost nothing going on in people with respect to therapies, whereas now there are a variety of different therapies being looked at."

The spike in research has been driven by increasing evidence that food allergies are becoming more common, occurring earlier in life and lasting longer. About 12 million Americans are estimated to suffer from food allergies, including about 3 million children. Some evidence suggests that peanut allergies may have doubled in children in the past decade.

The reason for the trend is the subject of intense research and debate. There are several theories, including changes in how food is processed and children's not being exposed to certain foods early in life. Evidence has also been mounting for the "hygiene hypothesis," which blames growing up in increasingly sterile homes, making the immune system overreact to ordinarily harmless substances, including food.

Whatever the cause, researchers have long struggled to develop therapies. Food allergies can trigger symptoms ranging from rashes and hives to responses believed to cause perhaps 200 deaths each year in the United States. Currently, food-allergic people have only two options: to avoid the substance that causes their reaction or to try to stop a reaction with an injection of epinephrine.

That leaves parents of allergic children scouring food labels, avoiding restaurants, sending their children to school and parties with specially made food and snacks, and still worrying about inadvertent contact with peanuts, milk, eggs and other ubiquitous foods.

"It's hard to live," said Angie Duty of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old son, Sam, was intensely allergic to peanuts before undergoing the therapy as part of one Burks's studies. "Sam doesn't like to be different, but of course he is different and we have to explain that to him."

Although doctors have long used shots to desensitize people allergic to pollen and other substances, early attempts to do the same for food allergies ended in failure.

"The side effects were so great that they were as bad if not worse than the disease itself," Burks said.

But a small number of researchers in recent years have begun trying the approach again, this time by orally administering the protein in the food that triggers the allergic reaction.

With doctors standing by in case of a severe reaction, each study subject undergoes careful testing to determine the maximum dose he or she can safely tolerate. Once that is established, the participants are sent home to sprinkle that amount of purified protein on their food for a week or two; then they return to the research center in to see if the dose can be increased. The procedure is repeated for months or even years to slowly raise the amount they can safely consume.

"It's a way of sort of rerouting or tricking the immune system to no longer be allergic to that food," said Stacie Jones, chief of allergy and immunology at the Arkansas Children's Hospital, who has been working Burks to test the approach for peanut allergies.

In a study involving 19 children who were severely allergic to milk, Wood found that within four to six months most of the children significantly increased the amount of milk protein they could tolerate. After between about nine months and two years, about half of the children could safely consume as much milk or food containing milk as they wanted.

"These are children who could have died from a teaspoon of milk before," Wood said.

In March, Burks and Jones reported the results of a pilot study involving 33 children with peanut allergies. The children started by ingesting peanut protein powder equivalent to one one-thousandth of a peanut. Four of the children had to drop out because of allergic reactions, but six of nine children who underwent the treatment for 2 1/2 years have been able to stop the peanut powder and have now gone six to eight months without reacting to eating peanuts. "It's fabulous," said Janet Vande Berg of Durham, N.C., whose 9-year-old daughter, Caroline, can eat peanuts for the first time in her life. "It makes a huge, huge difference in the quality of life for both the kids and the families. It just takes the stress away."

The researchers are tracking the remaining children in the study to see if any others achieve similar results and have followed up with a more stringent study in which 13 children received a similar treatment and seven received a placebo.

After about 10 months, all seven children on the placebo were still allergic, whereas none of the 13 on the peanut powder had reactions when they were challenged. All the children are now receiving the treatment and are being followed to see if they remain desensitized and perhaps become "tolerant," meaning they no longer need to consume daily doses of peanuts or peanut protein to maintain their ability to eat peanuts freely.

"I think it's an important advance in the field," said the NIH's Plaut. "It's a small number of subjects, so it's hard to draw full-blown conclusions. But it's the first data that suggest you may be able to achieve something like this in food allergies."

It remains far from clear, however, what proportion of children will benefit, how long the benefit might last and what proportion will need to continue to consume at least some milk or peanuts every day to maintain their protection. While some children, such as Vande Berg, appear to completely lose their allergies, others seem to just be able to eat more of the milk or food before reacting. But even that can be helpful.

"We know this therapy at least protects them from accidental ingestion so they won't have a life-threatening reaction," said Jones, the Arkansas researcher. "At the very least it's providing some security for these families."

Burks and Jones are part of the federal consortium, which is studying the same approach for eggs at research institutions across the country, including Johns Hopkins, and conducting detailed immunological studies to try to get a better understanding of how the treatment works.

Meanwhile, researchers in London are studying 640 babies at high risk for food allergies to see if exposing them to peanuts early in life reduces their chances of developing the allergy in the first place.

"There are a lot of people putting ideas out there and producing some promising preliminary data," Plaut said. "That makes me think there will be some important developments in the future."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story made clear that the work was being done in small numbers of children, that there’s "a long way to go," and that researchers "caution that much more research is needed to prove and perfect the approach and that it is far from ready for widespread use." 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women who undergo Caesarean sectionsmore than seven days before their due dates put their babies at higher risk of respiratory problems, longer hospital stays and other complications.

A multisite study that appeared Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine reinforces recommendations by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists that discourage scheduling C-sections before 39 weeks of pregnancy unless there is documentation of lung maturity or it is medically necessary. (Due dates are set at 40 weeks gestation, and infants are considered full term at 37 weeks.)

The findings offer important guidance to the growing number of women who face planned C-sections -- one in three babies in the United States, estimates the National Center for Health Statistics.

"We recognize that by the end of a long pregnancy there is a desire to see the baby and to move forward," said Dr. Brian Mercer, one of the study's authors and director of both the division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and obstetrics at MetroHealth Medical Center in Cleveland.

"But mothers and families need to recognize the potential risk of moving forward before it's time," he said.

The findings from the study sponsored by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development's Maternal Fetal Medicine Units Network also underscore the importance of a woman seeking medical care as early into her pregnancy as possible, so that doctors can accurately gauge the gestational age with an ultrasound, Mercer said.

Researchers at 19 medical centers studied more than 24,000 women who gave birth to a single child by C-section from 1999 to 2002. Of those, more than 13,000 had elective C-sections. All of the women had previously had C-sections.

More than one-third of the surgeries performed during that time happened at 37 or 38 weeks. Babies born at 37 weeks were twice as likely to have breathing problems, infections or to stay in intensive care than babies born a week later. Breathing problems -- already a high risk because labor helps clear the baby's lungs of fluid -- happened four times as often in babies born at 37 weeks than those born at 39 weeks.

Dr. Justin Lavin, director of theMaternal-Fetal Medicine Departmentat Akron Children's Hospital and a high-risk obstetrician, said he hopes the study's findings help people understand why doctors like him say nowhen it comes to scheduling unnecessary C-sections early.

"This happens to me every day," Lavin said. "Sometimes [the mother] is a bit uncomfortable, or sometimes Dad has to go on a business trip or Grandma wants to fly in," Lavin said. "It's human nature."

The standard practice has been that doctors planning repeat C-sections do so between 36 and 40 weeks, when most fetuses have developed enough to survive outside the womb.

The tests the doctors perform to determine the extent of the fetus's development are often not sophisticated enough to determine subtle milestones for breathing and processing food independently, said Dr. John Thorp, a University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill obstetrician and one of the authors of the study.

"I think there is something inherent in labor -- probably a signal from baby to mother that the baby is ready to make the transition -- that we choose to circumvent when we schedule an elective, repeat C-section," Thorp said.

"I think it points to a role for the baby in the initiation of labor and the baby's readiness to make the transition."

The Associated Press and McClatchy Newspapers contributed to this story.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the current study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Finding ways to fight the flu just got a tad more ribbeting -- that is, if you ask some researchers who have turned their attention to frogs.

A new study suggests that mucus from the skin of certain frogs can be harnessed to obliterate flu viruses.

Some frog mucus contains antimicrobial peptides, which are immune system molecules that can neutralize bacteria, viruses, and fungi.

However, the flu-killing power of such peptides has been demonstrated only under a microscope and in lab mice. More research is needed to determine just how effective a peptide can be in helping humans beat the flu.

"We have identified a potentially new treatment for H1N1 human influenza virus, which is a peptide that comes from the skin of a frog from southern India," said Joshy Jacob , an associate professor in the Emory University School of Medicine's microbiology and immunology department, who led the study.

"This peptide works by directly killing the virus, and it is specific for all influenza viruses that have a H1 type of hemagglutinin," Jacob said.

'It makes the virus particle fall apart'

The researchers observed how the peptides interacted with influenza viruses under a microscope and in mice.

"In this paper we screened 32 peptides, and the surprise was that four out of 32 had activity against the virus," Jacob said.

"Out of the four, we found one of them (urumin) was non-toxic to human cells," he said. "So, we tested it against viruses that came from the 1930s until the current ones, and it kills all of the H1s. It doesn't touch H3. It's very, very specific."

The researchers aren't quite sure why urumin only targets H1 viruses, but Jacob said that H1 viruses might be anatomically similar to an amphibian pathogen that the frog mucus is intended to destroy. If there is a similarity, it may explain why H1 viruses are vulnerable to urumin's wrath.

"The frog makes this peptide for its own survival. It never gets influenza," Jacob said, adding that the peptide fights the flu virus by destroying an important part of the hemagglutinin.

To explain how the peptide works, Jacob likened hemagglutinin to a billboard sign.

"You have the message and then you have the little stem that holds it up. The message can change but the stem is the same, and this peptide targets the stem of the hemagglutinin, that's why it's very efficient," he said.

The urumin peptide could be a novel treatment since it targets the hemagglutinin, unlike current drugs on the market which target other parts of the virus, resulting in less impact, Jacob said.

"It just blows it up. It makes the virus particle fall apart," he said.

Gregory Chinchar, a professor in the University of Mississippi Medical Center's department of microbiology and immunology, said that he was surprised that the peptide targeted the hemagglutinin on the flu virus. He was not involved in the new study.

"I don't think people thought that they work that way before," Chinchar said about the peptide. "They thought that they would be more targeted to membranes, but the data looks like they target the H1 protein specifically and that data looks pretty firm."

"The milk stayed good, just like you refrigerated it," Jacob said about the age-old Russian practice.

"In 2012, scientists took that particular frog and wanted to know why is it, why do these frogs keep milk fresh? It turned out that when you shock a frog or when you stimulate them or stress them, they secrete these short peptides into their surroundings," he said. "A majority of the peptides were antibacterial and some of them kill the things that make milk go bad."

"Amphibians, especially certain groups of frogs, produce and store large amounts of antimicrobial peptides in specialized granular glands in the skin," said Louise Rollins-Smith, associate professor of pathology, microbiology, and immunology at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. "When the skin is injured or the frog is alarmed, they release large amounts of the peptides to protect the skin."

"The peptide described in the Immunity report is somewhat unusual because of the apparent specificity," Rollins-Smith said about how urumin specifically targets H1 viruses.

"If further studies show that it has a low level of cytotoxicity and it can protect in other animal models of influenza, it could be developed as a potential treatment for influenza," she said. Cytoxicity refers to being toxic to cells in the body.

"As an amphibian biologist concerned about the loss of amphibian species around the globe, it is important to note that they may hold important secrets useful for human medicine and they should be preserved," she said.

Ferrets are next, then possibly humans

A challenge to possibly using frog mucus as a flu-fighting treatment in humans is figuring out how to get the urumin peptide to attach to flu virus cells in the human body, Jacob said.

In the new study, the peptide was delivered to mice through their noses, where flu viruses were also delivered.

"I need to come up with a strategy to deliver it systemically as well; maybe an injectable, which goes in the bloodstream and kills influenza viruses," Jacob mused.

If those studies prove to be successful, human testing could be next.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This was a real strength of the story. It does not oversell the findings–making it clear that this research is preliminary and preclinical. The text does not just reflect on the study design—albeit briefly—but then gives much space to an explanation of how the peptide does its job. For cursory readers, such a long story may be of little interest, but those seeking to understand the research will be both rewarded and entertained.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, scientists have precisely identified and targeted an area of the brain which is involved in "hearing voices", experienced by many patients with schizophrenia. They have been able to show in a controlled trial that targeting this area with magnetic pulses can improve the condition in some patients. This early clinical work is presented at the ECNP conference in Paris on Tuesday 5th September, with later publication in Schizophrenia Bulletin*.

"This is the first controlled trial to precisely determine an anatomically defined brain area where high frequency magnetic pulses can improve the hearing of voices", said lead researcher, Professor Sonia Dollfus (University of Caen, CHU, France).

Schizophrenia is a serious long-term mental health problem. People with schizophrenia experience a range of symptoms, which may include delusions, muddled thoughts and hallucinations. One of the best-known is hearing voices, also known as Auditory Verbal Hallucination (AVH), which around 70% of people with schizophrenia experience at some point. These voices, may be 'heard' as having a variety of different characteristics, for example as internal or external, friendly or threatening, they may be continuously present or present only occasionally, and so on.

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) has been suggested as a possible way of treating the hearing of voices in schizophrenia. TMS uses magnetic pulses to the brain, and has been shown to be effective in several psychiatric conditions. However, there is a lack of controlled trials to show that TMS works effectively with AVH sufferers.

The French research team worked with 26 patients who received active TMS treatment, and 33 as a control group, who received sham (placebo) treatment. The researchers interviewed the patients using a standard protocol - the Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale - which revealed most of the characteristic features of the voices which they were hearing. The treated patients received a series of 20 Hz high-frequency magnetic pulses over 2 sessions a day for 2 days. Using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the pulses were targeted at a specific brain area in the temporal lobe, which is associated with language (the exact area is the crossing of the projection of the ascending branch of the left lateral sulcus and the left superior temporal sulcus)

After 2 weeks, the patients were re-evaluated. The researchers found that 34.6% of the patients being treated by TMS showed a significant response, whereas only 9.1% of patients in the sham group responded ('significant response' was defined as a more than 30% decrease in the Total Auditory Hallucinations Rating Scale score).

Professor Sonia Dollfus said: "Auditory Verbal Hallucinations, or "hearing voices" can be a disturbing symptom of schizophrenia, both for patients and for those close to sufferers. This is the first controlled trial to show an improvement in these patients by targeting a specific area of the brain and using high frequency TMS. This means two things; firstly it seems that we now can say with some certainty that we have found a specific anatomical area of the brain associated with auditory verbal hallucinations in schizophrenia. Secondly, we have shown that treatment with high frequency TMS makes a difference to at least some sufferers, although there is a long way to go before we will know if TMS is the best route to treat these patients in the long-term".

Commenting, Professor Andreas Meyer-Lindenberg, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim and member of the ECNP executive board, said: "This work builds on previous studies that have shown a critical role of excessive activity of subregions of the temporal lobe in the generation of voice hallucinations in schizophrenia. To move this into treatment, controlled trial such as the one by Dollfus and coworkers are important. While response rates were moderate, TMS is a welcome addition to the therapeutic repertoire especially for patients who do not respond to medication."

NOTE: The full title of this release is "Scientists discover brain area which can be targeted for treatment in patients with schizophrenia who 'hear voices'" It has been shortened in some versions to comply with Eurekalert title limits.

*This work has been accepted in the peer-reviewed journal Schizophrenia Bulletin: The Journal of Psychoses and Related Disorders. The exact publication date has still to be determined.

Note: Around 220,000 people have been diagnosed as having schizophrenia in England and Wales (https:/ )
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of explaining the size of the trial and the study design. The release would have been stronger if it had noted that it’s not clear how long the benefits lasted beyond two weeks.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - The inexpensive tests that look for hidden blood in a person’s stool are effective for colon cancer screening, a study out Tuesday confirms.

The findings, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, give some extra weight to fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) as a valid option for early detection of colon cancer.

Experts generally recommend that people at average risk of colon cancer start screening tests for the disease at age 50. And they can pick from a number of tests that have all been found to cut the risk of dying from colon cancer.

Along with stool tests — done once a year at home — the choices include two invasive procedures: colonoscopy done every 10 years and flexible sigmoidoscopy done every five years.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federally supported expert panel, recommends that people at average risk of colon cancer choose any of the three methods.

FOBT detects hidden blood in the stool, which can be a sign of colon cancer or pre-cancerous growths called polyps. Positive results on the screen prompt a follow-up colonoscopy to investigate the source of the blood.

Advances in the stool tests in recent years have made them more effective. A newer version called immunochemical FOBT (iFOBT) is supposed to zero in on colon growths better than an older version known as guaiac FOBT — which often picked up bleeding originating in the upper digestive tract, such as from a stomach ulcer.

Immunochemical FOBT is now largely replacing the older test. But there’s been surprisingly little evidence that it really is highly “specific” to colon cancer, according to Dr. Yi-Chia Lee of National Taiwan University Hospital, one of the researchers on the new study.

So for their study, the researchers followed nearly 2,800 adults who all volunteered to have iFOBT, a colonoscopy and an upper endoscopy to check for problems in the upper digestive tract.

They found that of 28 people confirmed to have colon tumors after a colonoscopy, all but one had also a positive iFOBT result.

“It means that almost every case with colon cancer can be identified by iFOBT,” Lee told Reuters Health in an email. “It is a strong support to iFOBT as an effective screening tool.”

The researchers also found that iFOBT had “specificity” for colon cancer of close to 90 percent, meaning the test would accurately give a negative result to almost 90 percent of people who did not have colon cancer.

Of three study participants who were found to have cancers of the stomach or esophagus, for instance, none had a positive result on the iFOBT test.

Like any screening test, iFOBT does have a risk of false-positive results, which leads to unnecessary invasive testing in some people. In this study, about 10 percent of all participants had a false-positive finding on the stool test.

Among the risk factors for false-positives the authors identified were the use of anticlotting drugs and low levels of the iron-rich molecule hemoglobin in the blood.

In practice, a positive iFOBT result would be followed by colonoscopy, in which a scope is used to investigate the interior of the colon.

Whether used for first-line screening or as a follow-up, colonoscopy has the advantage of allowing doctors to spot and remove pre-cancerous growths called polyps — which means the test can prevent cases of colon cancer.

But as far as cutting the risk of death from colon cancer, stool testing is similarly effective, according to the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

And it’s much cheaper: iFOBT is more expensive than the older stool tests, but it is still roughly $30. A screening colonoscopy averages around $3,000.

The downside of iFOBT being specific to colon tumors is that it is not useful for catching cancers of the stomach or throat.

That’s particularly important in Asia, where those cancers are common.

Lee said researchers there are looking into whether combining iFOBT with the older guaiac test is useful for catching cancers in the lower and upper digestive tract — and whether adding a third stool test, which looks for the ulcer-causing bacteria H. pylori, can help as well. Infection with H. pylori is associated with increased risks of stomach and throat cancers.

In the U.S., cancers of the upper digestive tract are relatively uncommon. The average American has a one in 200 chance of developing esophageal cancer, while the risk of stomach cancer is one in 114.

In contrast, Americans’ lifetime risk of colon cancer is about one in 19, according to the American Cancer Society. More than 50,000 Americans died of the disease in 2010.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Thorough analysis of how the study was done, including easy to understand discussion of sensitivity and specificity.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 9, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Drinking plenty of water each day may have an unexpected benefit -- staving off urinary tract infections, a new study reports.

Young women plagued by UTIs who drank an additional 6 cups of water each day were nearly half -- 48 percent -- as likely as a control group to have another infection, the study showed.

The water group also reduced their use of antibiotics by roughly half -- or 47 percent.

What's more, the amount of time that passed before a woman's next UTI and between recurrent infections was longer in the water group than in the control group.

Women are more prone to UTIs than men, partly due to their anatomy. A shorter urethra makes it easier for bacteria from rectum to enter the vagina and travel to the bladder.

Study author Dr. Thomas Hooton said it's thought that increasing fluid intake decreases UTI risk in two ways: by preventing bacteria from adhering to the bladder and by reducing the overall concentration of bacteria that could cause an infection.

"Flushing bacteria out of the bladder, it's been known, at least it's been thought, that it is protective. This study suggests that it is," said Hooton, clinical director of the division of infectious diseases at the University of Miami School of Medicine.

Dr. Hunter Wessells, who wasn't involved in the study, called the additional fluid intake "substantial," leading to a corresponding increase in urine output.

"It is the urine output which is of course the key factor leading to the effect seen in the study," said Wessells, chair of the department of urology at the University of Washington School of Medicine in Seattle.

Dr. Susan Bleasdale, medical director of infection control at the University of Illinois at Chicago, said the study "may be a game changer" for antibiotic "stewardship" programs aimed at reducing inappropriate antibiotic use.

She cited a 2010 review estimating that 11 million to 12 million women a year will suffer from a UTI, accounting for 1.6 billion antibiotic prescriptions a year.

"We might not even need to use antibiotics," she said.

The study, conducted in Bulgaria, involved 140 healthy premenopausal women who had at least three UTIs in the past year. All reported low daily fluid intake. They drank roughly four cups of fluid per day, including just 2 cups of water a day.

Half of the women in the study were asked to consume 1.5 liters of water, or about 6 cups, each day in addition to their usual daily fluid intake. Specifically, they were asked to begin drinking a 1/2-liter water bottle at each meal and finish each bottle before the next meal.

The remaining women served as a control group. They continued their usual fluid intake.

The women were followed for a year, with clinic visits at the beginning of the study as well as 6 and 12 months later. Researchers measured their water and fluid intake; urine volume, frequency and concentration; and symptoms. They also called the women each month to assess compliance and counsel them to return to the clinic for evaluation and possible treatment if they were experiencing UTI symptoms.

Overall, the water group increased daily water intake by close to 5 cups a day. Their total daily fluid intake, including water and other beverages, averaged nearly 12 cups.

By contrast, the control group's total daily fluid intake was less than half of that.

Hooton noted that it's not clear exactly how much fluid intake must increase to deliver a benefit.

"There's no magic in a liter-and-a-half," he said.

Likewise, he believes any increase in fluid -- not just water -- may be beneficial since fluids are mostly water. And while the study involved younger women, he said older women who experience recurrent UTIs may benefit from increasing their daily fluid intake as well.

Whether the advice would benefit women with normal urine output, however, is unclear, Wessells noted.

"In addition, the bother associated with the higher urine output, and feasibility of implementing this water intake strategy across a range of occupations and ages, requires further study as well," he said.

Researchers presented the findings Saturday at IDWeek 2017, the annual meeting of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, the HIV Medicine Association and the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society.

Research presented at meetings is generally considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed publication.

Visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for more on UTIs.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This was a strong point of the story. We’re given many details about the study: How many women were enrolled in both a control group and an active intervention group, how many UTIs they suffered from at baseline, what their water intake was like before and during the study, how much water intake was involved in the intervention, how long the study lasted, and how the researchers kept track of the women, and so on. It also let us know the results are considered preliminary, since they’ve only been presented at a conference and haven’t been peer-reviewed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DNA Blood Test Gives Women A New Option For Prenatal Screening

When Amy Seitz got pregnant with her second child last year, she knew that being 35 years old meant there was an increased chance of chromosomal disorders like Down syndrome. She wanted to be screened, and she knew just what kind of screening she wanted — a test that's so new, some women and doctors don't quite realize what they've signed up for.

This kind of test , called cell free fetal DNA testing, uses a simple blood sample from an expectant mother to analyze bits of fetal DNA that have leaked into her bloodstream. It's only been on the market since October 2011 and is not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration — the FDA does not regulate this type of genetic testing service. Several companies now offer the test, including Sequenom and Illumina. Insurance coverage varies, and doctors often only offer this testing to women at higher risk because of things like advanced maternal age.

"I think that I initially heard about it through family and friends," says Seitz. "They had had the option of it given to them by their doctors."

To her, it sounded great. She didn't want an invasive procedure like amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.Those are considered the gold standard for prenatal genetic testing, but doctors must put a needle into the womb to collect cells that contain fetal DNA, which means a small risk of miscarriage.

"I wasn't interested in going as far as getting an amniocentesis because of the risk associated with that," she explains, "and so when I heard about this test, that was part of the reason that I was most interested in it."

This new way of testing fetal DNA seemed to have already become fairly common where Seitz used to live, in Washington, D.C. But she had recently moved to Alabama, and the clinic she went to there wasn't as familiar with it — although when she talked to her doctor, she learned the clinic had just had a visit from a company's sales representative.

"I think it was a fairly new test for them at that point, but she was interested in pursuing it further to see what needed to be done," Seitz says.

Seitz got her blood drawn last July, becoming one of hundreds of thousands of pregnant women who've opted for this new kind of test instead of the more traditional, invasive ones. Doctors say the impact has been huge.

"Those of us in the field who do diagnostic procedures like CVS and amnio have seen a drastic decrease in the number of those procedures that are being performed," says Dr. Mary Norton, an expert on maternal-fetal medicine and genetics at the University of California, San Francisco. "Places are reporting doing fewer than half the number of procedures that were being done previously."

But, she says, things have changed so quickly that it may be hard for doctors and patients to know what they're dealing with.

"It's still new and it's quite different than previous genetic testing that's been available," says Norton. "It's quite a different paradigm, if you will."

An invasive test like amniocentesis or CVS lets doctors get a complete picture of the chromosomes and a solid diagnosis.

Until the new testing technology came along, the only less invasive option was for an expectant mother to get an ultrasound, plus have her blood tested for specific proteins. This can reveal if there's an increased risk of certain disorders, but it's not very accurate and produces a lot of false alarms.

Studies have shown that the new fetal DNA tests do a better job, says Norton. They're less likely to flag a normal pregnancy as high risk.

"They're much more accurate than current screening tests, but they are not diagnostic tests in the sense that amniocentesis is," says Norton, "and so I think that has led to some confusion."

Even though the newer blood tests do look at fetal DNA, they can't give a definitive answer like an amniocentesis can because they're analyzing scraps of fetal DNA in the mother's blood that are all mixed up with her own DNA.

Norton says when women get worrisome results from one of these new tests and are referred to her center, they sometimes don't understand why doctors are offering a follow-up amnio "because they were under the impression that this was as good as an amnio."

She is concerned that some people might end a pregnancy without getting confirmatory testing and points to one study last year that found a small number of women did that.

"There's at least some evidence that it's happening to a greater degree than I think many of us are comfortable with," she says.

The tests are being used more and more widely. Some worry that the companies' websites and marketing materials don't make the limitations clear enough.

But Dr. Lee Shulman doesn't see it that way. He's an obstetrician and geneticist at Northwestern University in Chicago who has consulted for a couple of the testing firms.

"Patients need to understand that while this is better, it is not a diagnostic test, and I think the companies have done a great job in putting this material out," he says. "Whether or not clinicians use this material and take it to heart and use it for patient counseling is a different story."

He says the technology is so new that a lot of doctors have no experience with it, and consumers need to understand that.

"If the patient, if the couple, are not getting the answers, not getting the information they feel comfortable with, they need to seek out prenatal diagnostic centers, maternal fetal specialists, clinical geneticists, who may have more experience," says Shulman.

For example, here's one thing that might turn out to be a little more complicated than would-be parents might expect. Along with screening for the common chromosomal disorders, companies offer parents the chance to learn their baby's sex — weeks before it's clear on a sonogram.

"Many women are very excited by the idea that as part of their blood testing, they could find out pretty definitively if the baby is a boy or a girl," says Dr. Diana Bianchi, an expert on prenatal diagnostics at Tufts University School of Medicine.

What they may not realize, she says, is that the test will also determine whether there's something abnormal about the sex chromosomes.

"Approximately 1 in 700 pregnancies there's an extra X or extra Y," she says, noting that these are mild conditions that would normally go undetected, unless a woman had an invasive test like an amnio. Some babies with these conditions grow up into adulthood and never know they have them, unless they face a symptom like infertility.

Seitz, in Alabama, thought it was a bonus that getting this new blood test would tell her if she was having a boy or a girl. But it actually didn't do that, because of a paperwork glitch.

"The box for sex got unchecked somewhere along the way, so we weren't able to find it out from the test," says Seitz, who learned from an ultrasound that she was having a girl. The results she did get from the fetal DNA test were reassuring.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The study cited in the article (through a hyperlink) reports that the new screening tests did a better job of detecting chromosomal abnormalities. An independent expert quoted in the story agrees that the new tests are more accurate than traditional screening tests. The story’s bottom-line take on the evidence seems appropriate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE



Newswise — The latest in a series of studies led by researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine shows that addition of a widely available, noninvasive imaging test called 99mTc-sestamibi SPECT/CT to CT or MRI increases the accuracy of kidney tumor classification. The research team reports that the potential improvement in diagnostic accuracy will spare thousands of patients each year in the United States alone from having to undergo unnecessary surgery.

In a recent report on ongoing work to improve kidney tumor classification, published in the April issue of the journal Clinical Nuclear Medicine, the team reports that the sestamibi SPECT/CT test—short for 99mTc-sestamibi single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography(CT) — adds additional diagnostic information in conjunction with conventional CTs and MRI and improves physicians’ ability to differentiate between benign and malignant kidney tumors.

“Sestamibi SPECT/CT lets radiologists and urologists ‘see’ the most common benign kidney tumor, something CT and MRI have not succeeded in doing alone,” says Mohamad E. Allaf, M.D., MEA Endowed Professor of Urology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “This noninvasive scan may prevent patients with a potentially benign kidney tumor from having to undergo a surgery to remove the tumor or potentially the entire kidney, along with its associated risks and high costs. At Johns Hopkins, use of this test has already spared a number of our patients from unnecessary surgery and unnecessary removal of a kidney that would require them to be on dialysis. These results are hugely encouraging, but we need to do more studies.”

For this study, 48 patients who were diagnosed with a kidney tumor on conventional CT or MRI were imaged with sestamibi SPECT/CT at Johns Hopkins prior to surgery. Radiologists, who were not allowed to talk to each other or know the results of the surgeries, graded the conventional and sestamibi SPECT/CT images benign or malignant using a 5-point scale (1 = definitely benign, 5 = definitely cancerous).

Following surgery, similarly ‘blinded’ pathologists analyzed the tumors without knowing the radiologists’ imaging results. Pathology results of surgically removed tumors showed that 8 of the 48 were benign. The remaining 40 were classified as a variety of other tumor types, including malignant renal cell carcinomas.

Reviewing sestamibi SPECT/CT scan results in conjunction with CT or MRI changed the initial rating levels from cancerous (score 3, 4, 5) toward benign (score 1 and 2) in 9 cases, and changed reviewers’ score from likely cancerous (score 4) to definitely cancerous (score 5) in 5 cases, or about 10 percent of all cases. The addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT increased the reviewers’ diagnostic certainty in 14 of the 48 patients, or in nearly 30 percent of all cases.

Overall, the investigators said, adding sestamibi SPECT/CT helped identify 7 of 9 benign tumors, and conventional imaging with added sestamibi SPECT/CT outperformed conventional imaging alone, as measured by a statistical analysis that measures tradeoffs between sensitivity and specificity. On this measure, a value of 0.50 indicates that a diagnostic test is no better than chance. Conventional imaging combined with sestamibi SPECT/CT had a value of 0.85, while conventional imaging alone had a value of 0.60.

Even for patients whose tumors were not reclassified, the addition of sestamibi SPECT/CT increased physicians’ ability to more confidently classify malignant tumors, which reduces the risk of misdiagnosis and unnecessary surgery for all patients, the researchers say.

Radiologists and urologists have been frustrated for decades by the inability of conventional imaging tests, such as CT and MRI, to distinguish benign from malignant kidney tumors. At Johns Hopkins, multispecialty teams work together to determine the best care for patients and as partners on research innovations and quality improvement initiatives. “This collaborative venue enabled two then-residents [Drs. Michael Gorin and Steven Rowe] from different departments and specialties to design a clinical trial based on a few reports in the literature suggesting a potential role for sestamibi SPECT/CT in this diagnostic conundrum, and their hypothesis proved correct,” says Mehrbod Som Javadi, MD, assistant professor of radiology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and the senior author on the paper. Pamela T. Johnson, MD, associate professor of radiology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine notes, “these types of advances are critical to our precision medicine initiative, Hopkins inHealth, designed for individualized patient management, and to our mission of high-value health care, where the highest quality care is safely delivered at the lowest personal and financial cost to the patient.”

“As radiologists, we have struggled to find noninvasive ways to better classify patients and spare unnecessary surgery, but this has not been easy,” says Steven P. Rowe, M.D., Ph.D., one of the two former residents who developed this approach, and now assistant professor of radiology and radiological science at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “Sestamibi SPECT/CT offers an inexpensive and widely available means of better characterizing kidney tumors, and the identical test is now being performed as part of a large trial in Sweden, for which the first results have just recently been published and appear to confirm our conclusions.”

Although further study is needed to validate the accuracy of sestamibi SPECT/CT, this test appears to be a less expensive, faster, noninvasive alternative to surgery, says Michael A. Gorin, M.D., the other resident involved in developing this approach and now chief resident with The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. “In the absence of diagnostic certainty, surgeons tend to remove kidney tumors in an abundance of caution, leading to an estimated 5,600 surgically removed benign kidney tumors each year in the United States.”

Other authors on this paper include, Sara Sheikhbahaei, Christopher S. Jones, Kristin K. Porter, Alex S. Baras, Phillip M. Pierorazio, Mark W. Ball, Lilja B. Solnes, Jonathan I. Epstein, and Mehrbod S. Javadi, all of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and Takahiro Higuchi of Wurzburg University in Germany.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states that the radiologists evaluating the imagery were unaware of the results of the surgery, that is, whether the tumors were cancerous or benign. It also states that “similarly ‘blinded’ pathologists analyzed the tumors without knowing the radiologists’ imaging results.”  This blinding of the researchers lends credibility to the findings even though the study itself involved a small number of participants.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - New data from centers that aggressively treat short-term “mini-strokes” offer new evidence that quick action can cut the odds of a serious stroke in half.

The findings, reported in the New England Journal of Medicine, are more evidence of the benefits of sending someone to a hospital even if muscle weakness or slurred speech has only lasted for a few seconds, lead author Dr. Pierre Amarenco of Bichat Hospital in Paris told Reuters Health by phone.

That’s because mini-strokes, also known as transient ischemic attacks or TIAs, are often the harbinger of a potentially-deadly stroke that can come within a matter of hours or days.

“You should worry about symptoms even if they last for just a few seconds or a few minutes,” Amarenco said.

“The study showed that the widespread, systematic implementation of specialized TIA units across multiple sites, countries, and continents can make a difference in the care of these patients,” write Drs. Ralph Sacco and Tatjana Rundek of the University of Miami in an accompanying editorial.

The ongoing study, which used previous stroke estimates for comparison, was based on data from 4,789 patients from TIAregistry.org, an international registry designed to follow cases for as long as five years.

It didn’t include a comparison group, which would offer the best evidence, but it “helps build the evidence base for the importance of getting in for early treatment,” said Dr. Donna Arnett, dean of public health at the University of Kentucky and past president of the American Heart Association.

Any kind of mini-stroke “should lead you to be evaluated,” said Arnett, who was not involved in the study.

Research reported prior to 2004 had suggested that the stroke risk is 10 percent two days after mini-stroke symptoms appear and between 8 percent and 20 percent for the 30- to 90-day period after symptom onset.

But in the new study, Amarenco and his colleagues found stroke risks of 1.5 percent at two days, 2.1 percent at seven days and 3.7 percent at 90 days when mini-strokes were treated aggressively.

One year after symptoms, the stroke rate was 5.1 percent.

“Although this was not a randomized trial and there was no comparison group to assess whether specialized units performed better than nonspecialized (stroke) units, these (newly-reported) risks are substantially lower than expected. Outcomes in this study were at least 50 percent lower than those reported in previous studies,” Sacco and Rundek write.

“The rate was remarkably lower,” Arnett told Reuters Health. The study was also noteworthy because, over the long haul, patients did a particularly good job of taking the medications they were given.

The researchers also found that the one-year stroke risk doubled when multiple blood vessel clogs were seen with brain imaging, a large artery was narrowed by heart disease and the patient scored a 6 or 7 on a seven-point scale that assesses stroke risk factors.

More than two thirds of the patients in the study had a score of 4 or higher but the researchers caution that “limiting urgent assessment to patients with a score of 4 or more would miss approximately 20 percent of those with early recurrent strokes.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a strong point for the story. It does an adequate job of describing the study, but what sets it apart is how it addresses some of the limitations of the study. First, the story notes that “[the study] didn’t include a comparison group, which would offer the best evidence.” Later, the story quotes an editorial that accompanied the paper in NEJM: “…this was not a randomized trial and there was no comparison group to assess whether specialized units performed better than nonspecialized (stroke) units…”. We are always happy to see stories that highlight a study’s weaknesses as well as its key findings. They also could have stressed how the numerous possible interventions given to patients at these TIA units also make it hard to draw conclusions about what actually helped.
However, we do want to note the story overlooked one important limitation: None of the hospitals in the study were actually in the U.S., calling into question the applicability of these study results for Americans. The story certainly could have raised this issue, especially since an American Heart Association spokesperson was quoted in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
October 22, 2015 - A minimally invasive implant procedure is highly effective in reducing pain and disability for patients with sacroiliac joint (SIJ) dysfunction, reports a clinical trial in the November issue of Neurosurgery, official journal of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons, published by Wolters Kluwer.

The randomized controlled trial shows superior outcomes in patients undergoing minimally invasive sacroiliac joint (SIJ) fusion using triangular titanium implants, compared to nonsurgical management, according to the new research overseen by Dr. Daniel J. Cher of SI-BONE, Inc., in San Jose, Calif. (The study was sponsored by SI-BONE, manufacturer of the SIJ implants.)

Good Pain Relief and Other Outcomes with Implant Treatment for SIJ Dysfunction

The study included 148 patients with low back pain caused by confirmed SIJ dysfunction, treated at 19 US spine surgery clinics. The SIJ connects the central (sacrum) and lateral (ilium) bones of the pelvis. SIJ disruption or osteoarthritis is a common pain condition, estimated to cause 15 to 23 percent of cases of chronic low back pain.

Trial subjects had severe SIJ pain, with an average pain score of 82 on a 0-to-100-point scale. Average pain duration was longer than six years, and about two-thirds of subjects were taking opioid (narcotic) medications. Many had previously received many non-surgical SIJ treatments, and many had a history of prior spinal surgery.

Two-thirds of subjects were randomly assigned to undergo minimally invasive SIJ fusion. In this procedure, triangular titanium implants were placed through a small incision to stabilize and fuse the SIJ. Procedures were unilateral in most cases, but some subjects underwent bilateral treatment. The remaining subjects received nonsurgical treatments, such as physical therapy, steroid injections and/or radiofrequency ablation of sacral nerve root lateral branches.

Pain and other outcomes were compared at baseline and at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months. At 6 months, subjects in the nonsurgical group had the option to "cross over" to the implant procedure.

Based on reduction in pain and absence of complications at 6 months, treatment was rated successful in 81 percent of subjects assigned to the SIJ implant procedure, compared to 26 percent with nonsurgical treatment. Average pain score decreased to 30 in the surgical group versus 72 in the nonsurgical group. Seventy-three percent of subjects undergoing the implant procedure had "clinically significant" reduction in disability scores, compared to just 14 percent in the nonsurgical group.

After one year, subjects assigned to SIJ fusion still had significant reductions in pain and disability, as well as improved quality of life. Thirty-five subjects from the nonsurgical group opted to undergo the implant procedure, with similarly good results. There were only a few complications related to the SIJ implant procedure.

Sacroiliac joint dysfunction is a common cause of disabling pain in the lower back, buttocks, or groin. Many different surgical and nonsurgical treatments have been used for this condition, despite a lack of high-quality evidence for their effectiveness.

The minimally invasive SIJ implant approach evaluated in this trial has been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration. The study is the first randomized controlled trial to directly compare the results of surgical and nonsurgical treatment for SIJ dysfunction.

The results show "clinically and statistically important" improvements in clinical outcomes for patients undergoing the SIJ implant procedure, according to Dr. Cher and colleagues, with "profound differences" between the surgical and nonsurgical groups. The implant procedure is minimally invasive, has few complications, and produces significant and lasting improvements in pain, disability, and quality of life.

The authors note some important limitations of the trial, including the lack of long-term outcomes in the nonsurgical group due to the high crossover rate. They plan further analyses, including two-year follow-up CT scans and a cost-effectiveness comparison of SIJ fusion versus nonsurgical treatment.

Click here to read "Randomized Controlled Trial of Minimally Invasive Sacroiliac Joint Fusion Using Triangular Titanium Implants vs Nonsurgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint Dysfunction: 12-Month Outcomes."

Article: "Randomized Controlled Trial of Minimally Invasive Sacroiliac Joint Fusion Using Triangular Titanium Implants vs Nonsurgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint Dysfunction: 12-Month Outcomes" (doi: 10.1227/NEU.0000000000000988)

Neurosurgery, the Official Journal of the Congress of Neurological Surgeons, is your most complete window to the contemporary field of neurosurgery. Members of the Congress and non-member subscribers receive 3,000 pages per year packed with the very latest science, technology, and medicine, not to mention full-text online access to the world's most complete, up-to-the-minute neurosurgery resource. For professionals aware of the rapid pace of developments in the field, Neurosurgery is nothing short of indispensable.

Wolters Kluwer is a global leader in professional information services. Professionals in the areas of legal, business, tax, accounting, finance, audit, risk, compliance and healthcare rely on Wolters Kluwer's market leading information-enabled tools and software solutions to manage their business efficiently, deliver results to their clients, and succeed in an ever more dynamic world.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2014 annual revenues of €3.7 billion. The group serves customers in over 170 countries, and employs over 19,000 people worldwide. The company is headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands. Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on NYSE Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We thought the release should have explained why there were twice as many patients in the surgical group compared to the group receiving non-surgical treatment. Normally, a randomized trial aims to have equal numbers in each group.
The release would have benefited from mentioning this was an unblinded study and thus subject to observer bias, among other types of bias. 
The published study stated that “At baseline, 67.6% and 63% of SIJ fusion and NSM [non-surgical management] subjects were taking opioid analgesics for SIJ or lower back pain. By month 6, the proportions were 58.4% and  0.5%, representing a 9% decrease in use for the fusion group and a 7.5% increase in the NSM group (P = .08). ” Although surgical patients were said in the release to have dramatic improvement at 6 months post-surgery, according to the published study, only 9% had stopped using opiate pain medicines. In addition, almost all non-surgical patients crossed over to surgery after 6 months, again suggesting that there may be a strong bias towards surgery.
All this said, we thought the release deserved a satisfactory for its presentation of the evidence. The release adequately disclosed some trial limitations, notably that there was a lack of long-term outcomes in the nonsurgical group due to the high crossover rate and that future analysis will look at two-year follow-up CT scans and the cost-effectiveness comparison of SIJ fusion versus nonsurgical treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For biochemist Peter Molan, honey's ancient power to heal is not a matter of faith. So sure is he of the science behind it that he frequently applies the stuff of his research on himself -- and on his wife.

"She had a persistent boil on her buttocks," he explained. Since no standard salves had helped, he liquefied a dollop of a particular variety of honey known as manuka in the kitchen microwave, poured it over gauze and applied it.

"Fortunately, manuka is effective in treating burns as well as boils," Molan said cheerfully. Within a short time, he said, both boil and burn healed.

Manuka honey -- widely used for wound treatment in New Zealand, where Molan is co-director of Waikato University's Honey Research Unit -- is becoming increasingly accepted for this purpose around the world. Research over the past two decades, much of it conducted in Molan's lab, has focused on the potential for manuka to be used as an antimicrobial that may one day stand alongside such standard wound treatments as silver dressings and penicillin.

Manuka has also attracted attention because, in an era when the efficacy of pharmaceutical antibiotics is under threat, it has shown some promise in the treatment of wounds infected with especially challenging bacteria, such as methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), the superbug whose incidence increased 32-fold in U.S. hospitals between 1976 and 2003, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Manuka dressings have been in use for some time in Great Britain and Australia as well as in New Zealand; earlier this year they were cleared for use as an antimicrobial dressing in Canada; and last month the Food and Drug Administration cleared them for use in wound and burn care -- though not as an antimicrobial drug -- making them the first honey-based products cleared for medical use in the United States.

The picture has not always been so bright for manuka, or its manufacturers. New Zealand's scrubby manuka trees with their creamy blossoms used to be chopped down for farmland. Beekeepers regarded manuka honey as almost worthless, feeding it to their bees or simply discarding it: It was difficult to process, its taste too strong and bitter, its color too dark. In short, it seemed "medicinal."

This began to change with Molan's work. He had spent his career examining the possible antibacterial properties of various natural substances: milk, yeast, bull semen. At a colleague's suggestion, he began looking into manuka honey, and for the past 25 years he has led the way in this particular aspect of apitherapy, the study of honey as a medicine.

Surrounded by the pipettes and petri dishes of his lab, and with a strip of manuka dressing wrapped around a cut finger, Molan says, "Manuka honey tastes like medicine because it is medicine."

Today, New Zealand's Active Manuka Honey Association estimates that 120 tons are sold each year, with sales of almost $10 million annually. Manuka is proving to be a moneymaker for many companies that market it online as "nature's miracle" and "nature's greatest secret," claiming it can relieve everything from stomach ulcers to bedsores and sinus infections. Although Molan says he has no direct financial interests in honey, the honey research unit was set up with support from New Zealand's Honey Industry Trust, and his work has resulted in his university's signing a multimillion-dollar contract last year with New Zealand health-care products company Comvita.

All honey is medicinal to some extent. Its low water content allows it to draw fluid away from wounds; its high sugar content makes it difficult for microorganisms to grow. What's more, worker bees secrete an enzyme, glucose oxidase, into nectar, which releases low levels of the disinfectant hydrogen peroxide when honey makes contact with a damp surface such as a wound. Because of a chemical reaction with tissue, honey also makes healing wounds smell good.

From the time of the ancient Sumerians, who prescribed a mix of river dust and honey for ailing eyes, until the early 20th century, honey was a conventional therapy in fighting infection, but its popularity waned with the advent in the mid-20th century of a potent, naturally occurring antibiotic: the blue-green mold penicillin.

Not all honeys are equal, though. Manuka appears to have a poorly understood antimicrobial ingredient, dubbed its Unique Manuka Factor (UMF). The level of UMF can vary, and each batch of manuka is ranked according to its UMF value: The higher the concentration, the darker, thicker and more expensive the manuka is. A 250-gram jar with UMF16, which is in the midrange, sells for about $28.95 on the Internet.

As with other natural health-care products, many of the claims for manuka's efficacy are sweeping and scantily supported. Molan distances himself from the notion, for example, that, once ingested, manuka acts as a rejuvenator. The most promising research, he and many other scientists say, focuses instead on bioactive honey's potency as a topical application.

The South African Medical Journal reported in 2006 on a trial among gold miners in which honey worked as well as, and was more cost-effective than, a standard gel on shallow wounds and abrasions.

The European Journal of Medical Research reported in 2003 that honey had an 85 percent success rate in treating infected post-op Caesarean wounds, compared with a 50 percent success rate for conventional interventions.

One reason for the heightened interest in honey is that traditional antibiotics are proving increasingly powerless against certain microbes. In 2000, a World Health Organization report warned: "Since 1970, no new classes of antibacterials have been developed to combat infectious diseases." On average, the report said, "research and development of anti-infective drugs takes 10 to 20 years." Today, according to the CDC, "nearly all significant bacterial infections in the world are becoming resistant to the most commonly prescribed antibiotic treatments."

Hence the hope that a naturally occurring substance such as honey might help fill the void.

Molan offers anecdotal evidence from a ward at Waikato Hospital, where MRSA has been a persistent problem. The charge nurse, he says, began placing manuka on all wounds. "Not only did manuka clear up the infections, there were no cross-infections," Molan says. "Now, whenever MRSA appears at Waikato Hospital, they choose honey dressings."

At the May meeting of the European Wound Management Association, researchers presented the results of a small Irish study that compared the effects of manuka honey and a commonly used hydrogel dressing on 100 patients with chronic leg ulcerations. Those patients treated with manuka dressings experienced a higher rate of cleansing and faster healing than those who used the hydrogel dressing. Ten of the patients had ulcers colonized with MRSA. After four weeks, seven of those 10 wounds no longer showed the bacteria's presence. The results have not yet been published.

Even scientists who are intrigued by manuka's promise recognize that more research needs to be done. (And there's wide agreement among medical professionals that people should not test the treatment themselves by slathering their cuts and burns with honey from the pantry shelf.)

Andrew Jull, a research fellow at the University of Auckland's Clinical Trials Research Unit and principal investigator in a trial in New Zealand of 368 patients into the use of honey as a therapy for leg ulcers, says that while "there is reasonable evidence for manuka honey's antibacterial effect" in the lab, "there is still need for in vivo testing."

Molan suggests there may be another reason the United States has been slower than some other countries to adopt medicinal honey: the scientific establishment's resistance to traditional remedies.

He believes it's not customers or patients who need convincing, "it's the medical community. They find it difficult to accept anything that has an ancient lineage, whatever the scientific evidence," he says. "But manuka is catching on fast."

So much so that in July the FDA gave Derma Sciences, a manufacturer of wound-care products based in Princeton, N.J., clearance to sell manuka wound and burn dressings as medical devices. The company, which has been developing manuka products since 2005, buys medical-grade honey from Comvita, which receives unprocessed honey from beekeepers in New Zealand. The dressings should be available this fall.

Rose Cooper, a microbiologist and honey expert at the University of Wales Institute at Cardiff, remains cautiously optimistic that the increased use of honey dressings will help better information to emerge.

"Honey is not a panacea," she said in a telephone interview, but it has been used by British doctors for several years, and with its growing use elsewhere in the world, "health-care professionals will be more likely to consider honey in treating wounds, and so more data will accumulate." ·

Eric Frederick Trump is a science journalist and a research associate of the Trauma and Violence Interdisciplinary Studies Program at New York University. Comments:health@washpost.com.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does mention two trials using the honey, but appropriately points out that there is insufficient evidence to support the many "sweeping claims" that are made about the honey’s effectiveness. The story should have also mentioned that there is evidence in the literature that honey derived from sources other than manuka may work equally as well. As written, the story gives the reader the impression that manuka is in some way superior.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Drugs To Prevent Weak Bones Linked To Unusual Fractures In Women

There's fresh evidence pointing to a troubling link between commonly used osteoporosis drugs and a rare type of thighbone fracture.

When a hip bone breaks because of osteoporosis, the fracture usually involves either the ball at the top of the femur or the narrow neck just below the ball. The unusual fractures that may be associated with certain osteoporosis drugs called bisphosphonates occur lower on the bone. Ironically, that's where the femur, the longest bone in the body, is usually strongest.

These unusual fractures can occur suddenly without any trauma, such as a fall. And they can be complex breaks that are difficult to fix and slow to heal.

In the study, published in current issue of JAMA, researchers looked at 716 of these fractures in more than 200,000 Ontario women who had taken bisphosphonates.

Women who had taken the drugs for five years or longer had nearly a three times higher risk of suffering atypical fractures compared with women who had only transient exposure to such drugs.

That's called the relative risk, and it seems alarming. But the "absolute risk" of these unusual fractures is still pretty low — 13 fractures per year for every 10,000 people taking bisphosphonates for five years or longer. That is, long-term users have a risk of about a tenth of 1 percent.

Moreover, the study verified that long-term use of bisphosphonate drugs reduces the risk of typical osteoporosis fractures by 24 percent. That's obviously a lot more benefit than risk.

"The big message really is the number of typical hip fractures is much, much larger than the number of unusual thigh fractures," says Dr. Gillian Hawker of St. Michael's Hospital in Ontario, an osteoporosis specialist and study author. "So although we believe there is an increased risk of these unusual fractures, it doesn't outweigh the benefit" of taking osteoporosis drugs.

Merck, which makes Fosamax, the original and leading bisphosphonate drug, criticizes the new study. The company said in a statement to Shots that women who had atypical fractures were different from those who didn't. For instance, they started out with a history of more fractures, so the comparison isn't valid.

"Merck believes that the results must be interpreted with caution and should not be overstated," says the company's statement.

Still, the accumulating evidence that there is a risk of these serious, unusual fractures associated with bisphosphonates is getting a lot of attention in the medical community.

Last fall the Food and Drug Administration issued a "safety update" urging doctors and patients to be on the lookout for the problem. Often, the FDA says, an atypical fracture is preceded by pain in the thigh, apparently from a small stress fracture that signals bone weakness. "Although it is not clear if bisphosphonates are the cause, these unusual femur fractures have been predominantly reported in patients taking bisphosphonates," the FDA says.

The concern is heightened by another, even rarer possible side effect – osteonecrosis of the jaw. Basically, it means that part of the jawbone dies.

Some reports – including one published earlier this month in the Journal of Dental Research — have found a higher risk of the jaw problem in dental patients taking bisphosphonates.

Again, Merck disputes the connection. Earlier this month it convinced a New Jersey jury that Fosamax did not cause one woman's jaw problems.

Amid all the debate, many specialists are wondering if women on bisphosphonates should take a "holiday" from the drug from time to time. The idea is that perhaps they'd get the osteoporosis benefit without the risks of osteonecrosis and unusual fractures. "You could do five years on, five years off," Dr. Clifford Rosen, a bone specialist at Maine Medical Center, tells Shots. "Some people are doing three on and three off."

But at some point, should these patients start taking the drug again? "I don't think anybody knows," Rosen says. "The thought is you would have to put them back on at some time."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The fact that this was the largest study to date is important, since large groups are needed to evaluate rare events like these thighbone fractures. There is helpful discussion of how to interpet the risk vs. benefits outlined in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 3, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new study finds that people with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who haven't done well on other treatments may find relief with Xeljanz (tofacitinib), a drug currently used to treat arthritis.

Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease. It affects about 700,000 Americans, according to the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation (CCF).

The illness causes inflammation, irritation, swelling and sores on the lining of the large intestine. Symptoms include diarrhea with blood or pus and abdominal discomfort, according to CCF.

"There is still a substantial unmet need for new treatments for patients with ulcerative colitis," said study lead author Dr. William Sandborn. He is professor of medicine and chief of the division of gastroenterology at the University of California, San Diego.

Xeljanz targets certain proteins involved in the body's inflammatory and immune responses that other so-called biologic drugs don't, the researchers said.

"Treatment with oral tofacitinib is potentially a new treatment option for patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis, pending review by the [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]," Sandborn said.

The study was funded by Pfizer, Inc., the maker of Xeljanz. Sandborn said he has received research grants from the company and served as a consultant for Pfizer.

Whether Xeljanz should be used as a first treatment is still not clear, said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Because Xeljanz comes as a pill, it could have an advantage for patients, Swaminath said. But so far it has only been tried with patients who have not responded to other treatments, he said.

"How it is used in the real world may be different than how it was used in these studies," Swaminath said. "I am not going out on a limb and say this should be the first choice, because we don't have enough data to say that's the way it should be positioned."

The researchers randomly assigned more than 1,700 people with ulcerative colitis to one of three phase 3 trials.

The first two trials looked at more than 1,100 patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who had failed with conventional treatment or treatment with newer "tumor necrosis factor antagonist" drugs, such as Remicade (infliximab). They received Xeljanz or a placebo twice a day for eight weeks.

In the third trial, nearly 600 patients who responded to Xeljanz were assigned to a maintenance dose (one group with 5 milligrams [mg] and another group with 10 mg) of the drug, or placebo for a year.

In the first trial, nearly 19 percent of the patients taking Xeljanz experienced a remission of their condition in eight weeks. That compared to just 8 percent of patients receiving placebo.

In the second trial, almost 17 percent of those taking Xeljanz had a remission, compared with nearly 4 percent of those taking placebo, the researchers found.

In the third trial, more than 34 percent of patients taking 5 mg of Xeljanz had disease remission after one year. Forty percent of those taking a 10-mg dose of the drug had remission at a year. Only 11 percent of patients on placebo saw a remission.

However, in all of the trials, more patients taking Xeljanz suffered from infections, such as shingles, than those receiving placebo, researchers found.

In addition, five patients taking Xeljanz developed nonmelanoma skin cancer, compared with one patient receiving placebo. Five patients taking the drug experienced heart problems compared with no one on the placebo.

Also, compared with placebo, Xeljanz was associated with an increase in levels of cholesterol.

The report was published May 4 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Dr. Sonia Friedman is an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. She's also the author of an editorial accompanying the study.

"Tofacitinib is a promising new class of medical therapy that has efficacy in ulcerative colitis. It is an oral, small-molecule drug that is different from current biologic therapies, such as infliximab [Remicade], adalimumab [Humira], golimumab [Simponi] and vedolizumab [Entyvio]," Friedman said.

An advantage of Xeljanz is that it is a pill. Other biologic drugs are given by infusion or injection. In addition, patients cannot develop antibodies to Xeljanz as they can with other biologic drugs, Friedman said.

"Tofacitinib may be used in the future as rescue therapy from failure of biologics," she said. "Only future studies will determine whether it can be used as initial therapy for ulcerative colitis and what patients it would help the most."

For more information on ulcerative colitis, visit the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of clearly, but concisely, summarizing the design of the three clinical trials, letting us know the groups were randomized to receive either treatment or a placebo. More information on the number of patients in each cohort would have been nice, but the story is solid here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers trying to find a way to treat multiple sclerosis think they’ve come up with an approach that could not only help patients with MS, but those with a range of so-called autoimmune diseases, from type-1 diabetes to psoriasis, and perhaps even food allergies.

So far it’s only worked in mice, but it has worked especially well. And while mice are different from humans in many ways, their immune systems are quite similar.

“If this works, it is going to be absolutely fantastic,” said Bill Heetderks, who directs outside research at the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, part of the National Institutes of Health, which helped pay for the research. “Even if it doesn’t work, it’s going to be another step down the road.”

In autoimmune disease, the body’s immune cells mistakenly attack and destroy healthy tissue. In MS, it’s the fatty protective sheath around the nerves; in type-1 or juvenile diabetes it’s cells in the pancreas that make insulin; in rheumatoid arthritis it’s tissue in the joint.

Currently, the main treatment is to suppress the immune system, an approach that can leave patients vulnerable to infections and cancer. The new treatment re-educates the immune cells so they stop the attacks.

The approach uses tiny little balls called nanoparticles made of the same material used to make surgical sutures that dissolve harmlessly in the body. They’re attached to little bits of the protein that the immune cells are attacking, the researchers report in Sunday’s issue of the journal Nature Biotechnology.

Stephen Miller of the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago had been trying a slightly different approach to treating MS. When normal cells die naturally through a self-destruction process called apoptosis, immune cells called macrophages come in and eat up the mess.

The macrophages are carried to the spleen where they show these ground-up bits of cells to other immune cells called T-cells. It’s a kind of introduction that familiarizes the T-cells with the body’s normal cells. Then T-cells know not to attack healthy cells.

Miller’s team had been trying to find ways to use this process to re-educate the T-cells. They have been attaching bits of the myelin that T-cells mistakenly attack to healthy cells from MS patients that were self-destructing, then infusing the concoction back into MS patients.

The idea would be to “introduce” the myelin to the T-cells at the same time they were “meeting” the healthy tissue, and educate them to leave the myelin alone.

So far the team has only shown the process is safe – a phase 1 clinical trial. But Miller says the experiment also seemed to show they were beginning to repair the patients’ immune systems. However, it was hideously expensive. “It cost probably about a million dollars to treat 10 patients using live cells,” he said.

Obviously, the researchers needed something cheaper. Miller got together with Lonnie Shea, a professor of chemical and biological engineering at Northwestern. They substituted cheap little balls of plastic called polystyrene nanoparticles for the self-destructing cells.

These new nanoparticles stopped the course of a MS-like disease in mice, the researchers found. But polystyrene is no good to use in people. It doesn’t break down and contains a compound, styrene, that may cause cancer.

Shea had another possibility, called poly(lactide-co-glycolide) or PLG for short. “It turns out this is an FDA approved substance that is used in resorbable sutures,” said Miller.

“There is nothing rare or exotic or strange here,” said NIBIB’s Heetderks. The particles are easy to produce, he said.

This worked just as well in mice. It only takes an hour in a chemical bath to attach little bits of myelin to the nanoparticles of PLG. When infused into a vein, they’re carried by the blood right to the spleen, where the nanoparticles “meet” the T-cells.

If the treatment was done as soon as the mice had their first MS-like attack, the attacks stopped. The effects lasted for the entire lives of the mice, Miller said.

What’s great about the approach, Miller says, is that it can be used to treat any autoimmune disease. For diabetes, little bits of pancreatic beta cells could be attached to the nanoparticles. For a food allergy, the part of the food that causes the allergic response could be attached. “You can try to induce tolerance to peanuts or eggs or shellfish or whatever you are allergic to,” he said.

One shortcoming is that scientists don’t always know what’s causing an autoimmune disease. “We know that in rheumatoid arthritis, your joints get attacked, but what we don’t know really well is what specific protein in your joints is being attacked. We really need to know that before we can apply this therapy,” Miller said.

Now the researchers are looking for funding so they can test this new approach in people. They’re in discussions with the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation to test it in people with type-1 diabetes, and the Myelin Repair Foundation to test it in MS patients, Miller said. They may form their own company to develop it as a medical treatment, something that would be years away.

Mice don’t live very long, and it’s not clear if human patients would need repeat treatments. But the T-cells that are re-educated usually live for a long time in the body, and have long memories, Miller said.

It’s also clear the approach would not repair any damage already done by the disease, so the best candidates would be patients having their very first symptoms. But it might be possible down the road to combine the nanoparticle treatment with another treatment to replace the damaged tissue in more advanced patients, Miller said.

New drug may help MS
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does an excellent job describing the science involved. The descriptions of the different phases of the research and the attempts to perfect this approach are clearly laid out. The story does mention enough times that the research is being conducted in mice and that human trials are years away, but we think it should have steered clear of some of the broader statements about the treatment’s applicability. Like this paragraph:
What’s great about the approach, Miller says, is that it can be used to treat any autoimmune disease. For diabetes, little bits of pancreatic beta cells could be attached to the nanoparticles. For a food allergy, the part of the food that causes the allergic response could be attached. “You can try to induce tolerance to peanuts or eggs or shellfish or whatever you are allergic to,” he said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists are finding more pieces of the autism puzzle of with the help of MRI scans of brain circuitry, according to a study published Thursday online in the journal Autism Research.

By scanning the brain for 10 minutes using magnetic resonance imaging, researchers were able to measure six physical differences of microscopic fibers in the brains of 30 males with confirmed high-functioning autism and 30 males without autism.

The images of the brains helped researchers correctly identify those with autism with 94 percent accuracy, says Nicholas Lange, an associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and one of the study authors.

"No one has measured what we measured," says Lange of the MRI test he and Dr. Janet Lainhart from the University of Utah developed.

While previous studies using different types of scans have been able to identify people with autism, Lange says, "no one has looked at it [the brain] the way we have and no one has gotten these type of results."

Lange is quick to caution that this type of test is not yet ready for prime time. "We do not want to give anyone false hopes that this is ready for the clinic yet. This method, this test, needs to be tried [and confirmed] with many more subjects outside our laboratory," he says. Plus, the research needs to be expanded to many more study participants and tried on younger people with autism and those who are not as high-functioning as the subjects in this first trial.

Using the MRI, the study authors measured how the water in the brain flows along the axons or nerve fibers in the parts of the brain that control language, social and emotional functioning. The scans revealed that the wiring of the brains of those with autism was disorganized compared with the brains of a typical person without autism. This is how they could determine which brains scans belonged those study participants with autism.

The study included only males between the ages of 7 and 28 because they were part of a bigger research project at the University of Utah, which is following males with autism for a longer period. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates 1 in 110 children in the United States have an autism spectrum disorder and boys are far more likely to have this neurological disorder that affects language and social behavior – that number is about 1 in 70. However future studies will include girls too.

Currently there's no biologic test for autism, so pediatricians look to see if a child is meeting certain developmental milestones as well as signs and symptoms of autism. (The advocacy group Autism Speaks has posted videos to help parents see the signs of autism)

The earlier a child has been identified as having autism, the earlier behavioral therapies can be applied to lessen the impact of the disorder later in life. Lange believes this brain scans can be done on younger children, as long as they can go to sleep in the scanner – on their own, without sedation (because you can't move during the test).

Carissa Cascio, an assistant professor of psychiatry from Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, who specializes in autism and neuro-imaging, believes these study results are important. But she cautions that using this method as a true diagnostic tool to detect autism in a child is "a long way off." "What this paper seems to be doing is taking the first steps towards parlaying what we are able to glean from brain imaging into potential diagnostic tools."

Zachary Warren, who is the director of the Vanderbilt Kennedy Center Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorders (TRIAD), says since there are many types of autism, "it becomes very challenging to capture all these differences with one test." Still he believes this is new study can help pinpoint the earliest markers of concern in developing brains.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story analyzes the evidence better than the Reuters story by pointing out the limitations in the study. It also actually explains what this MRI does to find the differences. Because “the study included only males between the ages of 7 and 28” the study findings could prove problematic for the authors’ claims that the scans will lead to earlier diagnosis. “The earlier a child has been identified as having autism, the earlier behavioral therapies can be applied to lessen the impact of the disorder later in life,” the story says. But how will earlier children be tested? It’s simple, Lange says, “as long as they can go to sleep in the scanner – on their own, without sedation (because you can’t move during the test).” That’s a big “what if.” Any parent with a child under 7 can tell you how hard it is to get them to stay in one place, let alone fall asleep and remain immobile in a confined space.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Botox injections may provide some relief from arm tremors caused by multiple sclerosis, according to a small study published Monday. Botulinum toxin type A is sold under different brands, but it’s best known by the Allergan brand-name Botox.

Botox gained fame for smoothing aging skin — by blocking nerve signals and relaxing muscles under the skin — but the product has a number of medical uses. In the U.S., Botox is approved to treat conditions like chronic migraine, excessive sweating and certain symptoms of MS: overactive bladder and muscles spasms in the arms.

The new study, published in the journal Neurology, tested the effects of Botox injections on MS-related arm tremors, which affect up to two-thirds of people with MS. Researchers found that when they gave injections to 23 patients, the treatment typically eased their tremors and improved their writing ability.

Right now, there’s no good way to treat MS arm tremors, said Nicholas G. LaRocca, vice-president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society. Physical therapy and exercise have been studied, but are usually not very effective, said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study. Surgery is sometimes used in severe cases, but it’s risky and may not even have lasting benefits.

“Exploring new treatments is important, and it’s heartening to see there’s some promise here,” LaRocca said of the current findings. But there’s still a lot to be learned, he cautioned in an interview.

“This study is fairly preliminary, and it had a small number of patients,” LaRocca said. Larger studies, of more-diverse groups of MS patients, are needed, he said.

The study’s lead researcher agreed on the need for more work. “There are several questions that need to be answered by doing larger and longer-term studies,” Dr. Anneke van der Walt, a neurologist at Royal Melbourne Hospital in Australia, said in an email.

One is how long the benefits of repeat Botox injections might last: this study tested the effects of just one Botox treatment over three months.

In real life, the injections would have to be repeated every few months, or possibly every six months for some people, according to van der Walt. Another question is whether the side effects change over time. Muscle weakness was the most common side effect in this study, van der Walt said. It affected 42 percent of the study patients, though it went away within two weeks.

Muscle weakness is a potential concern in MS patients, LaRocca noted, since that problem often comes with the disease itself.

The study included 23 MS patients with mild to moderate arm tremors. Each patient received a round of Botox injections and a round of placebo injections (containing saline), three months apart. Half of the patients got the Botox first, the other half the placebo.

On average, the patients’ tremor “scores” had gone from a 5 to a 3 six weeks after Botox treatment — which essentially means moving from “moderate” to “mild,” LaRocca said. Their ability to write and draw a straight line had also improved by week six, and the benefits were still there at week 12.

In contrast, there were no improvements after the placebo injections.

Larger studies, van der Walt said, should look at whether Botox is more effective for some tremors than others. Tremors limited to the hand and forearm, for instance, might respond better than tremors that also affect the shoulder. If Botox is eventually approved for this MS symptom, LaRocca said it will be important for doctors to get training in how to give the injections — since the drug has to go into carefully chosen locations in the muscle.

“So practitioners will have to be up to speed,” LaRocca said. There will also be the matter of cost. That will vary from patient to patient, depending on how many injections are needed per treatment.

According to van der Walt, the cost could range from $500 to $1,000 Australian dollars, which are roughly equal to U.S. dollars. In the U.S., Botox treatments can cost $455-$575 per injection site.

Botox maker Allergan supplied the product for the study, and two of the researchers on the work have financial ties to the company. The study itself was funded by the Box Hill MS Research Fund and the Royal Melbourne Hospital.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Good context provided.  Example:
“This study is fairly preliminary, and it had a small number of patients,” LaRocca said. Larger studies, of more-diverse groups of MS patients, are needed, he said.
The study’s lead researcher agreed on the need for more work. “There are several questions that need to be answered by doing larger and longer-term studies,” Dr. Anneke van der Walt, a neurologist at Royal Melbourne Hospital in Australia, said in an email.
One is how long the benefits of repeat Botox injections might last: this study tested the effects of just one Botox treatment over three months.
In real life, the injections would have to be repeated every few months, or possibly every six months for some people, according to van der Walt. Another question is whether the side effects change over time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
May 18, 2010 -- Flibanserin, an antidepressant-like drug, makes sex more satisfying for some premenopausal women distressed over their low sexual desire.

The findings come from phase III clinical trials that drugmaker Boehringer Ingelheim hopes will convince the FDA to approve flibanserin for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD).

While HSDD is a controversial diagnosis -- some experts see it as the medicalization of what is for many women a relationship issue -- the 1,378 premenopausal women enrolled in the clinical trials were suffering distress over their lack of sexual desire.

Compared to women who received inactive placebo pills, those who took flibanserin at bedtime were more likely to get relief from self-reported sexual distress, to experience more sexual desire, and to have more sexually satisfying experiences.

The drug didn't work for all women. Just under a third of women taking flibanserin got over their sexual distress and/or lack of sexual desire (vs. about a fifth of women taking placebo pills). But the difference was important to the women, says study researcher Michael L. Krychman, MD, medical director of sexual medicine at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif.

"The absolute number of women who had remission of sexual distress was clinically significant, but equally important to them was how it improved their lives," Krychman tells WebMD.

Nearly half of women taking flibanserin (and nearly a third of women taking placebo) reported at least minimal improvement in "bothersome decreased sexual desire."

Flibanserin is taken nightly at bedtime. However, it's not an on-demand treatment. Data suggest that the drug begins to affect sexual satisfaction after four weeks of continuous treatment.

In the 24-week "Bouquet" studies (each of the Boehringer Ingelheim-funded studies is named after a flower), there were few drug-related side effects. Those most commonly reported were daytime sleepiness, dizziness, fatigue, anxiety, dry mouth, nausea, and insomnia. Some 15% of women on flibanserin, and 7% of those on placebo, stopped treatment due to side effects.

Updated reports on data from the North American "Daisy" and "Violet" studies were made by Krychman and other researchers at this week's annual meeting of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists in San Francisco.

Kychman is an advisor to Boehringer Ingelheim and serves on their speakers' bureau, services for which he is compensated.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of presenting and evaluating the available evidence.  Results are presented in absolute terms, for example that just under one third of women taking flibanserin reported improvement in sexual distress/desire compared to approximately one fifth of women taking placebo.  In contrast, these results were presented in relative terms by the manufacturer. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In 1992, Harvard neuroscientist Richard Davidson embarked on an unusual research project to study the brains of Buddhist monks who spent thousands of hours meditating. He found that not only did the practice activate different parts of the brain, it also seemed to impact the body in ways that matter for health.

That pivotal study has led to a number of research projects in recent years that look at what calming the brain does for specific medical conditions and diseases.

The results of one of those studies are out Tuesday in JAMA. The study looks at adults with chronic low back pain, one of the leading cause of disabilities in the United States and one reason why more and more people are addicted to painkillers.

Led by Daniel C. Cherkin of Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, the experiment involved randomly assigning 342 adults with the condition to meditate, talk with a psychologist or continue with their normal techniques for addressing the pain, such as medication. The first group engaged in yoga and mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), which focuses on being aware of and accepting physical discomfort. The second group participated in cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) to change pain-related thoughts and behaviors during eight weekly two-hour group sessions.

The participants in the small study ranged in age from 20 to 70 and had suffered from back pain for an average of 7.3 years.

The results for both techniques were very positive. At 26 weeks, 61 percent of those in the meditation group reported improvement in the activities they could do, compared with 58 percent in the CBT group and 44 percent of those who stuck to their usual routines. The results for pain improvement were similar, with 55 percent in the meditation group reporting improvement compared with 45 percent in the CBT group and 27 percent in the usual-care group. The numbers were similar when rechecked at 52 weeks.

"These findings suggest that MBSR may be an effective treatment option for patients with chronic low back pain," the authors wrote.

The study did caution that 30 of the 103, or about one-third, of the participants in the meditation group reported an "adverse event," most often an increase in pain due to yoga.

In an editorial, Madhav Goyal and Jennifer A. Haythornthwaite of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine said that the mechanisms for why meditation might work on back pain is still a mystery but that this question is merely "academic" for many clinicians and their patients who need immediate relief.

The two wrote that despite this and other unknowns, the study provides "a compelling argument for ensuring that an evidence-based health care system should provide access to affordable mind-body therapies."

MIT scientists find evidence that Alzheimer’s ‘lost memories’ may one day be recoverable

’Siri, I want to commit suicide’ and other statements likely to yield unhelpful responses from your phone

Roots of Napoleon complex may be justified: Study finds short men get short of end stick in life.



Kids with August birthdays are more likely to get an ADHD diagnosis. Here’s why.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story describes the study in detail, explicitly stating the study size and the absolute percentages in each arm that had benefit. It also acknowledged the study was randomized. We’ll count this as sufficient for Satisfactory, keeping in mind the following:
As explained in the summary above, the story doesn’t make clear MBSR and CBT were used in addition to conventional medical treatment, rather than instead of medical treatment.
The story didn’t mention that the study excluded participants with what the study authors term “a specific diagnosis (eg, spinal stenosis).” In other words, the study did not address treatments for back pain caused by issues like a herniated disc or rheumatoid arthritis. Many readers have these conditions, and should be informed that these study results may not be applicable to their situation.
Lastly, we would have welcomed a discussion of the high rates of success within the control group. Forty-four percent in that group experienced a gain in functionality, for example. That seems pretty good! What do the researchers have to say about that?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Thirty percent of Americans say they’re trying to reduce or eliminate gluten in their diets. But only about 1 percent of the population has an autoimmune response to gluten. Somewhere in that gap, a diet fad is thriving.

There are two groups of people who should definitely avoid gluten: those diagnosed with wheat allergies and those who have celiac disease. The latter is more common, affecting about 1 percent of the population. The former affects perhaps 0.1 percent of people and is more common in children, who often grow out of it.

What is less clear is whether there is another group of individuals whose digestive systems have some “gluten sensitivity” and who would, therefore, benefit from avoiding gluten. The people who think they’re sensitive to gluten are filling the gap between those who should avoid gluten and those who are doing it anyway. But how many people really are sensitive?

Gluten, for those of you who have not kept up with dietary fads, is a component of wheat. You eat it in bread, pasta, pizza and so on. Gluten-avoiders are helped by an increasing array of gluten-free breads, pastas and other products. Entire aisles of Whole Foods Market stores appear to be devoted to this trend.

Despite the growing availability of alternative products, avoiding gluten can be a challenge. The satisfying, slightly chewy texture of bread requires gluten. For those of us who care about our health but, let’s face it, like a nice baguette, it seems worth asking: Is there any actual health benefit to gluten avoidance?

The earliest report on whether gluten could muck with some digestive tracts comes from the late 1970s. Two authors reported on a woman in her early 40s who was experiencing significant “gastrointestinal distress” (bloating, gas, diarrhea, constipation, etc.) and did not have celiac disease or a wheat allergy. After being put on a gluten-free diet, she improved immediately. When gluten was reintroduced to her diet as a test, the symptoms returned, only to disappear when the gluten was again removed. The authors diagnosed the woman with what they termed “non-celiac gluten sensitivity” (NCGS).

Gluten sensitivity fell off the radar for many years, but researchers have returned to it and adopted the same term. In contrast to celiac disease or a wheat allergy, NCGS is not diagnosed through direct testing. Rather, it refers to a condition in which someone experiences some problematic gastrointestinal symptoms that resolve when gluten is avoided. Gastrointestinal symptoms are the hallmark of NCGS — although some people also complain of fatigue or a foggy head.

Of course, it’s difficult to distinguish between someone who is sensitive to gluten and someone who is sensitive to the placebo effect. Since there is no test for gluten sensitivity, “diagnoses” are based on whether people say they feel better when they avoid gluten. But the mind is a powerful thing. If you think avoiding gluten will make you feel better, there is a reasonable chance that it will — even if gluten is irrelevant.

This effect makes it hard to test for gluten sensitivities even in a randomized controlled trial. If a researcher enrolls people in a standard randomized controlled trial and has some participants eat bread and some not, those who avoid bread may feel better simply because they think they should. The placebo effect may lead a researcher to falsely conclude that avoiding bread is beneficial.

But that’s not enough. To really get a sense of whether gluten sensitivity is a thing, researchers need to conduct a double-blind randomized controlled trial in which one group eats gluten, another does not, and no one knows which group they are in. That means putting everyone on a gluten-free diet and then directly supplementing some people with gluten protein and others with something that seems similar but has no gluten.

There have been two small studies like this. They were run by the same team. And, unfortunately for our ability to draw conclusions, they find different results. The first of these, published in 2011, followed 34 people for up to six weeks. The study population was made up of people who complained of gastrointestinal symptoms consistent with NCGS.

Everyone participating in the study was on a gluten-free diet. Half had their diet supplemented with a regular muffin and regular bread; the other half received a gluten-free muffin and gluten-free bread. The authors found that 40 percent of patients on the entirely gluten-free diet reported a continuation of symptoms, compared with 68 percent of those who had consumed gluten. The groups also differed on such measures as “satisfaction with stool consistency,” a phrase that I honestly never thought I would write.

The second study, published in 2013, had a similar set up — 37 people complaining of gastrointestinal problems, randomized into high-gluten, low-gluten and no-gluten groups. This time, rather than using bread and muffins, the authors used gluten and whey protein supplements. They found no difference in symptoms among the groups.

Why the results of these studies differ is unclear. One possibility is that some participants in the first study guessed which group they were in based on the muffin and bread and therefore the placebo effect became pronounced. Another possibility is simply that given how small the studies were, the differences occurred by chance. Regardless of the reason, we are left with little convincing evidence that gluten avoidance matters.

But let’s say you take heart in the first of these studies and now believe that avoiding gluten will make some people feel better even though they don’t have an allergy or celiac disease. How many people? Estimates of prevalence of NCGS are based, more or less, on information on gluten avoidance. In the 2009-10 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, about 0.6 percent of people without celiac disease or an allergy say their diet is gluten-free. And in a large Italian study of people who complain of gastrointestinal problems, the authors conclude that NCGS is slightly more common than celiac disease, putting it at a prevalence of a bit above 1 percent of the population.

For those of you keeping track at home, that means that while 30 percent of Americans are trying to cut gluten from their diet, probably at most only 1 percent of Americans may have NCGS.

If you don’t have celiac disease or a wheat allergy and are experiencing distressing gastrointestinal symptoms after eating gluten — lack of satisfaction with your stool consistency, for example — there is something like a 1 in 30 chance that the gluten is potentially responsible. If you cut out gluten and it makes you feel better, great. Although it may all be in your head.

If you are cutting out gluten for any other reason, all that will happen is you’ll feel the same, but without the pleasure of bread that tastes like bread.

CORRECTION (Feb. 12, 11:50 a.m.): An earlier version of this article incorrectly state that it is hard to test for gluten allergies. It’s hard to test for gluten sensitivities. The previous version also misstated the probability that gluten is responsible for gastrointestinal distress for those who experience gastrointestinal distress after consuming gluten and who don’t have celiac disease or a wheat allergy. The probability is 1 in 30, not 1 in 100.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of evaluating the literature on NCGS in regard to the potential benefits of a gluten-free diet. Even better, the story (which appears in an online-only publication) includes links to every study it mentions. The story also makes good use of common-sense examples — for example, lack of “blinding” when participants know they are eating bread — to explain important concepts of study design in randomized trials. It provides information that goes beyond the specific topic of NCGS to educate readers about how to understand the strengths and limits of studies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most angioplasties not necessary, study finds

NEW ORLEANS — More than half a million people a year with chest pain are getting an unnecessary or premature procedure to unclog their arteries because drugs are just as effective, suggests a landmark study that challenges one of the most common practices in heart care.

The stunning results found angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevent heart attacks and give lasting chest-pain relief.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

Drugs are better today than they used to be and do a surprisingly good job, said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

"It may not be as bad as we thought" to leave the artery alone, she said.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

It involved 2,287 patients throughout the U.S. and Canada who had substantial blockages, typically in two arteries, but were medically stable. They had an average of 10 chest pain episodes a week — moderately severe. About 40 percent had a prior heart attack.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation. Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4 1/2 years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group — about 19 percent of each.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.

At the start of the study, 80 percent had chest pain. Three years into it, 72 percent of the angioplasty group was free of this symptom as was 67 percent of the drug group. That means you would have to give angioplasties to 20 people for every one whose chest pain was better after three years — an unacceptably high ratio, Nissen said.

After five years, 74 percent of the angioplasty group and 72 percent of the medication group were free of chest pain — "no significant difference," Boden said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job reporting on the results of the study; it explained that all the people in the study were treated with medication and that half of the people were assigned to have angioplasty.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dear Julia: How well do flu shots actually work?

Just about every influential public health figure urges people to get their flu shots each fall as a necessary precaution during influenza season.

So over dinner, I asked a couple of respected evidence-based medicine researchers what they thought of the vaccine. I was taken aback by their response. They basically laughed at the idea that the flu shot was particularly effective.

This posed a conundrum. It seemed like there were two groups saying very different things. But after reviewing the research, I think I understand what's going on here. It's true that flu vaccines don't work spectacularly well, at least according to the best evidence we have (and most of the evidence on flu vaccines is of poor methodological quality). But the downsides to getting a vaccine are extremely minimal, and flu shots may still be helpful in reducing some illness and saving lives, which is why public health experts say you should get vaccinated anyway.

Why the flu vaccine isn't always effective

The flu vaccine has been our main strategy for warding off seasonal flu for more than 60 years. Seasonal influenza, which surfaces as a respiratory illness, is caused by influenza A and B viruses. The flu shot is designed to protect people against three or four strains of the A and B viruses that researchers believe will be most common that year, leading to the nasty fevers, headaches, coughs, and runny noses that make many people miserable in the fall and winter.

The challenge, however, is that the flu virus is highly unstable, mutating all the time. So this means drug companies can't just make one kind of vaccine that'll last a lifetime. Every year, public health agencies essentially make educated guesses on what strains and mutations will make the rounds. And that's not easy. In February, the World Health Organization offers a prediction — based on surveillance and laboratory and clinical studies — and then each country uses that prediction to approve vaccines in its jurisdiction. (In the US, the Food and Drug Administration makes that final call.) The potential for error here can dramatically alter the effectiveness of the flu shot in a given season. If vaccine makers prepare for one combination of viruses and different ones end up circulating widely, the vaccine won't work that well.

This may help explain why the evidence on the effectiveness of flu shots is relatively mixed. The Cochrane Collaboration, an independent nonprofit that reviews the evidence on medical questions, has conducted two major meta-analyses (looking at the results of lots of individual studies) on whether the shot prevents flu in healthy children and adults.

In kids, the highest-quality evidence — a randomized controlled trial — suggests the vaccine works well enough: On average, if you give six kids under the age of 6 a flu shot, you can expect to prevent one case of the flu. For children under age 2, the benefits are less clear; the evidence, the researchers found, was scant, and of the research that was available, it seemed the efficacy of the shot was similar to placebo.

In adults, however, the vaccine's effects are more modest. "Depending on the season," explained Tom Jefferson, an author on these Cochrane reviews, "you need to vaccinate anywhere between 33 and 100 people to avoid one set of symptoms." In a good year, when the WHO guesses correctly and the flu shot matches the strains in circulation, you need to give 33 adults flu shots, on average, to prevent one case of illness. In a year when the WHO guesses badly, you need to vaccinate 100 people to prevent one flu case.

Jefferson pointed out that his Cochrane review on adults also found that flu vaccination rates have barely any effect on the number of sick days taken and no major impact on rates of hospitalization. So, yes, the flu vaccine can prevent illness, but it's hard to detect major effects on public health in the data.

On the other hand, the evidence suggests that there's no harm in getting a flu shot, either. The meta-analyses found no evidence of serious side effects beyond the odd case of soreness at the injection site.

That seems to be the same conclusion that other studies have drawn — the flu vaccine is modestly helpful, and doesn't hurt. In 2012 researchers analyzed 15 meta-analyses on the flu shot and concluded, "Most influenza vaccines have been shown to confer some protection against naturally acquired infection and no evidence for major harms has emerged."

One key caveat here is that the evidence, overall, is pretty poor quality. Most of these analyses rely overwhelmingly on observational studies, where researchers observe and gather data on people who take the flu shot compared with those who don't. Because these aren't experiments — ideally we'd have randomized controlled trials — they're more prone to bias and therefore less reliable.

In the case of the elderly, the situation is particularly troublesome. As this Lancet study points out, because annual flu shots were recommended for the elderly since the 1960s, it has been unethical to conduct high-quality randomized controlled trials where you give only one group the shot in order to compare it with another group that didn't get the vaccine. So, as this Cochrane review notes, it's impossible to draw firm conclusions on the effectiveness of the flu vaccine for those over 65 because the data is so biased and poor.

Again, though, this doesn't mean we should throw away the vaccine. Stanford researcher John Ioannidis told me how he makes sense of this issue after reviewing the evidence: "Overall the flu vaccine is effective, and it does save lives. I cannot put an exact figure to how many, but it may well be millions of lives. Generally it is safe and rather cheap, so even if the effectiveness is less than optimal sometimes, overall it is a good deal."

Why people still bother to get the shot

Despite the limited evidence of effectiveness, there are still good reasons why public health experts recommend the shot.

For one, in those years when the WHO guesses correctly which strains will circulate, the shot tends to be a lot more helpful than some of these averages suggest. And the vaccine is overwhelmingly safe. There's also little by way of alternatives. Beyond public health measures (making sure you have good hand hygiene and avoiding the office when you're sick), the flu shot is the best medical intervention we have for preventing infection. So there's little downside with at least some potential benefit. I personally continue to get the flu shot for this reason.

As Roger Baxter, the co-director of the Kaiser Permanente Vaccine Study Center, told me, "Flu vaccines are not a panacea, and do not prevent all cases of flu, even in the best years, when there are no manufacturing problems and the match is perfect." He continued: "However, the vaccines provide moderate protection, and can prevent huge numbers of cases of this serious illness. Many studies have shown that the vaccines are very safe, so the benefit-to-risk ratio is high and the cost is relatively low."

Welcome to Dear Julia, a column where readers can submit everyday health questions. Which over-the-counter painkillers work best? Is it better to run or walk for exercise? How much harm does frequent flying do to your body? Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form, or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gives readers the results of numerous meta-studies that compile partial answers on the vaccine’s effectiveness.  It also rightly points out the limitations of those studies, and the research they’re based on, in that ethics forbids the kind of control versus placebo trials that could show cause and effect.  Nevertheless, the story is clear in pointing out the limitations of the data it presents, giving readers enough information to make their own decisions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The growing number of patients who claim marijuana has helped them drop their painkiller habit has intrigued lawmakers and emboldened advocates. Many are pushing for cannabis as a treatment for the abuse of opioids and illegal narcotics such as heroin, and as an alternative to painkillers.

It's a tempting sell in New England, hard hit by the painkiller and heroin crisis. But there's a problem: There is very little research showing marijuana works as a treatment for such addictions.

Advocates argue a growing body of scientific literature supports the idea, pointing to a study in the Journal of Pain this year that found that chronic pain sufferers significantly reduced their opioid use when taking medical cannabis. Another study, published last year in the Journal of the American Medical Association, found cannabis can be effective in treating chronic pain and other ailments.

The research falls short of concluding marijuana helps wean people off opioids - Vicodin, Oxycontin and related painkillers - and heroin, though. Many medical professionals say there's not enough evidence for them to confidently prescribe it.

In Maine, which is considering adding opioid and heroin addiction to the list of conditions that qualify for medical marijuana, Michelle Ham said marijuana helped her end a years-long addiction to painkillers prescribed for a bad back and neck. Tired of feeling "like a zombie," the 37-year-old mother of two decided to quit cold turkey, which she said brought on convulsions and other withdrawal symptoms. Then, a friend mentioned marijuana, which Maine had legalized in 1999 for chronic pain and scores of other medical conditions. Ham gave it a try in 2013 and said the pain is under control and she hasn't gone back on the opioids.

"Before, I couldn't even function. I couldn't get anything done," Ham said. "Now, I actually organize volunteers, and we have a donations center to help the needy."

Bolstered by stories like Ham's, doctors are experimenting with marijuana as an addiction treatment in Massachusetts and California. Supporters in Maine are pushing for its inclusion in qualifying conditions for medical marijuana. Vermonters are making the case for addiction treatment in their push to legalize pot.

Authorities are also desperate to curb a sharp rise in overdoses; Maine saw a 31 percent increase last year, and drug-related deaths in Vermont have jumped 44 percent since 2010. Vermont officials also blame opioid abuse for a 40 percent increase over the past two years of children in state custody.

"I don't think it's a cure for everybody," said Maine Rep. Diane Russell, a Portland Democrat and a leader in the state effort to legalize marijuana. "But why take a solution off the table when people are telling us and physicians are telling us that it's working?"

Most states with medical marijuana allow it for a list of qualifying conditions. Getting on that list is crucial and has resulted in a tug of war in many states, including several in which veterans have been unsuccessful in getting post-traumatic stress disorder approved for marijuana treatment.

This month, Pennsylvania became the 24th state to legalize medical marijuana. Sen. Mike Vereb, a Republican, called on lawmakers to take on what he called "the number-one killer in Pennsylvania" - opioid abuse.

"Opioid abuse has no party, has no color, has no religion," Vereb said. "Let's face it, that's the killer. What we're doing today is the healer."

"It's hard to argue against anecdotal evidence when you are in the middle of a crisis," said Patricia Hymanson, a York, Maine, neurologist who has taken a leave of absence to serve in the state House. "But if you do too many things too fast, you are sometimes left with problems on the other end."

In New Hampshire, where drug deaths more than doubled last year from 2011 levels, the Senate last week rejected efforts to decriminalize marijuana.

There are some promising findings involving rats and one 2014 JAMA study showing that states with medical marijuana laws had nearly 25 percent fewer opioid-related overdose deaths than those without, but even a co-author on that study said it would be wrong to use the findings to make the case for cannabis as a treatment option.

"We are in the midst of a serious problem. People are dying and, as a result, we ought to use things that are proven to be effective," said Dr. Richard Saitz, chair of the Department of Community Health Sciences at the Boston University School of Public Health.

Cannabis could have limited benefits as a treatment alternative, said Harvard Medical School's Dr. Kevin Hill, who last year authored the JAMA study that found benefits in using medical marijuana to treat chronic pain, neuropathic pain and spasticity related to multiple sclerosis. But he urged caution.

"If you are thinking about using cannabis as opposed to using opioids for chronic pain, then I do think the evidence does support it," he said. "However, I think one place where sometimes cannabis advocates go too far is when they talk about using cannabis to treat opioid addiction."

The findings in the Journal of Pain study that found chronic pain sufferers reduced their opioid use when using medical pot were limited because participants self-reported the data.

Substance abuse experts argue there are already approved medications. It would also be wrong to portray marijuana as completely safe, they say, because it can also be addictive. But supporters point to doctors like Dr. Gary Witman, of Canna Care Docs, who has treated addicts with cannabis at his offices in Fall River, Stoughton and Worcester, Massachusetts. Since introducing the treatment in September, Witman said 15 patients have successfully weaned themselves off opioids. None have relapsed.

"When I see them in a six-month follow up, they are much more focused," Witman said. "They have greater respect. They feel better about themselves. Most importantly, I'm able to get them back to gainful employment."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This report included plenty of commentary that suggested caution in interpreting findings from marijuana research in treating opioid-related pain or addiction. Good limitations are mentioned, such as when one interviewee, commenting on the Journal of Pain finding that chronic pain sufferers “reduced their opioid use when using medical pot.”  He added that these findings “were limited because participants self-reported the data.”  This is the kind of nuance that is important to mention.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Sometimes, Ellis Glover would be forced to leave her friends and sit at a lunch table where no one was eating peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.

"I wanted to sit with my good, good friends, but I couldn't," the 10-year-old said. "If you're a kid and you have a food allergy, it's harder on you. You're missing out on a lot of stuff other children can have. I always want to try peanut stuff."

Mom Monica Glover said the family discovered Ellis' peanut allergy when she was about 3. The tipoff: a skin reaction around her mouth after she was given food with a small amount of peanuts in it. "We were lucky to have discovered it that way. That was a mild reaction," Glover said, and a doctor confirmed the allergy through tests.

The discovery was "distressing," Glover said. Accidental exposure to peanuts has happened, resulting in "severe stomach cramps and vomiting," she said. "Essentially, we have to live in fear all the time of Ellis being inadvertently exposed to peanuts and having a reaction that is potentially life-threatening."

Glover seized the opportunity to participate in a study on the safety and effectiveness of an experimental treatment that could give her daughter protection against accidental exposure to peanuts. Despite the risk, it was "a gift," she said, adding that her family hoped their efforts might help "lots of other children."

The risk paid off: Two-thirds of the kids in the study were able to eat the equivalent of two peanuts without any symptoms after following the months-long experimental treatment regimen, the researchers found.

Ellis is one of the majority of children for whom the treatment works. "It's been a huge success," her mother said.

"It does not make the allergy to go away," Vickery said. "The purpose is not to get them to be no longer peanut allergic and allow them to eat whatever they want."

"I'm telling patients when I see them that my hope is that patients will have access by late next summer, something like that," Vickery said. He added that although the study proved the treatment's effectiveness and safety only in children, adults would probably benefit in the same way.

To test the experimental therapy, 66 research centers in 10 countries recruited 551 participants who ranged in age from 4 to 55 and who all had a peanut allergy. Most -- 499 participants -- were between the ages of 4 and 17.

"We were extremely well-informed about the entire process," Glover said. "You start at a super low dose and work your way up. You take it at the hospital under observation. Then, you take it at home every day. "

Three-quarters of the study participants were given the treatment in increasing amounts every two weeks until reaching maintenance, when they received the equivalent of one peanut daily. The remainder of the participants were given a placebo. At the conclusion of the study after a year, all of the participants faced an "exit food challenge": They ate, under a doctor's supervision, the equivalent of two peanuts.

Two-thirds of the treatment participants were able to tolerate this exit dose without a severe reaction. Half tolerated even twice that amount: a four-peanut dose.

Overall, participants experienced fewer side effects during the study than the researchers had anticipated. "It's intuitive that that process would trigger some allergic symptoms in many patients," Vickery said. A third completed the study with no more than mild side effects, such as stomachache.

Ellis experienced stomach cramps and vomiting multiple times during the study, usually on days when her dose was increased to raise her tolerance. "Having stomach cramps did not feel very good," she said. Still, she usually vomited, and the cramps passed quickly.

Once, she felt her throat constrict, and "it was harder for me to breathe," she said. She'd gone into anaphylaxis, a severe allergic reaction. The hospital staff reacted immediately and gave her a shot of epinephrine. "I felt safe with all the doctors and nurses around me. They can help you get through it," she said.

A little more than 11% of the children dropped out of the study due to severe side effects. Among children receiving the treatment, 10% required rescue epinephrine during the exit challenge, compared with 53% in the placebo group.

"These treatments really have the potential to transform people's lives," Vickery said, "and I have seen it happen firsthand: the sense of relief [families] get when a child becomes desensitized."

Trying to be 'bite safe'

"It's what a lot of families call trying to be 'bite safe.' it's not that you're curing the allergy; it's not that you're going to be able to eat peanut butter sandwiches," said Sicherer, who was not involved in the study. "It's really just to have a better threshold so that if you accidentally ate something that had a little bit of peanut in it, maybe you wouldn't have a reaction or the reaction wouldn't be so bad."

Though the immunotherapy treatment is simply a matter of gradually increasing your tolerance to peanuts, you could have a severe reaction at home. "This is not something to try at home," Sicherer said.

Aimmune has made peanut into a "pharmaceutical-grade" product, he said. "Most people think of it as medicinalized food." Doctors and patients both know exactly how much you're getting, he said, "and that's important because if you're reactive to, say, a 50th of a peanut, you don't want to have a mistake where you're suddenly getting a 10th of peanut."

Assuming the treatment wins FDA approval, Sicherer said, the conversation between doctors and patients will be, "Is it better to just avoid the food and ask a lot of questions at restaurants and be real careful, or do something like this and still don't eat the food and ask the questions in the restaurant, but at least know you have a bit of a safety valve?"

There are more than a few caveats when it comes to the treatment regimen. For one, it's "a commitment," he said. You cannot take a dose before exercising, and you can't skip doses, or you might have a severe reaction when you pick it up again.

Glover noted, "It's somewhat disruptive. You have to do it every day. Generally, we would take it after dinner." After giving the medicine, she added, parents must carefully monitor their children, preventing them from becoming too active or too hot.

Sicherer said, "The family that does this really, really, really has to be a rule follower. It's not easy." It would still be worth it to many, he said.

If this ends up being the first approved treatment, if it is covered by insurance and if details of whom it works for best were all worked out and the risks and benefits were clear, "that would be so amazing, because we haven't really had anything like that before," he said.

"It's not everything we would hope for, but it's still fantastic to be able to raise someone's threshold from a teeny tiny amount of peanut to a couple of peanuts or more," said Sicherer, who believes that other allergy products will be developed in time: "I can tell my patients that this might be the right thing for them, but if not, we're looking at things that might be easier and better down the road."

Glover acknowledges that "it's not a perfect solution. I would say it's been some work to go through this study, just in terms of a time commitment." Still, if it had taken twice the amount of time, she would have done it: "It's peace of mind."

Even though she dislikes the medicine's taste, Ellis also believes it is worth it. "It's definitely better," she would say to another kid with peanut allergy: "You know you can be around your friends when they have peanut butter on them."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story reports the size of the study. It also emphasizes, repeatedly, the limitations of the protection against peanut exposure — not all those treated were protected, and even the positive outcomes were laced with allergic reactions along the way.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Feb. 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Menstrual cramps are the bane of many women, but new research suggests that a form of vitamin D may one day be added to the meager list of pain relievers for the sometimes disabling condition.

A small study in Italy found that a single, high dose of cholecalciferol -- also known as vitamin D3 -- was linked to a marked reduction in menstrual cramps, with the largest benefits observed in women reporting the most pain at the beginning of the study.

U.S. experts cautioned that it's too early to recommend vitamin D3 to those experiencing cramps -- estimated to occur in at least half of all reproductive-age women -- because the study didn't delve into possible long-term risks of taking high doses.

"It's provocative in the fact that the results are pretty amazing," said Dr. Robert Graham, an internist and vitamin D expert at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "But the dose [given] is a lot more than conventionally given for any condition."

The study was published Feb. 27 in the Archives of Internal Medicine.

In the study, 40 Italian women were split into two groups: one receiving a single oral dose of 300,000 IUs of vitamin D3 and the other getting a placebo five days before the expected start of their menstrual periods.

After two months, average pain scores dropped 41 percent for women assigned vitamin D treatment, while no difference in pain was reported in the placebo group.

Also, the women who took vitamin D reported no need to use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), such as the pain reliever ibuprofen, to manage their pain in the two-month study period, while 40 percent of those assigned to placebo reported using an NSAID at least once.

Menstrual cramps, known by the medical name dysmenorrhea, typically begin just before or at the start of a woman's menstrual period and can last several days. Experts attribute the pelvic pain to prostaglandins, a hormone-like substance that contributes to the contraction and relaxation of muscles and blood vessels.

Vitamin D3 apparently helped hamper prostaglandin production in study participants, easing their pain, said Dr. Jill Rabin, chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, N.Y. The vitamin is also known to have anti-inflammatory effects, Rabin added.

"The bottom line is, it looked like it worked," said Rabin, also head of urogynecology at the hospital. "It was a very well-done study, but my comment is, it was one study. It asks more questions than it answers, which is the sign of a good trial."

The 300,000 IU dose of vitamin D3 given in the study also far exceeds the daily intake of 600 IUs recommended for American women of reproductive age, both Graham and Rabin said. And since the study period lasted only two months, there was no way to tell whether such a high dose produced any toxic long-term effects.

Currently used methods of controlling menstrual cramps include NSAIDs and -- among those with severe pain -- birth control pills. But both have potential risks: NSAID users can experience stomach or kidney troubles, for example, while birth control pills are linked to blood clots in certain women. The cost of vitamin D supplements would be roughly comparable with both of these remedies.

Vitamin D use has also been widely studied as a possible preventive for many other conditions, including heart disease, certain cancers and autoimmune disorders.

The Italian study participants all had blood levels of vitamin D measuring in the lowest 25 percent of normal at the study's outset, although the researchers didn't report the womens' blood levels afterward. Experts wondered if women with higher blood levels would experience such dramatic cramp relief as observed in the study.

Graham and Rabin agreed that much larger trials should be done before they would recommend vitamin D3 use to any of their patients for cramp relief.

"From a symptomatic standpoint, it's something to be considered, but more studies are needed to see the risks and benefits," Graham said. "Studies like this are starting to show that vitamin D is ubiquitous in receptors in our bodies . . . but it needs further explanation."

To find out more about painful menstrual periods, head to the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: They did point out that the women in the study already had low levels of Vitamin D so it is unclear if receiving Vitamin D in lower doses would have been just as beneficial.  The study ended follow up at two months and did not have information regarding possible long-term follow-up.  They also pointed out that larger clinical trials were needed.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Cannabidiol, which is found in marijuana plants, reduced the number of convulsive seizures in children with a severe and often fatal epilepsy disorder, according to research published Wednesday in the New England Journal of Medicine . Among children taking cannabidiol, the decrease in the frequency of convulsive seizures -- which involve a loss of consciousness, stiffened muscles and jerking movements -- was 23 percentage points greater than the decrease in seizures among children taking a placebo.

The study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled human trial, which is considered the gold standard test for any new medicine.

GW Pharmaceuticals, a company that is developing cannabidiol medicines, helped subsidize the study.

"After 3,800 years of cannabis use for epilepsy ... we finally have solid evidence," said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, lead author of the study and director of NYU Langone's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center. His own previous research indicates that cannabis was used as early as 1800 B.C. in Sumeria to treat epilepsy; neurologists of the Victorian period used Indian hemp, which is rich in cannabidiol, for the same purpose.

Despite the generally positive results, most study participants reported side effects that included vomiting, fatigue, diarrhea and some liver issues.

A total of 120 patients with Dravet syndrome, ranging in age from nearly 2 to 18 years old, were randomly assigned to receive either an oral solution of cannabidiol or a placebo for a 14-week period.

"Dravet syndrome is a severe childhood-onset epilepsy that causes multiple kinds of seizures, developmental delays, speech and language problems, behavioral issues and movement and balance problems," said Brandy Fureman, vice president of research and new therapies at the Epilepsy Foundation. She was not involved in the new study.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that disrupts electrical communication between neurons in the brain. Considered a spectrum disorder, different epilepsy syndromes are defined by clusters of symptoms or features and treated accordingly.

Existing epilepsy medications usually don't work for patients with Dravet, so "up to 20% of these children die from seizures before age 20 years," Devinsky explained.

Within the study, individual participants experienced convulsive seizures at a rate ranging from four per month, on average, to 1,717 per month.

During the 14-week study, frequency of convulsive seizures decreased from an average of 12.4 to 5.9 per month in the cannabidiol group, compared with 14.9 to 14.1 in the placebo group. On average, the change in seizure frequency amounted to a 39% decrease for the cannabidiol group patients, compared with a roughly 13% decrease among the placebo group.

Five percent of the children became entirely seizure-free during the 14-week study. Overall, parents in the cannabidiol group felt that they witnessed "significantly greater" positive changes in their children than parents in the placebo group.

However, there was a downside. Most (93%) of the cannabidiol patients reported side effects, though three-quarters of the placebo group patients did as well. Nine out of 61 cannabidiol group patients dropped out of the study, eight of them because of side effects, compared with just three of the 59 placebo group patients.

"Tiredness (somnolence or fatigue) was most common; others were decreased appetite, diarrhea and vomiting," Devinsky explained.

Based on the overall results, Devinsky believes CBD should be evaluated for epilepsy types beyond Dravet syndrome, which is caused by a genetic mutation and affects about one in 20,000 to 40,000 children in the United States.

"No one study decides an issue; the sample size is still relatively small (because this is a rare syndrome and so hard to study large numbers of cases) and the duration of treatment so far has been relatively short," Hall, who was not involved in the research, wrote in an email.

Still, Hall said the research, which carefully measured safety and efficacy for a "substantial" number of children, showed "clear evidence of benefits in reducing seizure frequency and severity over the duration of the trial."

"Interestingly, it looks similar to our other seizure medications in terms of efficacy and tolerability," Porter said. "So, sadly, not a home run for most patients but another tool in our treatment regimen."

The marijuana plant is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance. Scientific researchers studying cannabidiol must meet federal security requirements and follow federal practices. Some scientists have said these federal requirements have slowed research supporting medicinal benefits of the plant.

Porter believes the study may open the door to having "more thoughtful discussions with our patients about the efficacy and the side effects" of cannabidiol. "Hopefully, the FDA will see this as a sign it should be moved off of Schedule I. If it stays on Schedule I, we will have trouble getting it to our patients when it does become available."

Changing the schedule of a drug falls to the Drug Enforcement Administration or the Department of Health and Human Services. An interested party, such as a drug company, may also petition for the process to begin. The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institute of Drug Abuse provide guidance to the DEA when reviewing scientific evidence on which to base a schedule change.

He noted that generating more evidence of effective use is "a good thing."

The University of Queensland's Hall believes that boundaries between medical use of cannabinoids and the recreational use of cannabis by adults should not be blurred. "If future clinical trials confirm these promising results, then appropriate regulation will enable the drug to be safely used for medical purposes," he said.

The Epilepsy Foundation's Fureman said, "before publication of this trial, much of the clinical evidence about CBD's effects on people's seizures was uncontrolled and anecdotal." She added that the new study is "critically important" for the epilepsy community, which believes a CBD-based medical product would be a first-in-class therapeutic option.

On the need for more scientific research, all these experts agree.

As Devinsky said, "natural substances are not necessarily safe and effective. They need to be evaluated rigorously."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gives a fairly good description of the trial. It also provides appropriate context and caveats. It says, for example, “The study was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled human trial, which is considered the gold standard test for any new medicine.” And it also includes a good quote saying, “No one study decides an issue; the sample size is still relatively small (because this is a rare syndrome and so hard to study large numbers of cases) and the duration of treatment so far has been relatively short.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Small doses of aspirin can lower the risk of heart attack in people who never had heart disease, a new look at the medical evidence shows.

But the blood-thinning drug doesn’t appear to cut the chances of dying from the disease, at least not enough that researchers can say for certain. And experts warn people to consult their doctor before taking the medication, which increases the risk of bleeding ulcers.

“I like to say you have to make the recommendation about aspirin one patient at a time,” Dr. Michael L. LeFevre, who was not linked to the study, told Reuters Health.

LeFevre worked on the 2009 aspirin recommendations from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), a federally supported expert panel.

The task force advises that men age 45 to 79 take aspirin to stave off heart attacks, as long as the benefit outweighs the risk of bleeding. For women age 55 to 79, aspirin is recommended to prevent strokes, with the same caveat.

The new work, by Alfred Bartolucci of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and colleagues, was supported by aspirin-maker Bayer AG.

The research team pooled the results of the nine trials that have tested the drug in the prevention of heart disease so far, including three that weren’t part of the 2009 USPSTF review.

About 100,000 men and women age 45 and up took part in the studies. Some were healthy and some had diabetes, but none had chest pain or other symptoms of an ailing heart.

The researchers found a 19-percent reduction in non-fatal heart attacks among participants who took aspirin compared to those who did not.

They don’t mention how many people actually suffered such a heart attack, but an earlier analysis of six of the trials showed that out of every 1,000 people, 18 individuals taking aspirin had heart attacks every year, compared to 23 individuals taking placebo pills.

On the other hand, that analysis also found aspirin increased the rate of bleeding from 0.7 to 1 per 1,000 people per year, making the authors conclude the drug was of “uncertain net value.”

Heart disease is the leading killer worldwide and accounts for more than a third of deaths in the U.S., according to the American Heart Association. Every year, heart attacks alone kill some 400,000 Americans.

In the current study, published in the American Journal of Cardiology, the researchers also report small decreases in stroke and death risks with aspirin, although those changes might have been due to chance.

“It refines our knowledge of how beneficial aspirin is,” Dr. Graham Nichol, an expert in emergency care at the University of Washington in Seattle, said about the study. “I don’t think this paper is inconsistent with previous work.”

Nichols, who was not involved in the study, said aspirin is clearly beneficial for people who’ve already had heart disease, and that it also seems to help those at high risk.

“There is not universal agreement on what is high risk,” he told Reuters Health. “In my mind, if you have diabetes or multiple risk factors for heart disease — such as smoking or obesity — it is reasonable to take aspirin.”

In addition, working to eliminate those risk factors by other means will not only slash the risk of heart disease, but also a host of other health problems.

LeFevre added that while the new study did add extra evidence compared with earlier work, it failed to analyze the effects on men and women separately.

That muddies the picture because men may see a benefit in the form of fewer heart attacks, whereas aspirin appears to lower the risk of stroke in women.

“We can’t tell from the existing study if that is going to hold up or not,” he said.

One recent study has suggested that despite the increase in bleeding ulcers from aspirin, the reduction in heart attacks might make the cheap drug cost-effective for men over 45.

The question then becomes finding out what your risk of heart attack is in the first place, which your doctor can help with.

“The number of events that you prevent depends on your baseline risk,” LeFevre concluded. “A blanket recommendation that everybody should take an aspirin is not a good idea.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Excellent analysis of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 27, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Middle-aged and elderly adults who regularly eat foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids may slow the mental decline that leads to dementia, according to a new study.

Researchers found that people with the highest blood levels of these essential fatty acidsfound in fish such as salmon and tunawere more likely to perform well on tests of mental functioning and to experience less age-related brain shrinkage.

"We feel fatty-acid consumption exerts a beneficial effect on brain aging by promoting vascular health," said the study's lead author, Dr. Zaldy Tan, associate professor at the Easton Center for Alzheimer's Disease Research and the division of geriatrics at the University of California, Los Angeles. This might include reducing blood pressure and inflammation, he added.

Previous research linked dementia risk with the amount of omega-3 fatty acids in blood plasma, which reflects how much people had eaten in the past few days. But in the current work, researchers could estimate the amount of omega-3s that participants had consumed in the past several months by looking at how much had built up in their red blood cells.

"This represents their average intake of fatty acids, not just a snapshot," Tan said.

The study, published in the Feb. 28 issue of the journal Neurology, did not prove that omega-3 fatty acids prevent mental decline, merely that there may be an association between consumption of fatty acids and brain health.

For the study, researchers measured the red blood cell level of fatty acids in 1,575 dementia-free people whose average age was 67. About three months later, participants underwent mental-functioning tests and MRI scans that examined brain size and blood supply in the brain.

The participants were in the Framingham Offspring Study, which is predominately white. Whether the association would apply to other ethnic and racial groups needs to be explored, the authors said.

The researchers found that those with the lowest levels of omega-3s had worse scores on tests of visual memory, attention and abstract thinking than people who ranked in the top 75 percent for fatty-acid levels.

Adults in the bottom 25 percent also tended to have smaller brain volume overall. The decrease in brain volume was enough to make their brains appear two years older than those of people in the top three-quarters for fatty-acid levels.

Brain scans also showed signs of less blood supply in the brains of people with the lowest omega-3 levels. This suggests they may play a role in promoting general vascular, or blood vessel, health in the brain, similar to how they are thought to help heart health, rather than acting on just one brain area, Tan said.

The researchers took into account various health and lifestyle factors, including age, education and body mass index, to explore whether other differences among the people with low levels of omega-3s could help explain their more rapid brain aging.

But after controlling for those risk factors, "the difference [in brain aging] is still there so we conclude that omega-3 fatty acids likely explain them," Tan said.

Tan added, however, that it remains possible that factors they did not control for, such as fruit and vegetable consumption, are really responsible for the brain benefits. Another possibility is that the slight mental decline that the people in the older brain group were experiencing caused them to eat less healthy omega-3-rich foods, instead of vice versa.

"This is a strengthening of the argument that people with less [omega-3 fatty acids] have higher risk of dementia," said Dr. Nikolaos Scarmeas, associate professor of clinical neurology at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City.

But questions remain over whether fatty-acid levels really influence changes in brain size, Scarmeas added. A clinical trial comparing high and low intake of omega-3s in relation to brain imaging would help answer those questions, he said.

In the meantime, fish is "a good prescription for other things and we have a hint it might be helpful for the brain," Scarmeas said.

That the current study reported a difference in brain health between people with omega-3 fatty-acid levels in the bottom 25 percent and top 75 percent suggests that there is a threshold level of consumption to attain brain gains.

A previous study in which participants filled out food surveys found decreased risk of vascular brain problems among those who ate at least three servings of fish a week.

Find out more about brain health at the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is where the HealthDay coverage shined. In addition to cautioning that the study couldn’t prove that omega-3 fatty acids prevent mental decline, the story had a nice discussion of the limitations that apply to this study and other observational studies:
The story also mentioned that a clinical trial of high and low omega-3 intake would help prove whether there’s a beneficial effect.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Health.com) -- The makers of POM Wonderful pomegranate juice say that the drink improves blood flow and heart health, prevents and treats prostate cancer, and works 40 percent as well as Viagra (whatever that means). All for about four bucks a bottle.

Those impressive claims helped the company rack up $91 million in sales in 2009. They also earned the disapproval of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Last month, the agency sued POM Wonderful for making "false and unsubstantiated" health claims, and is asking the company to remove the claims from its ads.

A 100 percent juice drink that contains antioxidants (and no added sugar), POM is just one of many beverages that bill themselves as promoting better health. VitaminWater, kombucha tea, coconut water, and various brands of juice drinks made from acai, goji berry, and mangosteen have all used health claims in their marketing -- and some, like POM, have been the subject of scrutiny and legal action.

The FTC, along with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), has been cracking down on food and beverage makers for allegedly overselling the health benefits of their products. In 2009 alone, the FDA warned 17 companies that they were providing misleading nutritional information on their packaging or making overly specific health claims.

Health.com: 25 diet-busting foods you should never eat

Not all of the products were drinks, but "the beverage category stands out," says Bruce Silverglade, director of legal affairs at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group based in Washington, D.C. "At first blush it seems that beverage products are certainly a large proportion of food products that make bogus health-related claims."

Drinks such as POM have become increasingly popular with consumers in recent years, thanks in part to public health campaigns against soda that have been prompted by the obesity epidemic. "The trend is away from traditional soda pop [toward] products claiming to provide magical health benefits," Silverglade says.

Are the health claims true? Yes and no. The federal government doesn't require companies to vet health claims with the agency before plastering them on product packaging (as long as the claims are accompanied by a disclaimer about their uncertainty). But that doesn't mean the claims are invented -- most are based in research.

The research is often funded by the manufacturers, however, and industry-funded research can be prone to bias. A 2007 study found that research on health drinks that was funded entirely by beverage companies was between four and eight times more likely to find a favorable result than research with no industry support.

"If a cell phone company told you they tested all the models and their model came out the best, would you believe it? Probably not," says Dr. Lenard Lesser, M.D., one of the co-authors of that study and a researcher at UCLA. "The same is true with nutrition research, but the stakes are higher because we're putting our bodies at risk."

Where's the line between research and marketing?

However far-fetched the claims may sound, POM is standing behind them. (Two weeks before the FTC publicly announced its lawsuit, POM preemptively sued the FTC, claiming that preapproval of ads featuring health claims violates the company's right to free speech.)

But are shoppers really convinced that POM can unclog their arteries, cure cancer, and lead to hotter sex?

There seem to be more than a few believers out there. "

I started drinking POM after reading the studies two years ago, my triglycerides were almost 1000!," one of POM Wonderful's 12,000 fans breathlessly posted on Facebook after the FTC announced its lawsuit. "Working out everyday, drinking POM, and eating healthy, they are now less than 400. Forget what the Feds say! I believe!!!" (A triglycerides level of 400 is still nearly three times higher than what's considered normal.)

Most health beverage drinkers aren't as enthusiastic as the realtor from Alaska who posted the above testimonial. Quinton Ma, a 22-year-old marketing coordinator at Gawker Media, in New York City, started to drink VitaminWater as a middle schooler because it seemed like a healthy alternative to soda.

"I figured that if they were selling something that I could get extra vitamins from, it couldn't hurt to drink," Ma says. "Once I learned they were really just cleverly marketed sugar waters, I stopped."

Health.com: You are what you drink

But the fact is, even when people don't buy the health claims they often still buy the beverage. That's the paradox of products such as POM, Silverglade says: The health claims on these products strain the imagination, yet studies have repeatedly shown that health claims sell food.

That's because these claims -- however improbable they may seem -- distract shoppers from the real nutritional information and hook consumers with buzzwords like "antioxidant."

This phenomenon is known as a "health halo," an aura of healthfulness attached to a product based on labels like "low-fat" "all-natural" or "made with whole grains" that seduces consumers into overeating. According to a study by the FTC, this halo effect can even lead people to overlook warning statements -- about the high sodium content of a product, for example.

"A healthy halo develops around products like these," says Frances Largeman-Roth, R.D., Health magazine's senior food and nutrition editor. "The health-conscious consumer incorporates them into their lifestyle, thinking that they're doing a world of good for themselves."

The makers of POM Wonderful have spent $34 million on scientific research on POM products and pomegranates. According to the FTC's complaint, the studies POM has funded do not substantiate the company's claims, and a closer look at the research seems to bear that out.

One of the most prominent claims, that POM can decrease arterial plaque by 30 percent, was taken from a single pilot study that included just 19 people and was funded by the makers of POM. Another claim, that POM drinkers experience a 17 percent improvement in blood flow, was taken from another POM-funded study that included just 45 people and only lasted for three months.

"These days it's possible for a food company to pay just about anybody to conduct a study," says Silverglade.

Michael Aviram, Ds.C., a cholesterol researcher at Rambam Medical Center, in Haifa, Israel, defended his studies on pomegranates -- many of them funded by POM -- by noting that they were published in "very prestigious peer reviewed journals," including the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and Atherosclerosis. Dr. Harley Liker, M.D., a physician at UCLA Medical Center who has also led research funded by POM, directed all inquiries to a POM spokesman.

"A grocery store is a designed marketing environment to get people to buy things," says Lesser. "Lots of products are going to try to use health claims from research, often from their own industry, [just] to sell a product."

Health.com: 14 health products you probably don't need

Iffy health claims don't mean that products like pomegranate juice should be avoided at all costs, says Keri Gans, R.D., a spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association. As long as consumers limit themselves to 8-ounce servings and products with no added sugar, juice can be an excellent source of vitamins and other nutrients, Gans says. But it's "not going to solve any of your health issues," she adds.

The bottom line is that consumers shouldn't believe everything they read on labels. "If they focus on consuming an overall well-balanced diet, they might not need to focus so much on finding a product that makes false promises," Gans says.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: For a piece that was all about scrutinizing product health claims, the story didn’t do quite as much digging into the evidence as we would have liked. The research supporting POM isn’t dissected until the last paragraphs of this relatively long article, and the analysis is limited to telling us what was wrong with the studies. — e.g  the claims about arterial plaque were based on a single POM-funded pilot study “that included just 19 people,” and the claims about blood flow came from a study “that included just 45 people and only lasted for three months.” A bit more detail on the design of these studies would have been appropriate for such an in-depth piece.
With that being said, the story did an excellent job of providing context around the issue of health claims. It noted that manufacturer-funded studies, which are often used to support health claims, are much more likely than independent studies to report favorable results. It also had some great discussion of the “health halo,” which is when companies tout unlikely claims on food packaging to distract people from the real nutritional content of the product.
This one was close, but the major expectation here is that the story include some kind of analysis of the quality of the evidence, which clearly is  provided.  There was also some excellent background information that will give readers a better understanding of why health claims are made and why they should be viewed skeptically. On that basis, we’ll award a satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 29, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A device that grabs and drags a blood clot out through the blood vessels should be used to treat certain stroke victims, according to new guidelines issued by the American Heart Association.

Nearly nine out of 10 strokes are caused by a blood clot that blocks one of the arteries supplying blood to the brain, the American Heart Association (AHA) said. Standard stroke treatment relies on powerful blood-thinning medications that break up the clot and restore blood flow to the brain.

But when those drugs don't work, doctors now can turn to a new catheter-based device that will physically remove the blood clot, said Dr. William Powers, lead author of the updated AHA guidelines and chair of neurology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

The tool, called an endovascular stent retrieval device, is made up of wire mesh that resembles a tiny ring of chicken wire, Powers said.

Skilled surgeons run the device up through a person's arteries via a catheter, and then open it smack in the middle of a stroke-causing blood clot.

"If you actually deploy or open one in the middle of a clot, it smooshes out and the clot gets caught in the chicken wire, and then you pull the whole thing out back through the artery," Powers said.

The new guidelines were published June 29 in the journal Stroke.

The AHA issued its updated guidelines based primarily on the results of six new clinical trials released within the past eight months, Powers said. All of these studies showed that the device can safely and effectively stop a stroke by removing blood clots, he added.

A number of other medical societies have endorsed the AHA's new guidelines, including the American Association of Neurological Surgeons and the Society of Vascular and Interventional Neurology.

As with other stroke treatments, time is of the essence. The procedure must start within six hours of the onset of a stroke, which means that emergency teams and hospitals will have to move fast, Powers said.

The guidelines provide added incentive to quickly transfer stroke victims from a local hospital to a major stroke center capable of advanced treatment, said Powers and Dr. David Kandzari, director of interventional cardiology and chief scientific officer for the Piedmont Heart Institute in Atlanta.

Local hospitals currently are urged to "drip and ship" people experiencing a major stroke -- essentially, start an IV drip of the powerful clot-busting drug called tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and then ship them by ambulance or helicopter to the nearest comprehensive stroke center for further treatment, Kandzari said.

Stent retrieval devices make that quick hospital transfer even more important, since the gadgets provide a crucial backup for tPA but are more tricky to use.

"These are procedures performed by very specialized individuals," Kandzari said. "They are not regularly performed by cardiologists or radiologists or neurologists. Hospitals must make plans to get people to other centers that are capable of this catheter-based therapy," he explained.

Powers said, "I think what's going to happen is that we will develop systems of rapid triage and rapid transport. A lot of this at this point depends on logistics and manpower. The people who do this are specially trained. You need a lot of special training to get those catheters up into the brain and pull things out."

The guidelines specifically recommend using a stent retrieval device for people who:
• Didn't have any significant disability prior to their current stroke.
• Received tPA within 4.5 hours of their stroke onset, and can start the procedure within six hours after stroke symptoms started.
• Are at least 18 years old, as clinical trials have not been conducted with children.
• Have imaging scans that show more than half of the brain on the side of the stroke is not permanently damaged.
• Have a clot blocking a large artery supplying blood to the brain.

That last point is especially important, because the stent retrieval device will not fit into the smaller blood vessels that branch out further into the brain, Powers said.

The major risk of using the device is that it could tear an artery and cause bleeding in the brain, particularly since it will be used on people who have already received very potent blood thinners, Kandzari said.

But clinical trials have shown that the risk of brain bleeding for people who received tPA and then went through mechanical clot removal is no greater than for people who just receive the blood thinner, Powers said.

"The outcomes were uniformly positive in all of the trials," he said. "It's really, really good evidence."

For more about stroke, visit the National Stroke Association.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story is about a set of guidelines and not about a single research study. The guidelines are themselves based on six different randomized trials described elsewhere as of high-quality.
Guidelines like these are very carefully considered by a committee. The quote from the story is: “The outcomes were uniformly positive in all of the trials,” he said. “It’s really, really good evidence.” The story also notes that the guidelines have been endorsed by other medical societies. In addition, there is discussion of limitations insofar as the story addresses how narrowly one must filter patients in order for them to fit these new guidelines.
We think the discussion of evidence is sufficient to convey the quality of the research, but we wouldn’t have minded some additional detail. For example, the related news release issued for the guidelines says:
“The evidence backing this new recommendation received the highest rating based on the scientific evidence reviewed, and suggests the benefits substantially outweigh the potential risks in these patients.”
and further:
“Evidence-based guidelines are based on clinical trials, which tell you that if you have a patient with the same characteristics of those in the trials, on average they will do much better with the treatment than if you treat them another way,” Powers said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Aug. 6, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Treatment with growth hormone-releasing hormone improves memory and focus in healthy adults and in those who already show some signs of mental decline, new research finds.

"Growth hormone-releasing hormone doesn't target one specific area in the body and brain," said study lead author Laura Baker, an associate professor of psychiatry and behavioral science at the University of Washington School of Medicine, in Seattle. "It stimulates a whole cascade of hormones in the body and brain; it stimulates normal function of a system that was working at a younger age so that cells can do what they were programmed to do at birth."

Results of the study are published in the Aug. 6 issue of the Archives of Neurology.

As levels of growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) decrease with age, so too do other hormones stimulated by GHRH, such as growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor 1. All of these hormones are believed to play a role in brain health, and decreasing levels of these hormones are suspected to play a role in the development of Alzheimer's disease.

In a previous study, Baker and her colleagues demonstrated that treatment with GHRH provided a short-term boost in memory and concentration for healthy adults. In the current study, they wanted to see if GHRH could help restore some function in people who were showing signs of a condition known as mild cognitive impairment. People with this condition don't yet have Alzheimer's disease, but they do have problems with memory and focus, and they're at higher risk of developing Alzheimer's disease, according to the Alzheimer's Foundation.

In all, 137 adults, including 61 with mild cognitive impairment, completed the current study. The study volunteers were between 55 and 87 years old, with an average age of 68, according to the study.

The study participants were randomly assigned to receive a daily self-administered injection of growth hormone-releasing hormone or a placebo injection for 20 weeks. The study medications were supplied by the manufacturer of the growth hormone-releasing hormone.

Study funding was provided by grants from the U.S. National Institute on Aging and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.

Tests to measure mental prowess were given at the start of the study, and at 10, 20 and 30 weeks after treatment began.

Baker said the researchers saw benefits in healthy adults and those with mild cognitive impairment who received GHRH. They saw improvement in "planning, organizing, focusing and shifting from one task to another" -- tasks collectively known as executive function. Baker said the researchers also saw a mild improvement in verbal memory in those treated with GHRH, but the results weren't as strong as for the executive function tasks.

Treatment with GHRH boosted levels of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) by 117 percent, according to the study. "IGF1 is a hormone we all have from birth that increases through development until it starts to decline in our early 50s. It promotes all kinds of growth in the body and brain, but if you have excess IGF1, it may put you at risk for cancer," said Baker, who added that people with Alzheimer's disease tend to have low levels of IGF1.

Benefits from the treatment lasted as long as people stayed on the treatment. When treatment was stopped, the benefits gradually tapered off, Baker said.

Insulin levels also spiked during treatment with GHRH, but only in the group already having memory problems. Baker said it wasn't clear why this happened, but she suspects the body may be trying to compensate for an insulin shortage in the brain in people with memory problems. Insulin helps glucose (sugar) enter cells to provide fuel for those cells.

Dr. Joel Zonszein, an endocrinologist from Montefiore Medical Center, in New York City, praised the study but said some questions still remain.

"This was an impressive study showing how GHRH can have a positive effect on cognitive function," Zonszein said. "The question is, how can we use this in normal individuals? When GHRH goes down with aging, it's a physiological adaptation. And, we don't know what would happen if we gave it chronically."

For instance, "would you alter the feedback mechanism that keeps IGF1 levels from increasing cancer risk? Would it start to lose some of its effect long term?" he said.

"There may be both good and bad effects," Zonszein added.

The researchers said larger and longer trials are needed to assess the hormone's therapeutic potential.

Learn more about mild cognitive impairment from the Alzheimer's Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The ending of the story included some evaluation of the evidence, including an independent perspective and this final sentence:
“The researchers said larger and longer trials are needed to assess the hormone’s therapeutic potential.”
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A daily dose of electricity delivered to a specific part of the brain can lift depression, new research confirms, even for people who’ve already tried multiple antidepressants to no avail.

While there’s evidence that this technique, known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), helps depressed people get better-and the US Food and Drug Administration has approved TMS for this purpose-many skeptics have questioned whether it really works, notes Dr. Mark S. George of the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, the lead author of the new study.

The biggest issue with studies so far, he explained, has been that it’s tough to fake the sound and sensation of the real device in order to run a gold standard clinical trial in which some people get the treatment, and others get a sham treatment, no one knowing which.

But George and his team say they’ve solved that problem by developing a dummy device that clicks in a similar way to the real thing and causes a person’s eye muscles to twitch, just like real a TMS device.

In the May issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry, George and his colleagues report the results of their 190-patient study, the most rigorous investigation of TMS for depression so far. The researchers randomly assigned participants to receive 37.5 minutes of TMS delivered to a part of the brain region that plays a role in emotion, or 37.5 minutes of sham TMS, once a day for three weeks.

After three weeks, 14 percent of patients in the real TMS group had recovered from their depression, compared to 5 percent of the sham TMS group; people who had the real treatment were four times as likely to get better as those who got the fake treatment.

Based on the results, George and his team say, it would be necessary to treat 12 depressed patients with TMS in order to have one patient recover.

Eighty-eight percent of the study participants completed the first phase of the trial. Patients in both groups were equally likely to report side effects, which included headache, discomfort at the TMS site, and eye twitching.

In a second phase of the study, all patients were given the real TMS treatment. Thirty percent of the patients in the second phase recovered from depression.

How long the treatment should last is not yet clear. “It’s very muddy now exactly how long we need to treat patients,” George said. “It looks as if from this trial you at least need to try three weeks and maybe even six weeks before you would give up.”

Patients who got better were prescribed venlafaxine - marketed as Effexor — and a small dose of lithium, noted George, a combination that’s been shown to help people stay well after their depression has remitted. George said he and his colleagues would like to study whether giving people TMS intermittently instead of putting them on antidepressants would produce equally durable effects.

TMS works by producing an electrical current that can pass through the skull and into the target area of the brain. George said he believes the approach works by “resetting” electrical activity and restoring normal mood regulation.

Something similar is likely happening, he added, with electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), or what is sometimes referred to as “electroshock treatment.” Sixty to 70 percent of depressed people who undergo ECT, in which electrodes placed on the front of the brain induce a convulsion while the patient is anesthetized, will recover.

George said he hopes that by better understanding where TMS should be delivered and by figuring out the best dose and duration of treatment, success rates closer to those of ECT might be achieved. “I’m optimistic that it’s pointing us in a path of understanding how to interact with the brain in a non-invasive way to get people well.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gives a satisfactory summary of what happened in this placebo-controlled trial and why it represents an advance over previous research. It provided good detail regarding the researchers’ efforts to develop a sham treatment that would mimic a real TMS treatment session. Although the story states that the optimal length of TMS treatment "is not yet clear," we think the story could have been a bit stronger in cautioning about the short duration of the study and lack of long-term outcomes data. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) – - Adding spice – in the form of curcumin supplements – to the daily diets of people with risk factors for heart disease may lower inflammation, a new study suggests.

Inflammation is implicated in a wide range of illnesses, from heart disease to cancer and joint pain. In the eight-week trial, researchers found significant reductions in signs of inflammation, such as C-reactive protein and other blood markers.

“Curcumin is the active ingredient of the famous spice turmeric and has a long history of culinary and medicinal use in the Asian countries,” said the study’s senior author Amirhossein Sahebkar.

“Two key effects of curcumin that account for most of the therapeutic effects of this compound are its strong antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties,” said Sahebkar researcher at the Mashhad University of Medical Sciences in Iran, in an email.

These properties of curcumin have been shown in several animal studies, he noted, but there have been relatively few studies in people. So his team designed a randomized controlled clinical trial to see if short-term use of a curcumin supplement could reduce inflammation in people with metabolic syndrome, a cluster of risk factors for heart disease.

Having a large waistline, high blood pressure, high blood sugar, low levels of HDL (good) cholesterol and high levels of triglycerides, are among the factors that make up metabolic syndrome. People with three or more of these classic traits are at higher than average risk of developing heart disease or diabetes or both.

Inflammation is also emerging as a feature of metabolic syndrome, Sahebkar’s team writes in the journal Clinical Nutrition. They set out to see if curcumin supplements could at least roll back that risk factor by enrolling 117 participants who had been diagnosed with metabolic syndrome for their study.

Half were given pills containing one gram of curcumin powder, and the other half were given similar looking pills with no curcumin inside. All the participants took the supplements every day for eight weeks.

At the beginning of the study and again at the end, the researchers measured levels of three blood markers of inflammation, including C-reactive protein (CRP), which even on its own has been linked with heart disease risk.

They found that the people who took curcumin had improved blood levels of all three biomarkers as well as reduced fasting blood sugar and hemoglobin A1c, a measure of long-term blood sugar levels. The comparison group had higher glucose and levels of one of the inflammation markers, and no changes in the other markers.

The study team also analyzed data from eight previous studies and confirmed that curcumin had shown a significant reduction of CRP concentrations in a total of 281 patients.

“The findings of our studies, along with clinical findings reported by other groups, indicate the usefulness of daily use of curcumin supplement for the prevention and treatment of several diseases,” Sahebkar said.

The researchers didn’t examine the effect of curcumin on any diseases, and it was a fairly brief study, so it’s not clear what the long-term implications may be they caution in their report.

The study was funded by the Clinical Trial Research Center in Tehran and the Iran National Science Foundation. One of the authors is CEO of Sabinsa Corporation and Sami Labs Ltd, manufacturers of curcumin supplements.

Sahebkar said most of the clinical benefits reported for curcumin have been achieved when curcumin was added to a standard drug therapy regimen, and patients should be careful not to replace their prescribed drugs with curcumin without prior consultation with their physician.

“Curcumin is a very safe natural supplement, and there is no severe adverse event associated with its use, even at high doses,” Sahebkar said.

However, owing to limited safety information, pregnant and lactating women should avoid using this supplement, Sahebkar said.

“In addition, patients with malabsorption syndrome, gall bladder problems, gastric ulcer, bleeding problems as well as those who are undergoing surgery, and those who have a history of hypersensitivity to herbal products should be cautious and consult with their physician before taking this supplement,” Sahebkar said.

Sahebkar added that he is often asked about the possibility of using turmeric instead of pure curcumin supplements.

“Whilst turmeric is known to have several medicinal properties, and its regular use in diet is strongly suggested, it cannot be regarded as an equivalent substitution of curcumin,” he said.

Sahebkar said turmeric contains very low quantities of curcumin, usually less than 5 percent, and curcumin has a very low absorption in its raw form, usually less than one percent of raw curcumin is absorbed when taken orally.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a great job of explaining the study design, noting that it was “a randomized controlled clinical trial” and discussing the dosages, the length of the study and the size of the experimental and control groups. Just as important, the story explains that “the researchers didn’t examine the effect of curcumin on any diseases, and it was a fairly brief study, so it’s not clear what the long-term implications may be.” These are important limitations to mention in a study that looked only at risk factors — not disease.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Pleasantville, N.Y., developmental pediatrician won’t allow drug marketers in his office, and says he doesn’t always prescribe medication for children diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Yet Dr. Bertin has recently changed the way he talks about medication, offering parents a powerful argument. Recent research, he says, suggests the pills may “normalize” the child’s brain over time, rewiring neural connections so that a child would feel more focused and in control, long after the last pill was taken.

“There might be quite a profound neurological benefit,” he said in an interview.

A growing number of doctors who treat the estimated 6.4 million American children diagnosed with A.D.H.D. are hearing that stimulant medications not only help treat the disorder but may actually be good for their patients’ brains. In an interview last spring with Psych Congress Network, an Internet news site for mental health professionals, Dr. Timothy Wilens, chief of child and adolescent psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital, said “we have enough data to say they’re actually neuroprotective.” The pills, he said, help “normalize” the function and structure of brains in children with A.D.H.D., so that, “over years, they turn out to look more like non-A.D.H.D. kids.”

Medication is already by far the most common treatment for A.D.H.D., with roughly 4 million American children taking the pills — mostly stimulants, such as amphetamines and methylphenidate. Yet the decision can be anguishing for parents who worry about both short-term and long-term side effects. If the pills can truly produce long-lasting benefits, more parents might be encouraged to start their children on these medications early and continue them for longer.

Leading A.D.H.D. experts, however, warn the jury is still out.

“Sometimes wishful thinking gives us hope that the impressive short-term relative benefits of medication over other treatments will persist beyond childhood, but I haven’t seen it,” said James Swanson, director of the Child Development Center at the University of California at Irvine. Dr. Swanson, a co-author of a landmark federally funded study, the Multimodal Treatment of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, said that follow-up research found overall improvement but no greater long-term benefits after three years for children who were treated with medication compared to those who weren’t. One possible reason, as the report noted, was that many children refuse to continue taking medication after a year or so, something most parentsof such children well know.

Research has shown that the brains of people with A.D.H.D. on average look and function differently than those who don’t have the disorder, particularly when it comes to processing two important neurotransmitters: dopamine and norepinephrine. For most people with A.D.H.D., stimulants can temporarily boost focus, motivation and self-control by increasing the availability of these chemical messengers. The question is whether these effects can last once the drugs have left the bloodstream.

In arguing for “normalization,” Dr. Wilens cited a major review in the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry in late 2013, which looked at 29 brain-scan studies. Although the studies had different methods and goals, the authors said that, together, they suggested that stimulants “are associated with attenuation of abnormalities in brain structure, function, and biochemistry in subjects with A.D.H.D.”

But other A.D.H.D. experts challenge this conclusion. Dr. F. Xavier Castellanos, director of research at the New York University Child Study Center, called assertions that stimulants are neuroprotective “exaggerated,” adding: “The best inference is that there is no evidence of harm from medications – normalization is a possibility, but far from demonstrated.”

A.D.H.D. is an exceptionally controversial diagnosis, with particular controversy zeroing in on researchers, including Dr. Wilens himself and some of the authors of the 2013 report he cited who have received financial support from pharmaceutical firms. In an email, Dr. Wilens said he had not received “any personal income” from the pharmaceutical industry since 2009.

As several experts noted, a major impediment to determining the long-term impacts of A.D.H.D. medication is that a “gold-standard” study would require researchers to assign children randomly to groups that either received medication or didn’t. Such a practice has been deemed unethical due to the widespread belief that the medication can help struggling children, at least in the short-term.

And other research has raised new concerns. One peer-reviewed 2013 study co-authored by Dr. Swanson suggested that the stimulants may change the brain over time so as to undermine the long-term response to the medication and even exacerbate symptoms when people aren’t taking them.

Dr. Peter Jensen, the former associate director of child and adolescent research at the National Institute of Mental Health, cautioned that parents should not try to force children with A.D.H.D. to take medication when they don’t want to, adding that “most kids don’t want to.”

Dr. Jensen, who now heads the REACH Institute, a national nonprofit organization concerned with children’s mental health, once surveyed 100 parents of sons and daughters in their 20s who had been diagnosed with A.D.H.D., asking what made the most difference.

“Eighty percent of them said ‘Love your child. Help him or her advocate for themselves, and find a doc who’ll work with you through thick or thin whether you medicate or not,” Dr. Jensen said. “Only a minority of these parents mentioned medication.”

Katherine Ellison is a Pulitzer Prize-winning former foreign correspondent and author and co-author of seven books, including the forthcoming “What Everyone Needs to Know about A.D.H.D.” (Oxford University Press), co-authored with Stephen Hinshaw, Vice-Chair for Psychology, Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco.

Katherine Ellison is an author or co-author of four books about A.D.H.D. and education, including “Buzz: A Year of Paying Attention.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: A strength of this story is that it clearly tackles limitations in the available studies. Without going into dense details of methodology, it makes clear that leading experts have differing interpretations of the evidence that is available.
For those interested in that detailed context, we’d note that this story raises an issue we commonly discuss with scientific studies: correlation vs. causation. Is drug treatment responsible for changes on brain scans recorded during and after drug treatment for ADHD — or is it merely associated with those changes? Note that drug treatment brings about changes in children’s perception, attention, and behavior, and such changes have the potential to “rewire” the brain independent of any drug effect. It’s conceivable that any intervention that promotes attention and focus could yield the same effects on the brain without the need for drugs.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
VANCOUVER, British Columbia, April 13, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Mapping blood flow in the brain of athletes using an advanced form of ultrasound may make it easier to more accurately recognize concussions, according to a study released today that will be presented at the American Academy of Neurology's 68th Annual Meeting in Vancouver, Canada, April 15 to 21, 2016.

"There is growing evidence that concussions can change the blood flow in the brain," said study author Robert Hamilton, PhD, co-founder of Neural Analytics in Los Angeles, Calif., and a member of the American Academy of Neurology. "While such changes may be detected with MRI, we believe there may be a less expensive and portable way to measure these changes with a transcranial Doppler (TCD) device."

More than one million athletes experience a concussion each year in the United States.

TCD uses ultrasound to map blood flow activity in the brain. Traditionally, it has measured variables like the speed and variability (pulse) of blood flowing through the arteries. But those measurements haven't been enough to accurately detect concussion.

For this study, researchers used an advanced version of TCD ultrasound to get a more complete picture of just how the blood moves through the middle cerebral artery, one of the three major arteries in the brain.

Researchers compared a group of 66 high school athletes in contact sports who had been recently diagnosed with a concussion to a control group of 169 high school student athletes from both contact and non-contact sports. Examples of collision sports included in the study were football, soccer, basketball, hockey, water polo and lacrosse. The non-contact sports included were cheerleading, cross country, cycling, tennis and track. Both the control and concussion groups were approximately 30 percent female.

Each of the concussed athletes had their brain blood flow measured with the advanced ultrasound headset within an average of six days after the injury. They were also given a general concussion evaluation and had their blood pressure checked.

The study found that the advanced version of TCD ultrasound was able to differentiate between healthy and concussed athletes 83 percent of the time. This is in contrast to traditional TCD ultrasound measurements like change in cerebral blood flow reactivity which differentiated between the two 60 percent of the time, average blood flow speed which differentiated 55 percent of the time and blood flow resistance which differentiated 53 percent of the time.

"This research suggests that this advanced form of ultrasound may provide a more accurate diagnosis of concussion," said Hamilton. "While more research is needed, the hope is such a tool could one day be used on the sidelines to help determine more quickly whether an athlete needs further testing."

"This important work provides insight into a tool that may yet prove useful in the recognition and management of concussion," said Jeffrey Kutcher, MD, FAAN, with the The Sports Neurology Clinic in Brighton, Michigan. "The potential of having an accessible technology that detects a physiological change following brain trauma is very exciting. However, what these detected blood flow changes mean to a patient's clinical care is still unclear."

"This is an important area of research. Testing of the TCD technique at the sideline at the time of injury will be an important next step to determine its ultimate utility," said Randolph S. Marshall, MD, MS, with Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York and a member of the American Academy of Neurology's Science Committee.

The study was supported by the National Institutes of Health and the National Science Foundation.

Learn more about concussion at www.aan.com/concussion, where you can access the AAN's Sports Concussion Guideline, QuickCheck app, and other resources.

The American Academy of Neurology, an association of 30,000 neurologists and neuroscience professionals, is dedicated to promoting the highest quality patient-centered neurologic care. A neurologist is a doctor with specialized training in diagnosing, treating and managing disorders of the brain and nervous system such as Alzheimer's disease, stroke, migraine, multiple sclerosis, brain injury, Parkinson's disease and epilepsy.

For more information about the American Academy of Neurology, visit http://www.aan.com or find us on Facebook, Twitter, Google+ and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The experiment is carefully explained in the news release, using language that will be accessible to non-scientists. But  we are not told when the test was performed in relation to the trauma, which has bearing on the results and diagnostic accuracy. We think the release earns a satisfactory here for adding a caution that doctors have not yet forged a clear link between documenting changes in blood flow in the brain after a concussion and treatment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — RESEARCH TRIANGLE PARK, NC— Major depressive disorder affects more than 32 million Americans, and their first stop for treatment is often their primary care provider. A recent evidence review of several alternatives to medication found that using cognitive behavioral therapy as the first treatment for depression can be equally effective as using a second generation antidepressant.

The research from the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center was published today in the British Medical Journal. The authors focused specifically on comparing second generation antidepressants, such as Wellbutrin, Lexapro and Prozac with cognitive behavioral therapy, which includes several in-person or phone sessions with a therapist to examine how actions and thoughts can impact depression. Second-generation antidepressants refers to newer antidepressants introduced primarily in the 1980s and 1990s.

"Major depressive disorder is a disabling and prevalent form of depression, experienced by more than 16 percent of U.S. adults during their lifetime," said Arlene Bierman, M.D., Director, Center for Evidence and Practice Improvement, at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which funded the study. "Most patients will be prescribed antidepressants. However, the evidence shows that cognitive behavioral therapy can be just as effective, providing important information for patients and their physicians to consider when choosing among available treatment options."

After conducting a full review of the scientific literature available, the researchers examined 11 randomized controlled trials with 1,511 patients that compared a second generation antidepressant with cognitive behavioral therapy. They found that symptom improvement and rate of remission were similar between the two options, whether used alone or in combination with each other.

"Primary care clinicians and their patients may not automatically consider alternatives when discussing treatment," said Halle Amick, research associate at the RTI International-University of Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center and lead author. "Our findings indicate that both options should be considered effective initial treatment strategies."

Side effects from antidepressants can include constipation, diarrhea and dizziness. Patients also sometimes express concerns about becoming addicted to medications and therefore prefer psychotherapy. However, psychotherapy can be time-consuming and may be substantially more expensive, depending on the patient's insurance benefits.

"Given comparable effectiveness, doctors need to discuss advantages and disadvantages of both treatment options with their patients. Such shared and informed decision making might enhance treatment adherence which is one of the main challenges of treating major depressive disorder," said Gerald Gartlehner, M.D., associate director of the RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center, who was the principal investigator of the evidence review, which was also published today by AHRQ.

A journal article describing all the review findings will be published in the Annals of Internal Medicine in January.

"Bringing psychotherapy into discussions of treatment may also enhance coordination of care between primary care and mental health care providers in addition to addressing the issue of patient-centered care," Amick said. "If primary care providers discuss psychotherapy with their patients as a valid treatment option, it may empower patients to voice their preferences and truly participate in medical decision-making and encourage them to adopt and adhere to effective treatment of their depression."

RTI-UNC Evidence-based Practice Center is a collaboration between RTI and the five health professions schools and the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research at UNC. It is funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This was a systematic review that looked only at randomized, controlled trials, which should reflect high quality, reliable results. While we’ll award a Satisfactory rating, we wish that the release had done more to explain where this type of study sits in the evidence hierarchy and how it differs from other types of research. Some comment on limitations of the included studies would also have been appropriate — for example the study itself said this: “Results should be interpreted cautiously given the low strength of evidence for most outcomes.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A scientifically based approach that includes a tooth-decay risk assessment, aggressive preventive measures and conservative restorations can dramatically reduce decay in community dental practices, according to a study by researchers at UC San Francisco.

The findings, which support earlier research demonstrating positive results of the assessment and treatment method in a university setting, have the potential to transform dental care for high-risk patients at a lower cost to both patients and dental clinics and practices. Results appear online Jan. 22, 2018, in Advances in Dental Research.

"We put the 2012 UCSF clinical study into the real world and showed it works," said lead author Peter Rechmann, DMD, PhD, professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences in the UCSF School of Dentistry. "The patients at high caries risk who used prescription products went down significantly over time in their risk level. Those in the control group also reduced their risk to a lesser degree, simply by using over-the-counter products that also protect teeth and affect the bacteria."

Dental caries (tooth decay) is caused by bacteria on the tooth surface feeding on carbohydrates, then making acids as waste. These acids destroy the protective tooth enamel and the dentin layer beneath it. If not halted or reversed, this leads to a cavity.

CAries Management By Risk Assessment (CAMBRA?) is an evidence-based approach to preventing or treating dental caries at its earliest stages. It was launched in 2003 through the UCSF School of Dentistry by the paper's senior author, John Featherstone, PhD, MSc, former dean of the school and distinguished professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences.

A dentist who uses CAMBRA obtains the patient's dental and medical history and conducts a clinical exam to assess caries early enough to reverse or halt progression and to determine caries risk factors. These factors include, among other things, acid-producing bacteria, frequent eating and drinking of fermentable carbohydrates ("snacking"), and abnormally low saliva flow and function.

From this assessment, the dentist utilizes behavioral approaches and chemical treatments to optimize protective factors. The treatment plan typically incorporates remineralization through the use of fluoride and/or antibacterial therapies such as chlorhexidine and xylitol, minimally invasive restorative procedures to conserve tooth structure, and regular patient follow up.

The authors published their initial validation of CAMBRA for ages 6 through adult in 2006, followed by several additional years of data published in 2011, 2012, 2015 and 2016. Since then, more than half of the U.S. schools and colleges of dentistry have adopted CAMBRA in one form or another as part of their standard curriculum. The authors said now that this has been shown to be effective in a non-academic clinical setting, there also is potential for insurance companies to reimburse CAMBRA and other preventive therapies for adults, thereby lowering patient costs while increasing profits for dental practices.

In the Advances in Dental Research study, Rechmann and his colleagues recruited 20 dentists - 17 in private practice, three in community clinics - to participate in a two-year CAMBRA trial of 460 patients ages 12-65 years old, with 239 in a CAMBRA group and 221 in a control group.

In the CAMBRA group, high-risk patients received prescription fluoride toothpaste, chlorhexidine antibacterial rinse, xylitol mints and fluoride varnish. The control group received regular fluoride toothpaste, an assumed inactive mouth rinse, sorbitol candies and a non-fluoride varnish.

Follow-up visits occurred at six, 12, 18 and 24 months, in which new caries lesions or changes in caries risk level were recorded. Overall, the researchers found that a significantly greater percentage of high-risk participants were classified at lower risk after receiving CAMBRA preventive therapies. Dental decay was low in both groups.

Among 242 patients (137 intervention, 105 control) initially identified as high risk for caries, only a quarter of the patients remained at high risk in the CAMBRA group at 24 months, while just over half (54 percent) of the control group did. Of the 192 low-risk participants (93 intervention, 99 control), most participants remained low risk, indicating that the assessment correctly identifies who is at risk for caries.

The researchers said the risk reduction among the control group may have been caused by the fluoride toothpaste enhancing tooth repair, as well as the mouth rinse enhancing saliva flow and having bactericidal effects. While not as significant as the CAMBRA group in this study, the risk level of these patients dropped more dramatically over time than for those in the 2012 UCSF CAMBRA study.

"It was surprising to see the benefits gained by the control group," Rechmann said. "More research is needed to see if the products and treatment administered to this group function in the way we speculate, and if so, they might be made easily available to dental patients. Doing so can change the whole picture of caries control."

Among the study limitations, the researchers noted a high study attrition (65 percent), which partly may have contributed to observed declines in risk level at each subsequent recall visit.

Co-authors on the paper were Benjamin Chafee, DDS, MPH, PhD, assistant professor of preventive and restorative dental sciences and director of the Global Oral Health program, and Beate Rechmann, research associate, both from the UCSF School of Dentistry. Funding was provided by the National Institutes of Health National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, PacifiCare/United Healthcare, DentaQuest and California Dental Association. Proctor & Gamble, 3M Espe and Epic provided products for study participants at reduced or no cost.

UC San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with nationally renowned programs in basic, biomedical, translational and population sciences; and a preeminent biomedical research enterprise. It also includes UCSF Health, which comprises three top-ranked hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals in San Francisco and Oakland, and other partner and affiliated hospitals and healthcare providers throughout the Bay Area. Please visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We are given enough information to judge the quality of the evidence; it was a randomized study with an experimental and a control group.
The release also deserves praise for noting study limitations, including the high study attrition rate (65 percent of volunteers dropped out before their 24 month follow-up).
The study quality seems to have been very good considering the difficulty in performing this type of community based study.  The blinding was adequate and although the published study states that the blinding was “double” (patient and investigator), it also appears that the treating dentists (participating treaters) were also blinded to the group that the patient was assigned.  This could have been mentioned, too, and would have strengthened the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Diseases like Alzheimer’s start years, even decades, before the first symptoms of memory loss shows up. And with rates of those diseases rising, experts say that more primary care physicians—not neurology experts—will have the task of identifying these patients early so they can take advantage of whatever early interventions might be available.

“If we had a simple blood test, a cholesterol test for Alzheimer’s disease, that would help,” says Dr. Ronald Petersen, director of the Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center at the Mayo Clinic, “but we don’t.” But Petersen has a potential solution, and according to a new paper released Wednesday in the journal , his Alzheimer’s test has promise.

Petersen and his team wanted to develop a test that any physician can administer to patients, without the need for any new technology or expensive equipment. Petersen believes that the test they came up with could become a useful tool for any physician, even those without special training in the brain. “What we are trying to do is give them some help so they can be as efficient as possible without ignoring these important cognitive issues,” he says.

In the first phase of the test, his researchers simply collected information from 1,500 patients’ medical charts—their age, family history of Alzheimer’s, factors such as diabetes or smoking that have been linked to Alzheimer’s, and whether the patient had ever reported problems with memory.

In the next phase they studied the results of the patient’s basic mental exam as well as of a psychiatric evaluation, because depression and anxiety have been connected to Alzheimer’s.

And another factor that emerged as important in developing the disease—how quickly the participant could walk a short distance. “We were a little surprised,” says Petersen. “But what’s nice about it is that it’s a nice non-cognitive, motor factor so it’s looking at another aspect of brain function.”

MORE: This Alzheimer’s Breakthrough Could Be a Game Changer

Petersen suggests that every physician should get this information on their patients at age 65; that way, they can have a baseline against which to compare any changes as their patients age. Only if they show such changes — a slower walk, for example, or worsening signs of depression or memory issues — should they move on to the third phase of the test, which is a blood analysis. That would look for known genetic factors linked to Alzheimer’s, including the presence of certain versions of the ApoE gene.

Currently, the only way to truly separate out those on the road to Alzheimer’s is to conduct expensive imaging tests of the brain, or to do a spinal tap, an invasive procedure that extracts spinal fluid for signs of the amyloid protein that builds up in the disease. “We have either expensive techniques or invasive techniques and it’s not practical to do them from a public health screening standpoint,” says Petersen.

MORE: New Test May Predict Alzheimer’s 10 Years Before Diagnosis

While his test is a possible solution to that problem, he acknowledges that the results need be repeated before it’s recommended on a wide scale to physicians across the country. But those who scored higher on the test of risk factors had a seven-fold higher chance of developing mild cognitive impairment than those with lower scores.

For now, even if doctors identify patients around age 65 who might be at higher risk of developing cognitive impairment, there isn’t much they can do to interrupt the process. But they can direct them toward clinical trials of promising new drugs to address Alzheimer’s dementia, which may slow the cognitive decline considerably.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We are on the fence on this one, but we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
The story does give an effective description of how the study was done, and it points out that the tests described are a “potential” solution and that confirmatory studies need to be performed.  It also points out that the only way to truly diagnose Alzheimer’s is through examination of spinal fluid or expensive imaging.
But the story headline, “A Simple 3-Part Test May Predict Alzheimer’s,” and its sub-head suggesting there’s “a new test that any physician can perform in their office” give an over-optimistic and inaccurate representation of the research and its implications. The 3-part testing process involves detailed patient histories, a psychiatric evaluation, a test of motor skills and a blood test to identify the presence of a specific gene associated with Alzheimer’s Disease. That’s not exactly “simple.”
We’re also concerned that the story allows an expert to suggest “that every physician should get this information on their patients at age 65; that way, they can have a baseline against which to compare any changes as their patients age.”  Even though the story later knocks that statement down, why even suggest it if the research isn’t yet ready for prime time? We’ll flag the story for this below in the Disease Mongering section.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers say they have taken a big step towards developing a test that can tell people if they have cancer long before the first symptoms show up.

The blood test detected the majority of cancers in people with four of the biggest cancer killers: breast, colon, lung and ovarian cancer, the team at Johns Hopkins University said.

The test is a long way from being used to screen for cancer, but the study shows a way to get there, the team reported in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

“There is a lot of excitement about liquid biopsies, but most of that has been in late-stage cancer or in individuals where you already know what to look for,” said Dr. Victor Velculescu, professor of oncology and pathology at the Johns Hopkins University Kimmel Cancer Center.

“The surprising result is that we can find a high fraction of early-stage patients having alterations in their blood,” said Velculescu, who led the study team.

It was not a slam dunk, but the test found cancer in the blood of more than half the patients who had been diagnosed with stage 1 cancer. It was even more accurate in finding late-stage cancers, but the goal would be to catch cancer in its earliest, easiest-to-treat stage.

There were no false positives in 44 people who did not have cancer, they said. That's important, said Dr. Wyndham Wilson of the National Cancer Institute, because there is no point detecting cancer in people if the cancer is not going to actually cause trouble.

"You don’t want to go screening people for hallmark (cancer) mutations unless you absolutely know that when you find it, that there is a tumor there and that it is a tumor that needs to be treated," said Wyndham, who was not involved in the study.

Sometimes, early-stage tumors or precancerous growths just go away -- attacked by the immune system or because they don't thrive for other reasons.

Several different liquid biopsies are already on the market, used to help track whether cancer treatments are working. But there’s nothing yet that can detect cancer in someone who has not yet been diagnosed.

It’s easy to find tumor mutations if you know what to look for. “The challenge was to develop a blood test that could predict the probable presence of cancer without knowing the genetic mutations present in a person’s tumor,” Velculescu said.

“We have used this approach to examine 58 cancer-related genes,” the team wrote in their report. The method involved deep sequencing – sequencing DNA 30,000 times over to look for mutations in DNA from tumor cells that floats in the blood.

Cancer patients had more of this DNA in their blood, the team found.

They identified 62 percent of the patients with stage I cancer – four out of eight colon cancer patients, and 90 percent of colon cancer patients with stage II, III or IV disease.

They got a positive in 45 percent of the lung cancer patients with stage I disease, 67 percent of ovarian cancer patients with stage I disease and 67 percent of breast cancer patients with stage I disease.

While that's good, it's not a great result. The test still missed a large percentage of cancers and will need much improvement, Velculescu said.

It will also have to be tried in larger groups of patients, and patients with different cancers. The first goal would be to try it in people at high risk of cancer but no symptoms yet – such as smokers, or people with cancer-causing gene mutations like BRCA mutations, Velculescu said.

Wyndham said it will be important to study such tests in large groups of people who have not had cancer diagnosed, to see if it can truly be used to screen asymptomatic people for cancer. And then it will have to be shown that using the test allows doctors to intervene sooner and help people.

Catching cancer in its earliest stages could save many lives. Cancer is the No. 2 killer overall in the United States.

”The survival difference between late stage and early stage disease in these cancers would account for more than a million lives each year worldwide,” Velculescu said.

The genetic sequencing is also expensive right now – on the order of several thousand dollars for the 30,000 repeats the team did. But costs are coming down steadily, he said.

Velculescu said Johns Hopkins had patented this test, and Velculescu is himself the founder of a company that does liquid biopsies for advanced cancer patients called Personal Genome Diagnostics.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has been very skeptical of blood tests that claim to diagnose disease before people have symptoms.

The agency has chastised a company called Pathway Genomics over its "liquid biopsy" test , saying the company had not shown the $699 test worked as advertised.

It’s also warned other gene testing companies but finally gave 23andMe the go-ahead to market its home DNA test – which does not include any cancer screening – in April.

Cancer screening is still often a tricky issue.

Currently, colon cancer can be detected very early with colonoscopies, and even stopped before pre-cancerous growths get out of control. But colonoscopies are uncomfortable and carry a small risk of injury.

Mammograms can detect early breast cancer, Pap smears can detect cervical cancer or pre-cancerous changes and a type of specialized chest x-ray called a spiral CT can detect lung cancer. There’s a debate over the usefulness of screening for prostate cancer but blood tests and physical exams can indicate some men at high risk.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story does a good job of reporting the results without exaggeration.  It reports the positive results but also cautions that they need to be better before this proposed test could be used widely.  It mentions that larger trials are needed to confirm the results and improve the methodology.  It was a retrospective study of blood samples from both normal people and persons with cancer, rather than a study using animal models.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A sweet tooth isn’t necessarily bad for your health— at least not when it comes to chocolate, hints a new study.

Researchers studying more than 33,000 Swedish women found that the more chocolate women said they ate, the lower their risk of stroke.

The results add to a growing body of evidence linking cocoa consumption to heart health, but they aren’t a free pass to gorge on chocolate.

“Given the observational design of the study, findings from this study cannot prove that it’s chocolate that lowers the risk of stroke,” Susanna Larsson from Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm told Reuters Health in an email.

While she believes chocolate has health benefits, she also warned that eating too much of it could be counterproductive.

“Chocolate should be consumed in moderation as it is high in calories, fat, and sugar,” she said. “As dark chocolate contains more cocoa and less sugar than milk chocolate, consumption of dark chocolate would be more beneficial.”

Larsson and her colleagues, whose findings appear in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, tapped into data from a mammography study that included self-reports of how much chocolate women ate in 1997. The women ranged in age from 49 to 83 years.

Over the next decade, there were 1,549 strokes, and the more chocolate women ate, the lower their risk.

Among those with the highest weekly chocolate intake — more than 45 grams — there were 2.5 strokes per 1,000 women per year. That figure was 7.8 per 1,000 among women who ate the least (less than 8.9 grams per week).

Scientists speculate that substances known as flavonoids, in particular so-called flavanols, may be responsible for chocolate’s apparent effects on health.

According to Larsson, flavonoids have been shown to cut high blood pressure, a risk factor for stroke, and improve other blood factors linked to heart health. Whether that theoretical benefit translates into real-life benefits remains to be proven by rigorous studies, however.

Nearly 800,000 Americans suffer a stroke every year, with about a sixth of them dying of it and many more left disabled. For those at high risk, doctors recommend blood pressure medicine, quitting smoking, exercising more and eating a healthier diet — but so far chocolate isn’t on the list.

SOURCE: bit.ly/qhsaZ0 Journal of the American College of Cardiology, October 10, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story was much more cautious in its depiction of the findings than the competing WebMD coverage. Most important, it was careful to explain high up that the study found only a correlation between chocolate intake and lower stroke risk. As one of the study authors explains: “Given the observational design of the study, findings from this study cannot prove that it’s chocolate that lowers the risk of stroke.” We also appreciate the story’s more nuanced language regarding which constituents of chocolate might be responsible for possible benefits. Whereas WebMD states unequivocally that flavonoids and antioxidants “deserve the credit” for these benefits, Reuters says more judiciously that  flavonoids “may be responsible for chocolate’s apparent effects on health.” [Emphasis ours.]   “Whether that theoretical benefit translates into real-life benefits remains to be proven by rigorous studies, however,” Reuters appropriately adds.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It’s common for people who suffer from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) to also struggle with depression. Now, a small study published in the journal suggests that taking a probiotic supplement may provide relief from both conditions.

The randomized, placebo-controlled trial shows a connection between probiotics and mood improvement in people with IBS and depression or anxiety, as well as changes in brain regions related to emotional processing. Most previous research on this topic has been on healthy people without mood disorders.

For the new research, scientists from McMaster University in Canada recruited 44 adults with IBS as well as mild to moderate anxiety or depression. They were followed for 10 weeks; half took a daily dose of the probiotic , and half took a placebo. The probiotics were manufactured and provided by Nestle, which also funded the study. (Nestle was not involved in collection, analysis or interpretation of study data.)

After six weeks, twice as many people who took the probiotic had decreased depression scores compared to those who took the placebo: 64% versus 32%. Results were similar after 10 weeks, as well. When people in the study were given functional MRI scans, the researchers found that improved depression scores were associated with changes in activity of several brain areas involved in mood regulation.

Those changes in brain activity “support the notion that this probiotic has anti-depressive properties,” the authors wrote in their paper. While their data did not show significant independent changes in anxiety, constipation, diarrhea or pain, people who took the probiotic did report improvements in overall symptoms of IBS and in quality of life.

One explanation for the improved mood in the group taking probiotics could be that because their physical symptoms feel better, their mood gets better too. That’s why Dr. Roger McIntyre, professor of psychiatry and pharmacology at the University of Toronto, thinks the fMRI findings are the most interesting and important aspect of the new study: they signal that the probiotics may really be working on the brain itself.

MORE: You Asked: Should I Take Probiotics?

“We know that one part of the brain, the amygdala, tends to be red hot in people with depression, and it seemed to cool down with this intervention,” says McIntyre, who was not involved in the new research. “It provides more scientific believability that something in the brain, at a very biological level, seems to be affected by this probiotic.”

No serious side effects related to the probiotic were reported, suggesting that such a supplement could be a safe way to treat both stomach- and mood-related symptoms. Studies have looked at various types of probiotics for IBS patients, the authors wrote, and a recent review found that seemed to work better for gastrointestinal symptoms than another common probiotic, .

Some experts believe that gut bacteria influence the brain (and vice versa) mainly through systemic inflammation. But in this study, the researchers found no difference in inflammatory markers between the probiotic and the placebo group. McIntyre points out that the bowel communicates with the brain through other pathways as well, including the metabolic and nervous systems.

The study’s findings need to be confirmed in larger independent trials, and McIntyre says he wouldn’t yet recommend taking a probiotic for symptoms associated with mental disorders like depression or anxiety. (Study co-author Premysl Bercik, associate professor of medicine at McMaster University, says the formula used in the new research isn’t commercially available, anyway.) “The evidence at this point is promising,” says McIntyre, “but it is not sufficient to justify recommending to patients as a viable treatment strategy.”

But McIntyre says the results are encouraging. “They seem credible to me, and they might hint that there are other mechanisms, besides just inflammation, linking the GI tract to the brain,” he says.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The research study was a randomized controlled trial, which is considered the gold standard in study design, and the story does a good job of not overstating the research findings. It notes that the evidence is insufficient to recommend probiotics as a treatment for depression, and that larger independent trials are needed to confirm the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have stopped a study of a new lung cancer drug, saying it’s so effective they want to offer it to all the patients in the trial.

The drug, Keytruda, is the same drug that former president Jimmy Carter says helped stall advanced melanoma that had spread to his brain.

Keytruda was being tested for the first time in 305 lung cancer patients who had not been treated at all yet. The researchers wanted to see how it worked against the standard chemotherapy cocktails.

It worked at least as well if not better than the chemo, so the researchers have stopped the study to give everyone a chance to take Keytruda, Merck, the company that makes the drug, said.

It helped patients live longer overall and helped them live longer without their tumors growing or spreading, Merck said.

The details are not available yet. “We look forward to sharing these data with the medical community and with regulatory authorities around the world,” said Dr. Roger Perlmutter, president, of Merck Research Laboratories.

Independent committees look at the details of the patients and how well they are doing in drug trials like these. It was one of these independent committees that recommended stopping the trial based on what they saw but that doesn't necessarily mean they shared the details with the company or anyone else.

"I suspect the findings were significant enough that this will be a practice-changing finding," Dr. Pasi Janne, lung cancer specialist at Harvard Medical School and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, told NBC News.

Cancer research goes forward in slow steps. In tests of new drugs, patients always get either the very best therapy already available, or the new drug. Often they get both. Usually, cancer drugs are only tested at first in patients who have tried everything else available and their cancer has come back, anyway.

So it’s an important break for a company if its drug is the first one a patient gets and it works better than the so-called standard of care.

The company now can ask the Food and Drug Administration if it will approve Keytruda to use as the first treatment a lung cancer patient tries.

The FDA has given speedy approval to several new drugs in a class called checkpoint inhibitors, including Keytruda.

They treat cancer by stopping tumor cells from cloaking themselves against the normal, healthy immune system response.

They work on the principle that it's not where cancer starts that matters, but the genetic mutation that causes the cancer. So a lung tumor in one patient may look like the melanoma in another.

Keytruda — known generically as pembrolizumab — targets the activity of genes called PD-1 (anti-programmed-death-receptor-1) and PD-L1. The interaction between the two genes lets some tumors escape detection and destruction by immune system cells.

PD-1 stops immune cells from attacking normal healthy cells by mistake. Tumor cells make PD-L1 turn on PD-1 when immune cells approach.

This trial only included patients whose tumors cells made a lot of PD-L1. That is only a portion of people with lung cancer - 25 percent in one recent trial.

A rival drug, Bristol-Myers Squibb’s Opdivo, works in a similar way to Keytruda and it has slightly different approval from the FDA for how it should be used.

Related: Keytruda Keeps Some Patients Alive For Three Years

"Immunotherapy is a whole new way of treating cancer, including lung cancer," said Janne, who was not involved in the study. "Having seen patients benefit who failed existing therapies, now doing well on these new therapies, is fantastic."

Keytruda, approved October last year for lung cancer and in 2014 for melanoma, is pricey – costing about $150,000 a year for a course of treatment. It’s approved for use with a specific test for PD-L1 activity.

The new drugs are less toxic and more precise than standard chemotherapy. But they are not free of side-effects. Some are severe and can damage the lung, colon, liver, kidneys, hormone-producing glands and the brain, the FDA says.

Lung cancer is the top cancer killer in the U.S. It’s diagnosed in more than 220,000 people a year and it killed nearly 160,000 people last year, according to the National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story says up high that, “Keytruda was being tested for the first time in 305 lung cancer patients who had not been treated at all yet.” It does not spell out that the study findings were not published in a peer-reviewed journal, but that is implicit in the fact that the findings were announced by the company as it was deciding to stop its clinical trial for the drug.
Later in the story there is an important qualifier that we hope won’t be missed by readers busy tweeting about the “Jimmy Carter drug.” The story says, “This trial only included patients whose tumors cells made a lot of PD-L1. That is only a portion of people with lung cancer– 25 percent in one recent trial.”
The story also could have added this important piece of context: When clinical trials are stopped early for benefit, the reported results tend to overestimate the positive effects of the intervention.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Aug. 15, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A traditional Chinese herbal treatment may reduce fever from H1N1 ("swine flu") influenza just as well as the prescription medication Tamiflu, a new study suggests.

"For thousands of years, Chinese herbs have been used to treat influenza," study co-authors Dr. Chen Wang and Dr. Bin Cao, of Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, in China, said in an email. "The pandemic influenza 2009 gave us the opportunity to evaluate a standard Chinese herb formula" designed to target the flu, they added.

Cao and Wang, who specialize in infectious diseases and clinical microbiology, said the herbal recipe -- known as maxingshigan-yinqiaosan (M-Y) -- is easily accessible throughout China and much less expensive than Tamiflu (oseltamivir).

However, finding the medicine in the United States is difficult, if not impossible, given that it contains the stimulant ephedra. The United States has banned or restricted the sale of ephedra products because of concerns about possible complications, such as heart attack, stroke and even death, related to its use as a weight-loss supplement.

The authors discuss their findings in the Aug. 16 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

The 2009 H1N1 ("swine flu") pandemic sparked influenza cases around the globe, resulting in nearly 18,000 deaths, the authors said.

Per World Health Organization (WHO) recommendations, in most instances, Tamiflu was the treatment of choice, where it was available. However, it is often out of reach in less developed parts of the world, such as rural China, where traditional herbal medicines are a likely default treatment.

The M-Y flu preparation is composed of 12 herbs: ephedrae, zhimu, qinghao, shigao, yinhua, huangqin, chaoxingren, lianqiao, bohe, zhebeimu, niubangzi and gancao.

To compare the relative effectiveness of M-Y and Tamiflu in treating H1N1 influenza, the authors focused on 410 previously healthy patients who were diagnosed with a "very mild" form of the illness.

The men and women were relatively young, with an average age of 19. They were being treated in 11 different medical facilities across four Chinese provinces during the height of the pandemic, between July and November of 2009, to prevent spreading the flu, not because their symptoms were severe.

Within 72 hours of the onset of symptoms, the patients were assigned to one of four five-day treatment groups. One group was given 75 milligrams of Tamiflu twice a day in capsule form; a second group received 200 milliliters of M-Y four times a day in liquid form; a third group took the same dosages of Tamiflu and M-Y together; and a fourth group received no treatment.

All of the herbs were screened for quality, and the M-Y mixture was deemed to meet Chinese safety standards.

The results: Both M-Y and Tamiflu were effective at eliminating fever, whether administered on their own or in combination.

All three approaches helped to resolve fever sooner than no intervention whatsoever, the authors said, noting it appeared that fever dissipated fastest when M-Y and Tamiflu were given together. However, none of the treatment methods appeared to be superior in terms of overall viral control, and side effects were minimal in all cases.

Even though the ephedra-containing herbal is not readily available in the United States, the M-Y herbal formula is available in many countries besides China, including Korea, Japan, India and Germany, the study authors noted.

Duffy MacKay, vice president of scientific and regulatory affairs at the Council for Responsible Nutrition, which represents the dietary supplement industry, believes that fears over ephedra's use as a weight-control agent have overlooked "its more traditional and much safer" role as a medicine against lung inflammation.

MacKay said that in China, traditional medicine is "seamlessly integrated" into everyday medical practice.

"Here in the U.S., we do things differently," he said. "We have our prescription drugs on the one hand, and then we have dietary supplements on the other."

But, MacKay continued, "it should also be understood that these two treatments actually work very differently. Tamiflu works to stop viral replication. But the herbal formula is working on symptoms to help people become more comfortable. And those are two very different goals," he noted.

"So our advice," MacKay added, "is that because H1N1 can be very serious, it's very important to see your doctor. And once you're under the care of your licensed physician there's certainly a lot of things in the world of botanicals that might help."

For more on the flu and traditional medicine, visit the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We would have liked to see more qualifiers, specifically regarding the fact that these were patients with very mild disease. We don’t know how effective the herb mixture would be for patients with more severe cases of H1N1 flu, which is where Tamiflu has a more pronounced effect. The story does, however, quote an expert who counsels readers not to self-medicate and to see a doctor. That advice, together with a generally adequate description of the study, allows this story to squeak by with a satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - In a new study of middle-aged New Jersey men, taking cholesterol-lowering drugs was linked to a lower chance of dying from prostate cancer.

The findings don’t prove that the drugs, called statins, ward off aggressive cancer. But they jibe with previous studies suggesting that getting cholesterol levels under control might help reduce the risk of life-threatening disease, researchers said.

“People may be on these medications for their heart, but it may actually be doing them some good for their prostate,” said study author Dr. Stephen Marcella, from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in New Brunswick.

“If a person’s on the fence about taking a statin medication for their heart, this is another potential benefit they may have by taking one of these,” he told Reuters Health.

Marcella and his colleagues collected the medical records of 380 men who had died of prostate cancer and another 380 of the same age and race without prostate cancer or with non-lethal cancer.

Most of the men were white and in their mid- to late-60s, on average. Close to one in four of the men in both groups combined had ever taken a statin.

The researchers found that men who died of prostate cancer were half as likely to have taken a statin at any time, and for any duration, than men in the “control” group.

When they accounted for whether or not men were overweight and their other health problems and medications, it turned out that those with fatal cancers were 63 percent less likely to have ever taken a statin, according to findings published in Cancer.

But, Marcella added, “I would not tell a person if they don’t have a risk of heart disease, (if) they don’t have hypertension...to take a statin just to prevent lethal prostate cancer.”

The evidence that’s effective, he said, just isn’t there yet.

And even if statins do turn out to help prevent fatal prostate cancer, researchers said, previous studies have suggested they don’t lower a man’s risk of getting less aggressive forms of the disease.

According to the American Cancer Society, about one in every six men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer at some point, and one in every 36 men will die of the disease.

Marcella’s team didn’t have the data to figure out if taking a statin for longer, or starting one earlier, was more beneficial than more limited use of the drugs.

The researchers also couldn’t tell whether men started using statins before or after they were diagnosed with aggressive cancer.

But they did find that while high-potency, often newer statins were linked to a lower risk of fatal prostate cancer, lower-potency drugs were not. That suggests it’s something about the drugs themselves that lower men’s chances of dying from prostate cancer, Marcella said.

Statins may protect against fatal prostate cancer through their known cholesterol-lowering effects, said Dr. Stephen Freedland, who studies prostate cancer at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, but wasn’t involved in the new study.

He said that cholesterol is a “key nutrient” for cancer cells, so lower cholesterol levels in the body could prevent more aggressive forms of cancer from developing.

But it’s also possible that statins don’t prevent certain cancers at all, Freedland said, and it’s something else about men who take statins — for example, if they also change their diet and start exercising — that explains their lower risk of fatal cancer.

“It gets very, very tricky to sort out,” Freedland told Reuters Health.

To prove that statins protect against aggressive cancer would require a large study in which cancer-free men, or those with early-stage disease, are randomly assigned to take statins or not and then tracked for years to see how many of them die from cancer.

That type of study, especially involving healthy, disease-free men, would be very expensive and time consuming, said Dr. Nelly Tan, from the University of California, Los Angeles, who has studied statins and prostate cancer risk.

About one-quarter of adults age 45 and older in the U.S. take statins to lower cholesterol and protect against heart attacks. The drugs run anywhere from $11 to more than $200 per month, and sometimes cause side effects including muscle pain, nausea and gas and liver dysfunction.

Researchers agreed that until there’s clearer evidence for benefit, men with healthy hearts shouldn’t seek out statin prescriptions for the purpose of lowering their prostate cancer risks.

But Freedland said that other strategies for lowering cholesterol — such as eating better and exercising regularly — are ways almost everyone can lower their disease risks in the meantime.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story is very clear about the potential holes in the study results and what it would take to actually prove that statins protect against aggressive cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, May 19, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A leukemia drug might also effectively treat severe asthma, a small-scale clinical trial suggests.

Gleevec (imatinib) reduced the "twitchiness" of airways, making them less likely to reflexively constrict when exposed to an allergen or asthma trigger, said senior researcher Dr. Elliot Israel.

"We showed we could decrease the amount of airway twitchiness by a third," Israel said. "That's a substantial change, and that was significant compared with the placebo group."

Israel is director of the respiratory therapy department at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

The drug also improved overall airway function, an effect researchers hadn't expected, Israel said.

People whose severe asthma isn't controlled despite use of high-dose steroid medications are at risk of declining lung function and poor quality of life, the researchers said in background notes.

But, this powerful cancer drug can't be recommended for them on the basis of this small study, Israel and other specialists noted.

Gleevec fights leukemia by blocking a specific receptor on cancerous white blood cells, inhibiting their ability to multiply and spread, Israel said.

That same action also affects mast cells, a type of white blood cell distributed throughout the body that promotes inflammation and causes allergic reactions, Israel said.

For example, mast cells in the skin are responsible for hives, while mast cells in the lungs have been associated with severe asthma, he said.

"By blocking the signal that helps keep mast cells alive, we were hoping to reduce the number of these cells," Israel said. "By doing that, we hoped to produce improvements beyond the maximal therapy that these patients with severe asthma are on."

Israel and his colleagues recruited 62 severe asthma sufferers for the study. All received top-notch asthma treatment, and were randomly assigned to take either Gleevec or a placebo pill once daily during the 6-month trial.

Blood tests showed that Gleevec did reduce mast cell activity in patients, Israel said.

Further, allergy challenge tests showed a decrease in airway reactivity among patients taking Gleevec, the researchers reported. Airways became less likely to close off after exposure to an allergen.

Physical examinations showed that people taking Gleevec actually experienced a slight overall widening of their airways, Israel added.

"There was a small but significant improvement in the airway narrowing in these patients, which we didn't expect because we didn't think the mast cells were necessarily promoting that airway narrowing all the time," Israel said.

Side-effects were not as severe as expected, he added. One person dropped out because of a sharp decline in white blood cells, which bounced back after the drug was discontinued. Another person dropped out because of leg cramps associated with the drug.

"All in all, we were expecting a significantly greater pattern of side-effects, and we didn't see it," Israel explained.

According to Dr. Len Horovitz, a pulmonary specialist with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, "This drug represents a new mechanism for the immune modulation of severe asthma." Horovitz was not involved with the study.

"It has been a while since a new approach and treatment for severe asthma has emerged," Horovitz said. "Further studies will be needed to assess its utility in moderate asthma."

Pulmonologist Dr. Theodore Maniatis is medical director of Staten Island University Hospital in New York City. He sounded a more cautionary note.

"This is a very early work that in no way should encourage asthmatics," Maniatis said. "While it is a very interesting study for pulmonologists and immunologists, it is a very small study."

Until now, "this immune-modulating drug has been used only for cancer and is toxic," he added. "It will take years of study to determine the usefulness of this drug in treatment."

Israel agreed that further clinical trials are needed. "Before you go out and recommend this be used in general, you really want to repeat this in a larger population with greater numbers," he said.

It likely will be three to four years before Gleevec could be approved for asthma treatment, Israel estimated.

If proven effective, Gleevec might provide a relatively inexpensive new treatment for asthma patients. Two generic versions of the drug were launched last year, which could make it less pricey than new-wave asthma drugs headed for the market, Israel added.

The study was published May 18 in the New England Journal of Medicine.

For more on asthma, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We applaud the words “small-scale clinical trial” in the lead, though we would have liked to see a researcher’s caution that further trials are needed higher up in the story. The story also notes that it was a six-month trial involving patients whose asthma was not controlled with steroids, and that patients were randomly assigned to the real drug or a placebo.
The story offers helpful quotes from two independent experts. One notes that  “further studies will be needed to assess its utility in moderate asthma.” Another says: “This is a very early work that in no way should encourage asthmatics. … While it is a very interesting study for pulmonologists and immunologists, it is a very small study.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The finding is another in a series suggesting that early detection of cancer might not always lead to better outcomes for patients. A study published in March, for instance, suggested that early detection of using the blood test did not help men live longer but did lead to unnecessary treatments.

This new study does not refer to initial diagnosis of ovarian cancer, only to a relapse. Doctors are convinced that if the initial diagnosis can be made early, which is very difficult, the cancer can be treated by surgery. But for relapsed ovarian cancer, surgery is usually not an option.

Dr. Beth Karlan, director of gynecologic oncology at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in , said the results of the new trial would “make us all rethink the approach to treating patients with recurrent ovarian cancer.”

Dr. Karlan, who was not involved in the study but presented a commentary on it, said CA125 testing should be done less frequently. But she stopped short of saying it should be eliminated, saying that in any event, patients would not accept that.

“Many women often say they live from one CA125 to the next,” she said.

The new study, done in and nine other countries, compared 265 women who began chemotherapy after their CA125 levels began to rise with 264 women who waited to begin chemotherapy until they had symptoms, like or pain.

The group getting the test began chemotherapy a median of about five months earlier. But the overall median survival for the groups was the same, about months from the start of their remission. Moreover, the extra chemotherapy seemed to worsen the quality of life.

Dr. Rustin said the explanation for the counterintuitive results was not that CA125 was a poor predictor of cancer’s return. Rather, he said, some cancers were sensitive to chemotherapy, so it did not matter if they were treated early. Other were resistant to chemotherapy and would not respond to treatment no matter when it was given.

Dr. Andrew Berchuck, director of gynecologic oncology at , said that while “it’s the American way, sort of, to be aggressive” and treat early, some doctors and patients even now did not start chemotherapy when CA125 rises.

“I’ve had patients who wouldn’t dream of not being treated,” Dr. Berchuck said. “But there are also people who wouldn’t want to go back on chemo unless they absolutely have to.”

Diane Paul, an ovarian cancer survivor and patient advocate in , said that when she was getting the CA125 test, she asked her doctors not to tell her the results, to reduce her anxiety. “I was in a constant state of , waiting for the test, waiting for the results,” she said.

But others would prefer to know. “This makes me feel in control of this disease,” said Carol Tawney of Shawnee, Kan., a seven-year survivor who has her CA125 tested every two months.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the current study and placing the results in context with current clinical thinking.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS, Aug. 22, 2018 -- Breastfeeding is not only good for babies, there is growing evidence it may also reduce the risk for stroke in post-menopausal women who reported breastfeeding at least one child, according to new research in Journal of the American Heart Association, the Open Access Journal of the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.

Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death among women aged 65 and older, and is the third leading cause of death among Hispanic and black women aged 65 and older, according to the study.

"Some studies have reported that breastfeeding may reduce the rates of breast cancer, ovarian cancer and risk of developing Type 2 diabetes in mothers. Recent findings point to the benefits of breastfeeding on heart disease and other specific cardiovascular risk factors," said Lisette T. Jacobson, Ph.D., M.P.A., M.A., lead author of the study and assistant professor in the department of preventive medicine and public health at the University of Kansas School of Medicine-Wichita.

This is among the first studies to examine breastfeeding and a possible relationship to stroke risk for mothers, as well as how such a relationship might vary by ethnicity.

Researchers analyzed data on 80,191 participants in the Women's Health Initiative observational study, a large ongoing national study that has tracked the medical events and health habits of postmenopausal women who were recruited between 1993 and 1998. All women in this analysis had delivered one or more children and 58 percent reported ever having breastfed. Among these women, 51 percent breastfed for one-six months, 22 percent for seven-12 months and 27 percent for 13 or more months. At the time of recruitment, the average age was 63.7 years and the follow-up period was 12.6 years.

After adjusting for non-modifiable stroke risk factors (such as age and family history), researchers found stroke risk among women who breastfed their babies was on average:
• 19 percent lower in women who had breastfed for up to six months. A longer reported length of breastfeeding was associated with a greater reduction in risk.

"If you are pregnant, please consider breastfeeding as part of your birthing plan and continue to breastfeed for at least six months to receive the optimal benefits for you and your infant," Jacobson said.

"Our study did not address whether racial/ethnic differences in breastfeeding contribute to disparities in stroke risk. Additional research should consider the degree to which breastfeeding might alter racial/ethnic differences in stroke risk," Jacobson said.

Because the study was observational, it couldn't establish a cause-and-effect relationship between breastfeeding and lower stroke risk, meaning that it is possible some other characteristic that distinguishes between women who breastfeed and those who don't is the factor changing the stroke risk. However, because the Women's Health Initiative is large, researchers were able to adjust for many characteristics, and the effects of breastfeeding remained strong, Jacobson said.

"Breastfeeding is only one of many factors that could potentially protect against stroke. Others include getting adequate exercise, choosing healthy foods, not smoking and seeking treatment if needed to keep your blood pressure, cholesterol and blood sugar in the normal range," Jacobson said.

The study was also limited by the relatively small number of strokes that occurred during the follow-up period (just 3.4 percent of the women experienced a stroke during the study period and 1.6 percent reported having had a stroke prior to the study) and by the Women's Health Initiative's exclusion of women who had already had severe strokes at the time of recruitment.

Currently, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the World Health Organization recommend exclusive breastfeeding for six months, with continuation of breast feeding for one year or longer. For babies health, the American Heart Association recommends breastfeeding for 12 months with transition to other additional sources of nutrients beginning at about four - six months of age to ensure sufficient micronutrients in the diet.

Frontiers: The Heartland Institute for Clinical and Translational Research and the Wichita Center for Graduate Medical Education-Kansas Bioscience Authority funded the study. The WHI was supported by the National Health, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Co-authors are Erinn M. Hade, Ph.D.; Tracie C. Collins, M.D., M.P.H., M.H.C.D.S.; Karen L. Margolis, M.D., M.P.H.; Molly E. Waring, Ph.D.; Linda V. Van Horn, Ph.D., R.D.; Brian Silver, M.D.; Maryam Sattari, M.D., M.S.; Chloe E. Bird, Ph.D.; Kim Kimminau, Ph.D.; Karen Wambach, Ph.D.; and Marcia L. Stefanick, Ph.D. Author disclosures are on the manuscript.
• Available multimedia including photos and an audio interview are on the right column of the release link - https:/
• Story on previous JAHA study (June 21, 2018): Breastfeeding may reduce a mother's heart attack and stroke risk
• For updates and new science from JAHA, follow @JAHA_AHA

Statements and conclusions of study authors published in American Heart Association scientific journals are solely those of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the association's policy or position. The Association makes no representation or guarantee as to their accuracy or reliability. The Association receives funding primarily from individuals. Foundations and corporations (including pharmaceutical, device manufacturers and other companies) also make donations and fund specific association programs and events. The Association has strict policies to prevent these relationships from influencing the science content. Revenues from pharmaceutical and device corporations and health insurance providers are available at https:/ .

The American Heart Association is devoted to saving people from heart disease and stroke - the two leading causes of death in the world. We team with millions of volunteers to fund innovative research, fight for stronger public health policies and provide lifesaving tools and information to prevent and treat these diseases. The Dallas-based association is the nation's oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke. To learn more or to get involved, call 1-800-AHA-USA1, visit heart.org or call any of our offices around the country. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a pretty solid job here, describing the study fairly well and acknowledging its limitations. But there are a couple of things that could have been slightly better. For example, the release describes the study in the fifth paragraph. It is not until the 10th paragraph that the release explicitly tells readers that “Because the study was observational, it couldn’t establish a cause-and-effect relationship between breastfeeding and lower stroke risk, meaning that it is possible some other characteristic that distinguishes between women who breastfeed and those who don’t is the factor changing the stroke risk.” For example, it’s possible that women who did not breastfeed had higher levels of stress than women who did breastfeed, which may be a contributing factor to stroke. And it is not until the 12th paragraph that the release tells readers that “The study was also limited by the relatively small number of strokes that occurred during the follow-up period (just 3.4 percent of the women experienced a stroke during the study period and 1.6 percent reported having had a stroke prior to the study) and by the Women’s Health Initiative’s exclusion of women who had already had severe strokes at the time of recruitment.”
To be clear, we are very glad that the release includes these valuable qualifiers. However, we think the release would have been stronger if they had not been buried at the bottom of the piece.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alcoholics see hope in new pill Migraine drug may curb drinking but comes with some side effects

CHICAGO — A migraine pill seems to help alcoholics taper off their drinking without detox treatment, researchers report, offering a potential option for a hard-to-treat problem.

The drug, Topamax, works in a different way than three other medications already approved for treating alcoholism.

Experts said the drug is likely to appeal to heavy drinkers who would rather seek help from their own doctors, rather than enter a rehab clinic to dry out. The drug costs at least $350 a month, plus the price of doctor's visits.

It's unclear whether the findings will make a dent in an addiction that affects millions of Americans.

Addiction specialists not involved in the study said the findings are promising, although side effects such as trouble concentrating, tingling and itching caused about one in five people to drop out of the study. Drowsiness and dizziness are also problems.

"The size of the treatment effect is larger than in most of the other medications we've seen," said Dr. Mark Willenbring of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. "And all the drinking variables changed in the right direction."

The study, published in today's Journal of the American Medical Association, was funded by the maker of the drug, Johnson & Johnson Inc.'s Ortho-McNeil Neurologics.

The study followed 371 heavy drinkers for 14 weeks. About half were randomly assigned to take Topamax, also called topiramate, in gradually increasing doses. The others took dummy pills.

All volunteers were encouraged — but not required — to stop drinking.

At the start of the study, they drank, on average, 11 standard drinks daily. That's about two six-packs of beer each day, or two bottles of wine, or a pint of hard liquor.

By the end of the study, 27 of the 183 people, or 15 percent, who took Topamax had quit drinking entirely for seven weeks or more. That compared to six out of 188, or 3 percent, in the placebo group.

Others cut back. The Topamax group cut back to six drinks a day, on average, assuming everyone who dropped out of the study relapsed into heavy drinking. That compared to seven drinks a day for the placebo group.

"You can come in drinking a bottle of scotch a day and get treatment without detox," said Dr. Bankole Johnson of the University of Virginia, who led the study, which was conducted at 17 U.S. sites from 2004-2006.

It's unclear how many relapsed after quitting the pill.

Tom Wolfe, 44, a carpenter from Earlysville, Va., said he felt "a little light-headed" at first until he got used to the drug. "It's been a miracle to me," Wolfe said.

The drug works by inhibiting dopamine, the brain's "feel-good" neurotransmitters that are involved in all addictions, said Stephen Dewey, a neuroscientist at the Brookhaven National Laboratory.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a fine job reporting on the results of the study; it is clear from the story that only 15% of the people who took the drug quit drinking during the course of the study but that the difference in the average number of drinks per day though lower in the drug treated group, were really not very different than that of the placebo group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The debate over coronary bypass surgery versus stenting goes back decades.

Studies have been inconclusive, but doctors and patients have voted with their feet in favor of the less-invasive procedure — clearing clogged arteries and propping them open with tiny scaffolds called stents.

U.S. doctors do at least two stenting procedures these days for every coronary bypass operation.

Now the biggest collection of cases so far comes out in favor of surgery on the all-important question of mortality. Four years after the procedure, patients over 65 who had coronary artery bypass surgeries (called CABG or "cabbages") were almost 20 percent less likely to die.

Put another way, 21 percent of stented patients had died after four years compared with 16 percent of surgery patients.

Is that a big difference? Well, the study's lead author tells Shots that it might be enough to "tip the balance a little bit, but not overwhelmingly so."

The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, which funded the study with new "stimulus" money from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, is more bullish on the implications.

"We would hope a study as powerful as this one will inform decision-makers to rethink the direction they're going in," the NHLBI's Dr. Michael Lauer told Shots. He says it's been worrying that so many doctors have been opting for stenting over surgery.

Study author Dr. William Weintraub, chief of cardiology at Christiana Care Health System in Newark, Del., is presenting the data at the annual meeting of the American College of Cardiology in Chicago. The study also appears online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

It draws on data from more than 86,000 patients across the nation who underwent CABG operations and nearly 104,000 patients who had coronary stenting. They had blockages in either two or three coronary arteries but did not require emergency procedures.

Although the pro-surgery outcome is not a game-changer, Weintraub says it might cause some doctors and patients to consider surgery. And he says it supports those who now opt for CABGs.

"It's a very big deal to recommend coronary surgery to patients," Weintraub says. "I think doctors work very hard to weigh what's best for their patients. When doctors recommend surgery, these data suggest that that decision is a good one."

But Dr. Laura Mauri says in an accompanying editorial that the new study can't settle any debates. Only studies that randomly assign comparable patients to surgery or stenting can do that. Mauri is an interventional cardiologist – i.e., a specialist who does coronary stenting – at Brigham and Women's Hospital inBoston.

Weintraub notes it's "very difficult and expensive" to do randomized studies on this question – and to make the comparison groups truly comparable. And while such a study is being done, the technology (especially stenting technology) changes. That can call into question the ultimate relevance of the findings.

So the new data may be the best that doctors and patients in this situation can expect for the foreseeable future.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story could have done more here, but, given the space devoted to the topic, we were happy to see some mention of the study’s limitations saying that only “studies that randomly assign comparable patients to surgery or stenting can” answer the question of which type of procedure is better for patients. The story also notes that the difficulty in doing randomized trials “calls into question the ultimate relevance of the findings.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, June 28, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Something as simple as taking a low-dose aspirin every day may protect pregnant women from the life-threatening condition known as preeclampsia, new research suggests.

"Preeclampsia is one of the most serious complications of pregnancy, with a high risk of death for the mother and baby," said senior study author Dr. Kypros Nicolaides. He is a professor of fetal medicine at Kings College Hospital in London.

But he added, "This condition is, to a great extent, preventable."

The new study looked at an aspirin dose of 150 milligrams (mg) per day because some past studies with smaller daily doses of aspirin have produced conflicting results, according to Nicolaides. A baby aspirin dose is 81 milligrams.

In those studies using smaller doses, the reduction in preeclampsia risk hovered around 10 percent, he said, but the higher dose in this latest study was linked to a 62 percent reduction in risk.

Preeclampsia is a serious high blood pressure disorder. It can affect all of the organs in a woman's body, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). The exact cause of the disorder is unknown, but certain risk factors make it more likely to occur, including:
• Being pregnant with more than one baby,
• Having chronic conditions, such as type 1 or type 2 diabetes, autoimmune disease and kidney problems.

Dr. Mitchell Kramer, chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Huntington Hospital in New York, said he'd add women who are severely obese and women who've had babies who had restricted growth to the list of women at high risk of preeclampsia.

ACOG already recommends that women who are at high risk of preeclampsia take a low-dose baby aspirin beginning between 12 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.

About 1,600 women completed the double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Just under 800 were randomly put into the daily aspirin group, while just over 800 were placed in the placebo group. The women came from 13 different maternity hospitals across Europe and Israel.

Instead of relying solely on standard risk factors, the researchers combined those risk factors with measurements of maternal blood flow, blood pressure and two hormones produced by the placenta. They used an algorithm they designed to combine all those factors to select women who they believed were at a high risk of preeclampsia.

Between 11 and 14 weeks, the women began taking a daily 150 mg aspirin or a placebo. They continued taking the pills until they were 36 weeks' pregnant, or sooner if they delivered the baby early.

Just 13 women in the aspirin group developed preeclampsia, while 35 women in the placebo group developed the complication, the findings showed.

The reduction in risk was even greater for early deliveries. Women who delivered at less than 34 weeks were 82 percent less likely to have preeclampsia if they were taking 150 mg of aspirin, Nicolaides said.

There were no serious side effects for expectant mothers, or adverse events for the babies related to aspirin use during pregnancy, the researchers noted.

However, as with all drugs, women should talk to their doctor about the use of aspirin in pregnancy before taking up this regimen, because aspirin does increase the risk for bleeding.

Nicolaides said the aspirin may help improve blood flow from the mother to the placenta.

According to Kramer, "This randomized study concludes that [aspirin's] use is not only effective for reducing the incidence of preeclampsia at term, but also preterm. This is important because it will reduce the need for preterm delivery, which is risky for the baby."

Low-dose aspirin can also help reduce the chances of eclampsia, which is seizures due to preeclampsia for high-risk women, Kramer noted.

The study is scheduled for presentation Wednesday at the Fetal Medicine Foundation meeting in Slovenia. The findings were also published simultaneously in a special online issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

To learn more about preeclampsia, visit the March of Dimes.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story explains that the clinical trial in question was a “double-blind, placebo-controlled study” involving 1,600 women who “came from 13 different maternity hospitals across Europe and Israel.” Furthermore, it provides some detail as to how researchers determined the risk status of the women in the study: “Instead of relying solely on standard risk factors, the researchers combined those risk factors with measurements of maternal blood flow, blood pressure and two hormones produced by the placenta. They used an algorithm they designed to combine all those factors to select women who they believed were at a high risk of preeclampsia.”
It’s not clear how reliable that algorithm is, though.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Does swapping out all of your saturated fat with unsaturated fat lead to a longer life?

A new study suggests the answer may be no.

Eat less saturated fat for better heart health: that’s been the conventional wisdom based on decades of scientific study. Consumers have been advised to swap saturated (animal) fats — found in foods like whole milk, cheese, butter, and fatty cuts of beef and pork — for unsaturated vegetables oils.

The new report, which analyzed 40-year-old data from the Minnesota Coronary Experiment, found no association between lower cholesterol levels and longer life, suggesting that reducing the amount of saturated fat in the diet isn’t enough to reduce risk of death from heart disease.

A group of more than 9,000 people were divided into two groups; one group swapped out the dietary saturated fat for unsaturated vegetable fats in the form of corn oil and corn-oil margarine, and the other group continued with their standard daily saturated fat intake.

While the diet rich in vegetable oil did lower cholesterol levels over the 4-5 year study period, compared to a control group (who continued to eat saturated fat daily), the researchers found no change in the rate of death from heart-related ailments.

The original MCE study was conducted between 1968 and 1973 at seven different long-term care facilities. Researchers from the National Institutes of Health and University of North Carolina obtained data from 2,355 of these participants — information which apparently had not been analyzed — and discovered that giving up saturated fats didn’t protect against heart disease.

It’s unclear whether the corn oil or corn oil margarine consumed by the participants contained artery-clogging trans fats or hydrogenated vegetable oils that are now associated with heart disease, or whether the patients had a history of heart disease or genetic risk. All that is known is the participants had a normal cholesterol levels and normal blood pressure.

But even when their cholesterol levels were lowered by the switch from saturated fats, there was no longevity benefit. In fact, the study found that the lower the cholesterol, the greater the risk of death. But that’s a misleading association because a variety of illnesses can also cause drop in cholesterol, which is unrelated to diet.

“What's important here is for us to understand what we know and what we don't know, and the conventional wisdom, the evidence that saturated fat and cholesterol in the diet are the main drivers of heart disease is not supported by the study,” says cardiologist Dr. Steve Nissen, chair of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic.

While this study suggests that cholesterol levels alone are not associated with longevity, it is important to emphasize that many studies show the benefit of statin medications to lower blood cholesterol, that are highly associated with a reduced risk of death. Whether statins have additional properties to reduce risk, in addition to lowering serum cholesterol remain under study.

How does this translate to what we eat every day?

Current worldwide guidelines remain the same, and are modeled after Mediterranean-style eating: a variety of fruits, vegetables, whole grains and fish.

Saturated fats can remain a part of a healthy diet, in limited amounts – but there are two easy ways to help:
• Saturated fats should make up 10 percent of total caloric intake daily. For someone eating 2,000 calories, that’s about 200 calories, or 20 grams of saturated fat
• 1/3 of the total fat consumed daily allocated for saturated fat; if consuming 60 grams of fat daily, no more than 20 grams should come from saturated fat.

While the study has many limitations because it doesn’t take into account genetic or lifestyle factors that are proven important in both heart disease risk and longevity, it suggests that blood cholesterol levels are only one factor.

Madelyn Fernstrom, Ph.D is NBC News Health and Nutrition Editor. Follow her on Twitter @drfernstrom.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gives us information about both the old Minnesota study and the new British Medical Journal publication. We know the old study was randomized and included 9,000 people. At the end of the story, we also learn the study has “many” limitations and some of these are mentioned.
Ideally, the story would have specifically pointed out that the study population included only residents of nursing homes and mental health hospitals, which may affect generalization. Also, given that this is decades-old data, we’re wondering how researchers took that into account, and how it might have impacted the quality of evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, May 8, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Countless people -- often men with enlarged prostates -- need to visit the bathroom during the night. But help could soon be at hand in the form of a nasal spray, new research suggests.

A spritz of a synthetic hormone, already used by bed-wetting kids, might benefit older people struggling with the problem called nocturia.

"Nocturia is very common in patients over 50 years old, and can cause significant problems by causing loss of sleep, and injury due to falls," said study lead author Dr. Jed Kaminetsky.

The millions of people with nocturia wake up two or more times a night to urinate. Besides an enlarged prostate, Kaminetsky said, common causes are bladder problems, poor circulation and obesity.

Kaminetsky is a clinical assistant professor of urology at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City.

In the United States there's no approved drug to treat the problem, the study authors said.

The new drug, while promising, is of concern because of its potential to lower blood sodium levels in the elderly, one doctor said. Meanwhile, another researcher suggested that exercise might help stave off nocturia.

Known as SER-120, the nasal spray contains desmopressin, a low-dose synthetic version of the naturally occurring hormone vasopressin. Vasopressin, an anti-diuretic, reduces urine production.

SER-120 appears to delay urine production for four to six hours during sleep, said Kaminetsky, "and wears off by morning when patients awaken and start to drink fluids."

He is scheduled to present his team's research Sunday in San Diego at a meeting of the American Urological Association. The research was funded by the spray's manufacturer, Serenity Pharmaceuticals.

Desmopressin is commonly used to treat bed-wetting among children ages 6 and up, the study authors pointed out.

To assess its potential in adults, the study team enlisted nearly 1,400 men and women, 50 and older, who had a history of nocturia.

For three months, participants were randomly assigned to use either the desmopressin spray (two doses were tried) or a non-medicinal spray (a placebo).

Patients kept three-day urination diaries, and filled out quality-of-life questionnaires.

Desmopressin spray prompted "a significant decrease" in the frequency of nightly bathroom trips compared with the untreated group, Kaminetsky said. On average, patients reported at least two fewer episodes a night.

The treatment group also experienced a "significant increase" in the length of time they could sleep before awakening to urinate. That uninterrupted sleep period extended to more than four hours, Kaminetsky said.

The researchers also found that those in the higher-dose spray group experienced a "significant improvement" in overall quality of life, compared with the untreated group.

Though SER-120 is still considered investigational, Kaminetsky said the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing the findings, with a possible decision late this year.

Dr. Tomas Griebling, a professor of urology at the University of Kansas, described the study results as "promising," but added a note of caution.

"Other researchers have examined the utility and safety of desmopressin for the treatment of nocturia in the past," he said. "However, there have been concerns about safety, particularly in elderly patients."

Griebling said the American Geriatrics Society includes desmopressin in the Beers Criteria for potentially inappropriate medications for older adults, primarily because of concerns about resulting low blood sodium levels.

But the lower doses used in this study (1.5 or 0.75 mcg) "may help to improve the overall safety profile, particularly for geriatric patients," he said. "Additional research will be needed to fully answer this question in the future."

The study team said two of the higher-dose patients developed significantly low blood sodium levels (hyponatremia) as did one person taking the placebo.

Dr. Julien Dagenais, a urologist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, explored nocturia from another angle. He analyzed physical activity data reported by more than 10,000 men and women (aged 20 and older) in a U.S. health and nutrition survey conducted between 2005 and 2010.

People who reported higher levels of exercise were less likely to suffer from nocturia, Dagenais found. This suggests that the anti-inflammatory impact of routine exercise may minimize nocturia, he said.

These findings will also be presented at the American Urological Association meeting. Data and conclusions presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

There's more on nocturia at the National Association for Continence.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This was a tough one to rate because the study hasn’t actually been published, which means it hasn’t received peer review. However, there are enough details about the study that we feel it rates as a Satisfactory explanation of the quality of evidence.
For example, fairly early on, we’re told the study was presented at a urology conference, and at the very end of the story do we learn this means the results are considered “preliminary,” an important indicator of the study’s quality. Other details in the story that help the reader assess the quality of the evidence is the specific number of people in the trial (1,400), and that it was randomized to either placebo or not. While no study limitations are pointed out, an independent source does stress the need for additional research, and the story states the drug is considered not approved for use in this way and is “investigational.”
One area that confused us was the timeframe of the intervention–the story says the study was three months long, but that participants only kept diaries for three days. Longer study durations generally indicate stronger evidence, so this ideally would be clearer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finding a ‘silent killer'

A new strategy involving a simple blood test is a ‘step forward’ in detecting ovarian cancer early

Houston researchers have demonstrated a promising new way to detect ovarian cancer early, a long-sought tool in the battle against the disease known as “the silent killer” because it's usually not diagnosed until it's difficult to treat.

University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center researchers Thursday reported the results of a study that showed a simple blood test, tracked over time and followed by an ultrasound if needed, accurately picks up the disease in early, more curable stages. There is no such screening tool currently in use.

“This is an important step forward in the effort to develop an early detection system for this very lethal disease,” said Dr. Karen Lu, a professor in M.D. Anderson's department of gynecologic oncology and the study's principal investigator. “If the study's findings are confirmed in larger studies, I think this new strategy will be practice-changing.”

The method used in the nine-year study of 3,252 initially healthy postmenopausal women caught five ovarian cancers, three of them invasive. There were only a few false positives.

Lu said the study isn't large enough to justify recommending yet. But she added that an ongoing study in the United Kingdom involving 200,000 women should more definitively determine the test's value. That study is due to show results in 2015.

Ovarian cancer, though rare, is the fourth-leading cancer killer among U.S. women. In 2009, according to the American Cancer Society, it was diagnosed in 21,550 women and killed 14,600. More than 75 percent of women are diagnosed when the disease has already become advanced.

The new strategy involves an existing blood test for a protein discovered in the 1980s by an M.D. Anderson researcher and long used for predicting ovarian cancer recurrence. The protein, known as CA-125, has not been good at identifying new early-stage ovarian cancer because it can become elevated for other reasons, leading to false positives.

In the last decade, hopeful of finding a better test, ovarian cancer researchers have invested much time in the investigation of other biomarkers and technologies. But none proved as accurate as CA-125 after a Harvard scientist developed a mathematical model combining trends in test results and a patient's age.

One expert said the study is an important step but definitely needs follow-up work.

“It's a well-done study about which its authors are appropriately careful in their conclusions,” said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy medical director at the American Cancer Society. “But more research and refining needs to be done before it should be implemented. I can remember when doctors all rushed to adopt the Prostate Specific Antigen test, and we still don't know how to use it.”

Lu acknowledged there are comparisons to the PSA test, which has come under fire in recent years for being better at detecting prostate cancer than improving survival. But Lu said that if the UK study replicates her results, the ovarian cancer test would have the advantage of producing much fewer false positives and being able to spot aggressive cancers.

Study participants were grouped as low, medium or high risk based on how much their CA-125 levels changed over time. Low-risk women repeated the blood test in a year, medium-risk women were referred for an ultrasound, and high-risk women had exploratory surgery.

Over the study's nine years, 85 women had ultrasounds and eight had surgery. Three of the eight turned out to have benign tumors.

Among the study participants was Liz Stegall, who enrolled at the request of the family of Linda Nelson Taylor, a friend who died of ovarian cancer that wasn't diagnosed until it was advanced. Stegall had no family cancer history, but six years into the study last year, she was diagnosed with early stage disease after a blood test showed a spike in her CA-125 levels.

“I would say I'm ecstatic,” said Stegall, 59, of Sugar Land, who finished treatment at the end of December and is cancer free. “This new test came too late to save Linda, but thanks to her and it, I should be alive for some time still. And if I can be saved, so can other people.”

The study results were unveiled Thursday in advance of a major cancer conference next month.

More than half of the women in the study came from Houston. Besides M.D. Anderson, the participating institutions were The Woman's Hospital of Texas, Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, Women and Infants Hospital in Providence, R.I., and John Stoddard Cancer Center in Des Moines, Iowa.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the current study and provides some much-need caveats in interpreting the results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A patient's own heart cells can be used to regrow new heart tissue and help undo damage caused by a heart attack, according to early research published on Monday.

Scientists at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles and Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore were able to treat 17 heart attack patients with cells grown from their own heart tissue. Not only did this show that the procedure was safe, it also showed that the cells can help reduce scarring and even cause new heart muscle to grow.

When a person suffers a heart attack, he or she is often left with huge areas of scarring in the heart. Scarred heart muscle doesn't pump blood as well as it used to, putting stress on other parts of the heart to make up for the deficit. The damaged area also doesn't conduct electric current as well, leading to an abnormal heart rhythm, which can cause more problems. Heart attack patients often go on to develop heart failure.

 

 "This is the first instance of therapeutic regeneration," says Dr. Eduardo Marbán, director of the Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute.

He says while nature abounds with examples of spontaneous regeneration of limbs or tissues - like a salamander's new tail or a human liver regrowing to full size if partially damaged - doctors have not been able to help patients regrow heart tissue. This could change in the future if larger clinical trials and longer patient outcomes confirm the results of this early research published Monday in the journal The Lancet.

Marbán and his colleagues first presented this research at an American Heart Association conference in November.

To qualify for this clinical trial, patients had to have suffered a recent heart attack and "had to have a significant amount of damage to begin with and weren't squeezing [blood into the body] as well as they should have," says Dr. Peter Johnston, one of the study authors who injected the new heart cells into patients treated at Johns Hopkins Hospital.

A total of 25 patients participated in the clinical trial, which was designed to determine if it was safe to have cells grown from one's own heart tissue injected back into the heart. Seventeen patients received the stem cell transplants, while the other eight patients were given conventional post-heart attack therapy.

In an outpatient procedure under local anesthesia, doctors funneled a catheter into the patient's heart and removed peppercorn-sized bits of tissue from the part of the patient's heart that was unaffected by the heart attack. Using a procedure invented by Marbán, heart stem cells were isolated from the tissue and then millions of new cells were grown in a petri dish.

About four to six weeks after having suffered the heart attack, the patients had either 12 million or 25 million heart-derived cells injected back into the their hearts.

Marbán says when the first patient data came in, he and his colleagues were relieved to see the procedure was safe. After 12 months, researchers report only one patient appeared to have a serious side effect that may have been connected to the experimental cells.

Six months after the first patient was injected with his cells grown from his own heart tissue, Marbán says there was dramatic shrinking of scar tissue and new tissue had grown. "That was unprecedented" he says. "No one had demonstrated that before."

All patients were followed for six months and researchers have 12-month data for 21 patients. In patients who received the cell transplant, Marbán says about half of their scar tissue dissolved and the reduction in scar size appears to get bigger after the first six months. He says that why this is happening is still unclear.

Marbán says the amount of new heart tissue that grew was not subtle. [On average] "22 grams (about .78 ounces) of new heart tissue grew," which he says is quite remarkable considering this had never been done before and the average weight of the part of the heart that is responsible for pumping the blood through the body is about 150 grams (about 5.3 ounces).

Patients in the control group, those who didn't get a cell transplant, did not regenerate any tissue and the amount of scar tissue they had remained the same.

Sonia Skarlatos, Ph.D and deputy director of the Division of Cardiovascular Sciences at the NIH’s National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute says this early research is very exciting and a move in the right direction. She cautions that this procedure has to be tested on many more patients and they have to be observed for longer periods than in the current study, but she says these results are all very positive. She is hopeful further studies will confirm these early results.

"By preventing the consequences of a heart attack you may be able to prevent further down the heart failure that happens in [many of these] patients." Skarlatos says.

She was not involved in the research but the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute did help fund it.

Skarlatos also says it's still not clear exactly what is making the heart regenerate and scar tissue disappear. Is it the cells themselves or proteins and other factors produced by these newly introduced cells that help fix the heart? Further research will hopefully also help answer those questions, she says. The study authors say based on these results, further research is warranted.

Marbán, who began his research at Johns Hopkins, says "we did see a glimmer [of regeneration] in animal testing," but the results in humans were much better. "That doesn't usually happen this way in research."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a better job than some of the other coverage of the study in explaining exactly what this study entailed and the study’s limitations. The story says, for example, “She cautions that this procedure has to be tested on many more patients and they have to be observed for longer periods than in the current study, but she says these results are all very positive.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The most common sexually transmitted disease is often silent and invisible: human papillomavirus (also called HPV). But in some people HPV leads to genital warts and cancers – notably, cervical cancer.

The vaccines Gardasil and Cervarix were designed as a prevention for young women who have not yet been exposed to HPV. Men up to age 26 are also eligible for Gardasil to protect against HPV. But there are a lot of people out there who still have HPV, and nothing protects against all 130 strains of the virus. At least half of all sexually active males and females have had HPV, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

A Pennsylvania start-up company called Inovio Pharmaceuticals has developed an experimental vaccine for people who already have HPV and precancerous lesions that are associated with it. A new study demonstrating the vaccine's safety and potential effectiveness was published this week in the journal Science Translational Medicine.

 

 The experimental vaccine does not use the live HPV virus; it is formulated in synthetic DNA and pure water. It uses the immune system of the treated women to fight off cancer, said Joseph Kim, president and CEO of Inovio Pharmaceuticals and study co-author.

Worldwide, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer after breast cancer, with about 493,000 new cases and 274,000 deaths annually, the study said. HPV causes about 5% of cancers globally.

Some women, because of their particular genetic makeup, can clear precancerous lesions on their own and would not need this vaccine. This happens in anywhere from 10% to 25% of women infected with HPV, Kim said.

No one knows why some women have this capability and others do not, but for those who lack it the Inovio vaccine is "giving our immune system a little boost," Kim said.

Eighteen women with high-grade precancerous cervical lesions participated in the phase 1 study.

Study authors say the vaccine is formulated to work against all cancers caused by HPV types 16 and 18, including cervical, anogenital (anal and genital), and head and neck cancers. The researchers did not observe any side effects.

In the next phase of this research 150 women worldwide are participating, but they are not included in these published results, Kim said.

The phase 1 results are very early in the experimentation of this vaccine. The study was not done as a randomized controlled trial, the gold standard for determining whether a drug works better than chance. Also, 18 people is a small number for examining the effects of a medication.

Given those drawbacks, it’s not appropriate to draw too many conclusions from this study, says Dr. Diane Harper, a prominent HPV researcher at the University of Missouri – Kansas City’s School of Medicine. Harper contributed to the studies on both HPV vaccines that are currently available, Cervarix and Gardasil, and is not involved with this research.

“Several therapeutic vaccines have shown great promise in phase 1 and then not panned out in phase 2,” she noted in an e-mail.

The vaccine consists of three injections in the arm over three months, Kim said. The vaccine trains T-cells in the body to go after cervical cells with potentially cancerous genes embedded in them.

Inovio is using this technology to develop vaccines for prostate cancer and HIV also, Kim said.

“We certainly have a technology that can change the medical field by being able to program and generate strong immune responses that are specific and effective,” he said.

Kim said the next phase results should be out at the end of 2013; then comes a larger phase 3 trial with about 500 patients, to be concluded around 2016 or 2017.

HPV is spread through genital contact, including oral sex, and partners can bounce the virus back and forth between them, making it harder to clear naturally. Kissing is not known to deliver this STD.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story pointed out the study for which the paper was based was not a randomized clinical trial and the small sample size made it hard to draw any definite conclusions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
America's favorite dietary supplements, multivitamins, modestly lowered the risk for cancer in healthy male doctors who took them for more than a decade, the first large study to test these pills has found.

The result is a surprise because many studies of individual vitamins have found they don't help prevent chronic diseases and some have even caused problems.

In the new study, multivitamins cut the chance of developing cancer by 8%. That is less effective than a good diet, exercise and not smoking, each of which can lower cancer risk by 20% to 30%, cancer experts say.

Multivitamins also may have different results in women, younger men or people less healthy than those in this study.

"It's a very mild effect and personally I'm not sure it's significant enough to recommend to anyone" although it is promising, said Dr. Ernest Hawk, vice president of cancer prevention at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and formerly of the National Cancer Institute.

"At least this doesn't suggest a harm" as some previous studies on single vitamins have, he said.

Hawk reviewed the study for the American Association for Cancer Research, which is meeting in Anaheim, Calif., where the study was to be presented on Wednesday. It also was published online in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

About one-third of U.S. adults and as many as half of those over 50 take them. They are marketed as a kind of insurance policy against bad eating. Yet no government agency recommends their routine use "regardless of the quality of a person's diet," says a fact sheet from the federal Office of Dietary Supplements.

Some fads, such as the antioxidant craze over vitamins A and E and beta-carotene, backfired when studies found more health risk with those supplements, not less. Many of those were single vitamins in larger doses than the "100% of daily value" amounts that multivitamins typically contain.

Science on vitamins has been skimpy. Most studies have been observational — they look at groups of people who do and do not use vitamins, a method that can't give firm conclusions.

Dr. J. Michael Gaziano, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and VA Boston, led a stronger test. Nearly 15,000 male doctors who were 50 or older and free of cancer when the study started were given monthly packets of Centrum Silver or fake multivitamins without knowing which type they received.

After about 11 years, there were 2,669 new cancers, and some people had cancer more than once. For every 1,000 men per year in the study, there were 17 cancers among multivitamin users and more than 18 among those taking the placebo pills. That worked out to an 8% lower risk of developing cancer in the vitamin group.

Multivitamins made no difference in the risk of developing prostate cancer, which accounted for half of all cases. They lowered the risk of other cancers collectively by about 12%. There also was a trend toward fewer cancer deaths among multivitamin users, but the difference was so small it could have occurred by chance alone.

Side effects were fairly similar except for more rashes among vitamin users. The National Institutes of Health paid for most of the study. Pfizer Inc. supplied the pills and other companies supplied the packaging.

The main reason to take a multivitamin is to correct or prevent a deficiency, "but there may be a modest benefit in reducing the risk of cancer in older men," Gaziano said.

Cancer experts said the results need to be confirmed by another study before recommending multivitamins to the public. These participants were healthier — only 4% smoked, for example.

For people who do want to take multivitamins, doctors suggest:

— Be aware that they are dietary supplements, which do not get the strict testing required of prescription medicines.

— Ask your doctor before taking any. Vitamin K can interfere with common heart medicines and blood thinners, and vitamins C and E can lower the effectiveness of some types of chemotherapy. For people having surgery, some vitamins affect bleeding and response to anesthesia.

— Current and former smokers should avoid multivitamins with lots of beta-carotene or vitamin A; two studies have tied them to increased risk of lung cancer.

Copyright 2012 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provides a solid explanation of where this study fits in the hierarchy of vitamin research. It explains how the study differs from previous trials that looked at the effects of individual vitamins in higher doses. It also differentiates the new research from previous observational studies of vitamin users, which “can’t give firm conclusions.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - A stem cell therapy developed by Vericel Corp helped reduce deaths and hospitalizations in advanced heart failure patients, according to data from a midstage study, potentially providing a treatment that could delay the need for heart transplants.

However, the treatment failed to improve secondary goals of the trial, such as heart-pumping efficiency and six-minute walking distance, and Vericel shares fell more than 31 percent by afternoon trading on Monday.

“It’s a little baffling that you’re keeping patients alive, but not having any effect on those secondary endpoints,” said Needham & Co analyst Chad Messer. “People were looking for downside and they had one.”

The data compared Vericel’s bone marrow-derived ixmyelocel-T stem cells with placebo in 109 well-treated patients with advanced heart failure who had exhausted medical and device therapies.

After one year, the Vericel treatment led to a 37 percent reduction versus placebo in a composite of adverse events, including death, heart-related hospitalizations and unplanned clinic visits related to heart failure.

Vericel last month reported that the study succeeded. Detailed results were unveiled on Monday at an American College of Cardiology meeting in Chicago and in the Lancet medical journal.

The result was primarily driven by the difference in deaths of 13.7 percent in the placebo group, or 7 deaths, compared with 3.4 percent, or 2 deaths, for the ixmyelocel-T group. In addition, 38 percent of stem cell patients required hospitalization, versus 47 percent for placebo.

“This is strong evidence in a well-designed trial that we can decrease events,” said Dr. Timothy Henry, the study’s lead investigator and chief of cardiology at Cedars Sinai Heart Institute in Los Angeles. “For patients, this is a really hopeful thing.”

Henry, who presented the data at the ACC meeting, stressed the need for larger trials to prove the benefit of ixmyelocel-T

For the treatment, bone marrow is taken from the patient and enhanced over two weeks to increase two types of cells associated with healing. They are then injected directly into the patient’s heart.

With advanced heart failure, a leading cause of hospitalizations, blood-pumping ability is diminished as the heart’s left ventricle becomes enlarged and weakened.

If the disease worsens despite all available medicinal and interventional therapies, the only options are heart transplant or a pumping assist device.

“The idea is to find a treatment for this group of people before they get to that stage,” Henry said.

Vericel shares were down $2.01, or 33 percent, at $4.02 on Nasdaq.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story quoted the study’s lead investigator in saying that there is a need to have larger trials for this stem cell therapy to accurately prove its benefits. The story points out that the group consisted of only 109 patients, but there was no mention of how many patients received the stem cell therapy. Sample size can be a limitation of any trial, and there should be a level of caution if the treatment group does not accurately represent a diverse population.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Boston, MA-- The investigational drug abaloparatide-SC (subcutaneous) may help increase bone mineral density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis and reduce their risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures, new industry-sponsored research suggests. The results of the pre-specified subgroup analysis within the ACTIVE clinical trial will be presented Friday, April 1, at ENDO 2016, the annual meeting of the Endocrine Society, in Boston.

According to lead study author Felicia Cosman, MD, osteoporosis specialist and Medical Director of the Clinical Research Center at Helen Hayes Hospital, Senior Clinical Director of the National Osteoporosis Foundation and Professor of Medicine at Columbia University, who is a consultant to Radius Health, Inc., in Waltham, Massachusetts, "Abaloparatide-SC increased bone mineral density in both the spine and hip and reduced the risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures consistently in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis regardless of their baseline patient characteristics, including age, bone mineral density, and whether or not they had prior fractures."

The researchers investigated patients enrolled in the randomized, double-blind, comparative, multicenter international phase 3 ACTIVE trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 80 micrograms of abaloparatide-SC in preventing fractures in otherwise healthy, ambulatory, postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Osteoporosis was defined broadly, using both BMD criteria as well as recent history of nonvertebral fracture and confirmed prevalent vertebral fracture on x-ray. Overall, 2,463 patients between 49 and 86 years of age were randomized to one of three treatment arms for 18 months: double-blind 80 micrograms of abaloparatide-SC, blind-matched placebo, or open-label 20 micrograms of subcutaneous teriparatide (an FDA-approved prescription drug known to increase bone density and strength).

At 18 months, abaloparatide-SC significantly increased bone mineral density from baseline at the lumbar spine by 9.2%, the total hip by 3.4% and the femoral neck by 2.9%, compared with placebo. Abaloparatide-SC also reduced new vertebral fractures by 86%, nonvertebral fractures by 43%, clinical fractures by 43%, and major osteoporotic fractures by 70% compared with placebo after 18 months of treatment. The drug also reduced major osteoporotic fractures by 55% compared with teriparatide and increased bone density to a greater extent in the hip region compared with teriparatide.

The authors found that the risk of new vertebral or nonvertebral fractures dropped consistently among the participants taking abaloparatide-SC, irrespective of their baseline risk factors; and they found an increase in bone mineral density by abaloparatide in each of the baseline risk subgroups.

The data suggest that abaloparatide appears to be an effective treatment for a broad group of postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.

The study was funded by Radius Health, Inc.

Endocrinologists are at the core of solving the most pressing health problems of our time, from diabetes and obesity to infertility, bone health, and hormone-related cancers. The Endocrine Society is the world's oldest and largest organization of scientists devoted to hormone research and physicians who care for people with hormone-related conditions.

The Society, which is celebrating its centennial in 2016, has more than 18,000 members, including scientists, physicians, educators, nurses and students in 122 countries. To learn more about the Society and the field of endocrinology, visit our site at http://www. . Follow us on Twitter at @TheEndoSociety and @EndoMedia.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release provides a good overview of the randomized, double-blind trial which lasted 18 months and provides demographics of those enrolled in the study. The release also lets readers know that there is at least one other drug similar to the one being studied that is already FDA approved. It does a quick but effective job of distinguishing what might be better about the new drug. (Increased density in the hip region that is greater than the existing compound.) It would have been helpful to note that the trial was conducted in the US, Brazil and Denmark which carry different levels of risk for fracture in post menopausal women, as pointed out in an International Osteoporosis Foundation report.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Sierra Riddle stormed into the conference room at Denver’s child protective services office, the director of the agency was seated there, along with her son’s team of doctors, top administrators from the Children’s Hospital Colorado oncology department and lawyers. She recalls looking one of the physicians in the eye, defiant. “I’m done with this shit,” she remembers saying. “I’m done with you guys bullying us.”

Then, she took out a bag and dumped the contents on the table: nine months of cancer drugs prescribed to her son, Landon, who was 4 at the time. He had been diagnosed more than a year before with an aggressive form of leukemia and undergone months of grueling treatment. But his mother was now refusing to follow his doctors’ orders. “Listen: Here’s all this chemo you told CPS he cannot live without, and if I didn’t give it to him, he would relapse and die.”

But Landon, who underwent only one year of cancer treatment instead of the recommended four, was still alive—thriving, in fact—even though he’d stopped taking that massive pile of drugs prescribed for him. That’s why his mother had called this meeting. She implored the CPS director—whom by then she knew by first name—to restrain the oncologists who had threatened to take her child away and put him in foster care. Riddle believes the doctors wanted to prove she was a neglectful, abusive mother, but she knew she could convince the world that the hospital was wrong about her son’s treatment. (Due to HIPAA patient privacy laws, Children’s Hospital Colorado was unable to comment on Landon’s case for this story.)

Landon’s cancer, diagnosed in September 2012, had put Riddle in a situation that’s any parent’s worst nightmare: She had to watch him undergo lifesaving treatment that appeared to be killing him. Riddle says she was left with no choice but to defy his doctors’ orders.

RELATED: What we know about how cancer starts could all be wrong

In January 2013, nearly four months after Landon’s initial diagnosis, the two went from Utah to Colorado, where Riddle purchased an alternative treatment fraught with complicated politics and plenty of skepticism—especially when it comes to saving the life of a preschooler with a potentially fatal disease. At the time, Colorado was one of only about a dozen states in the U.S. that had legalized medical cannabis. It also allowed sick children to access the drug under professional guidance. Landon became the youngest patient in the U.S. at that time to receive a medical marijuana card. Riddle’s decision to treat her child with cannabis landed the family in the center of a contentious national debate, as well as on prime-time television with CNN’s chief medical correspondent, Sanjay Gupta. In Utah, all cannabis is illegal, so when their story went public, she and Landon had to move permanently to Colorado, so he could continue to have access to the drug. Even now, at 7, he still needs to take cannabis to cope with the long-term effects of chemotherapy and radiation, she says.

By the time of that showdown with CPS and Landon’s doctors in Denver, Riddle had stopped giving her son all of the drugs prescribed by the hospital: the chemo, opiates and benzos. The latter two—which included OxyContin, morphine and Ativan—were prescribed to help Landon cope with the side effects of cancer treatment. None of them helped, she says, or they made him feel worse. But when Landon started the cannabis oil, his health miraculously improved. She was willing to do whatever it took to keep him on cannabis.

As laws that permit medical cannabis have expanded nationwide (29 states in the country now permit some form of cannabis use for medical purposes), cancer patients increasingly use the drug to alleviate the harsh symptoms of chemotherapy, such as nausea, anxiety, loss of appetite and insomnia. But there’s also an emerging body of research that suggests marijuana might be effective as a treatment for cancer on its own, or in conjunction with standard therapies.

When Riddle made the decision to give her son cannabis, the information on its safety and efficacy was (and still is) limited to anecdotal accounts, a handful of case reports and lab studies published in obscure medical journals. Initially, her hope was that the drug would lessen the side effects. But Riddle soon heard that certain compounds in cannabis—cannabinoids—have been shown to induce cancer cell death. The theory seemed to be especially promising for leukemia, at least according to studies done on cancer cells in test tubes and on mice injected with human leukemia cells. But at that point there wasn’t any evidence it would work for humans. There still isn’t. While cannabis is legal in many U.S. states, the drug is still classified by the Drug Enforcement Administration as a Schedule 1 narcotic (along with heroin and cocaine), which make it very difficult for scientists to conduct clinical trials on people. However, that may change as other nations, such as Israel, take the lead and fund marijuana research.

The findings so far from published lab studies suggest cannabidiol (CBD), one of more than 100 cannabinoids present in the plant, targets certain pathways in leukemia. The evidence indicates that leukemia cells have a high number of cannabinoid receptors—primarily the receptor CB2. The proteins on the cell membrane (receptors) recognize the chemical compound, CBD. The shape of the receptor mirrors the shape of the compound, enabling the CBD to land and attach to the cell. “It’s like a key in the lock,” says Dr. Bonni Goldstein, medical director of Canna-Centers in Los Angeles and the medical adviser to Weedmaps.com, a resource for people seeking specialists to oversee their medical cannabis treatment. “When compounds such as cannabidiol bond to receptors, it causes the cell to die.”

Further studies are needed to verify that CBD could potentially kill leukemia, says Robert McKallip, an associate professor of immunology at Mercer University School of Medicine, who conducted some of the earliest research on the anti-leukemia properties of compounds found in cannabis. McKallip suggests cannabis could be used along with other treatments for leukemia. “Combined with other targeted therapies, which again, specifically target the leukemia, you give it a one-two punch and hopefully reduce side effects and improve efficacy of treatment,” he says.

Riddle isn’t a doctor, but she theorizes that while the chemo initially cleared Landon’s cancer, it’s the cannabis that has kept his disease from coming back. Oncologists who treat pediatric patients often tell families that when the five-year mark passes, their child is in the clear. It’s been nearly five years since Riddle sat in that conference room meeting; Landon is still cancer-free. Riddle says that once he hits the five-year mark this fall, he’ll set a precedent for pediatric leukemia patients in the U.S., and maybe even worldwide.

Riddle, a single mother, was willing to do whatever it would take to rid Landon of the cancer in his blood that had spread to his brain and formed a tumor in his chest the size of a large grapefruit. She desperately wanted to trust the doctors at the Huntsman Cancer Institute in Salt Lake City, where her son was diagnosed at age 2, and who admitted to her that they weren’t sure they could save his life.

She knew the leukemia treatment protocols are backed by decades of research. But they are infamously rough for a child and drag on for years. First, there would be several months of aggressive inpatient chemo and other therapies for what’s known as “remission reduction.” After that, even when blood work showed the disease had entered remission, Landon would need years of chemo and monitoring—called “consolidation”—to make sure his body wasn’t harboring leukemia cells.

This aggressive approach is one of the main reasons pediatric leukemia, depending on its more specific classification, has at least an 80 to 90 percent survival rate. The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society estimates that nearly 5,000 kids will be diagnosed in the U.S. with some form of leukemia in 2017. For most of the kids who go through the entire course of treatment, the illness turns out to be a mere blip on the screen of childhood. Riddle hoped the same would be true for her son. But Landon appeared to be among a small percentage of children with leukemia for whom the treatment was unbearable, excruciating. The chemo caused him to vomit up to 50 times a day, which made it difficult for him to speak because his esophagus was burned and closed up. The chemo had compromised his immune system so severely that he caught every bug in the hospital, just about every strain of stomach viruses, influenza and the common cold. He eventually developed numbness, tingling, pain and weakness (neuropathy) in his feet and ankles, and was no longer able to walk.

Within the first 90 days of treatment, Landon lost half his body weight. He stopped eating for more than a month. He needed blood and platelet transfusions. Doctors kept adding prescription after prescription to alleviate the side effects of treatment—narcotics, anti-depressants, anti-anxiety drugs, prescriptions for pain. “The sad thing is they didn’t seem to help Landon,” she says. “At this point, they kept telling us we have to keep going. I said, ‘He’s dying. It’s very apparent that he’s dying.’”

Landon began to refuse chemotherapy and turn into a “little psychopath,” says Riddle. He kicked and screamed when nurses forced pills into his mouth, so eventually everything needed to be administered with an IV. “The chemo actually has healed a lot of kids, but it almost killed me,” he says.

Most children with leukemia go into remission within the first 30 days of treatment, which was why Landon’s doctors insisted on several more years of chemotherapy, says Riddle. By the time Landon was nearing the end of his first stage of treatment, Riddle says her son was on the brink of death. The doctors told her to bring him home for a two-week break from chemo, adding that they would arrange to send a hospice nurse—an ominous hint that Landon was about to die.

A plea for help posted on Facebook by Riddle’s mother, Wendy, led the family to a group of brothers in Denver, the Stanleys, who were cultivating cannabis for medicinal purposes and had made the news for a strain they called Charlotte’s Web. Riddle and her mother had seen the story about Charlotte Figi, a 6-year-old girl with Dravet syndrome, a rare type of epilepsy that was unresponsive to standard treatment. She had up to 300 seizures per day. But the seizures stopped when she began taking CBD oil supplied by the brothers.

The Stanleys visited the Riddles in Utah to educate them about Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)—the psychoactive chemical in the plant—and CBD. She decided to start Landon on cannabis. But to do that, the family would need to leave Utah, where all cannabis is illegal. So Riddle and Landon moved in with the brothers for about a year, says Joel Stanley, the CEO of the company that is now known as CW Hemp. “It was just so sad to see someone that young and that small going through such harsh treatment,” Stanley says of Landon. “He also had elements of what I know a lot of folks would call ‘chemo brain.’ He would get very frustrated and very angry, all normal because his little body was just being invaded by this intense medication and rounds of chemotherapy treatment.” Throughout that year, Riddle and her son traveled back and forth from Colorado to Utah, so he could continue chemo, but this time with the aid of cannabis, to make treatment more bearable. That meant Riddle had the drug on hand, and Landon was under its influence while in Utah, which made mother and son both felons.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We will give the story a satisfactory rating because it clearly states that “the information on its safety and efficacy was (and still is) limited to anecdotal accounts, a handful of case reports and lab studies published in obscure medical journals.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SATURDAY, March 31, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A noninvasive scan might someday help doctors track the progress of prostate cancer and help guide treatment, researchers report.

The imaging tool, known as a prostate cancer-specific radiotracer, has so far only been tested successfully in mice. But a team from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City said the technology could help identify cases where prostate cancer has spread to the bone.

Radiotracers work by injecting a small amount of a compound tagged with a radionuclide into patients. Using positron emission tomography -- also known as a PET scan -- doctors are then able to better visualize tumors and tumor spread.

In studies involving mice with prostate cancer, the researchers had the radiotracer hone in on prostate-specific antigen (PSA), the same prostate cancer marker used in the PSA test. They found that the PSA gravitated to tissues containing prostate cancer that had already grown resistant to standard hormone-based therapies.

The study also revealed the radiotracer could help identify cases where prostate cancer had spread to the bone. The researchers pointed out traditional bone scans are unable to differentiate between malignant and nonmalignant lesions.

The findings were to be presented Saturday at the American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting in Chicago, and are also being published in Cancer Discovery.

If used on people, the researchers claimed that the radiotracer might someday help doctors "personalize" treatment strategies for prostate cancer and better manage the disease.

"The ultimate goal is to be able to predict the response of patients to new and existing therapies at an early stage, thereby personalizing their treatment and improving outcomes," Michael J. Evans, research fellow in the Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, explained in meeting news release.

Encouraged by their findings, the study's authors said they hope to begin a human trial next year.

Two prostate cancer experts said the tool, if borne out in patients, could prove very useful.

Dr. Michael Schwartz is director of laparoscopy and minimally invasive surgery at North Shore-LIJ Health System in Lake Success, N.Y. He noted that, as of now, doctors typically rely on results of the PSA blood test and/or standard diagnostic scans to help guide treatment decisions.

Both methods have their limits and, "while this study is very preliminary, if this radiotracer technology can prove to detect very early recurrence or metastasis in human patients, it could become extremely useful in either the pre- or post-treatment setting in selecting a treatment algorithm," Schwartz said. "It also may help reduce the need for biopsy of possible metastatic lesions."

Dr. Erik Goluboff, an attending urologist at Beth Israel Medical Center, New York City, agreed that, "this is an exciting study using a novel radiotracer to detect PSA-expressing tissues throughout the body."

He believes that the new tool's "greatest strength would be in monitoring changes in PSA expression in tissues as a result of various treatments. If a treatment showed a marked change, it could continue to be used in that patient, hence "personalized" medicine. If a specific change did not occur, that treatment could be abandoned and another tried instead. Since these changes could not be detected based on a PSA blood test alone, this new test would be very helpful in determining early on which therapy to choose in a given patient."

However, Goluboff also noted that research from animal-based studies does not always pan out in humans and "further, larger studies are of course required to confirm these findings."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute provides more information on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story reminded readers in several places that this work was only done in mice.  So we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt.
But the story also jumped the gun, reporting on the results even before they were presented at the American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting in Chicago.
We remind journalists and readers about the pitfalls of reporting on talks at scientific meetings.
Read: More caution about news from scientific meetings and Reporting or reading news from a medical meeting? Read this first.
Frankly, we think we’re being generous in giving this a satisfactory score on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study has shown how the body's immune system responds to the new shingles vaccine, Shingrix, making it more than 90% effective at protecting against the virus.

The trial included more than 15,000 participants across 18 countries in Europe, North America, Latin America, Asia and Australia. Participants in the trial received two doses of the vaccine, with the doses given two months apart.

Lead researcher Professor Tony Cunningham from the Westmead Institute for Medical Research said the study shows that the vaccine stimulates production of a specific immune memory cell (CD4 T cells), generating a strong and sustained protection against the virus.

"The body has two types of immunity: protein antibodies and white blood cells known as T cells. As the virus circulates around the body, antibodies block it from entering cells. But when the virus does get into cells your T cells try to kill those infected cells.

"Our research shows that the vaccine stimulates your immune system to produce more antibodies and it generates a 24-fold increase in T cells. This is 12 times higher than other less effective shingles vaccines.

The research, published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases, shows that Shingrix offers protection for up to four years, but Professor Cunningham believes it will last much longer.

"The second dose of the vaccine is important to ensure long-term protection," Professor Cunningham said.

"The efficacy is approximately 90% for all age groups--even for those over 70 years of age.

"This is quite remarkable because there are no other vaccines that perform nearly so well for people in their 70s and their 80s. We are seeing results comparable to those of childhood vaccinations.

"What's particularly exciting, though, is that 90% of recipients had an increased immune response sustained across the 3-year duration of the study.

"We anticipate that this protection will actually last much, much longer. We are now measuring the efficacy of the vaccine over the next 10 years and are very optimistic about the results," he said.

Shingrix is different from most other vaccines. Many vaccines are made from a weakened form of the virus, but Shingrix is made from just a single protein--known as glycoprotein E--that comes from the outer shell of the herpes zoster virus.

The vaccine also contains an adjuvant--a substance that helps your body fight off the virus. It is the first shingles vaccine to combine a non-live antigen with a specifically designed adjuvant.

Shingles is a viral infection, caused by the herpes zoster virus--the same virus that causes chickenpox. The incidence of shingles increases as we get older, because the body's natural immunity declines.

"When people reach their 50s and 60s, T cell immunity declines allowing shingles to strike. That's why our adult vaccine is directed specifically at T cell immunity," Professor Cunningham said.

Most Australian adults have been infected with the herpes zoster virus and are at risk of shingles, even if they do not remember having chicken pox. By age 85, approximately 50% of the population will develop shingles. Vaccination is the only way to protect against shingles.

The full paper is published online by the Journal of Infectious Diseases as Editor's choice: https:/

The Shingrix vaccine is developed by GlaxoSmithKline.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release states that data encompasses more than 15,000 people in 18 countries who received two doses of the vaccine, with the doses given two months apart.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Why Tortillas May Hold The Key To Healthier Babies

One of the great public-health success stories of the past couple of decades can be found in your cereal bowl.

Since 1998, the Food and Drug Administration has required that breakfast cereals, breads, rice, pasta and other grain products made with enriched flour come fortified with folic acid. When consumed by women before and during early pregnancy, this B vitamin plays a critical role in preventing severe brain and spinal cord defects. Thanks to mandatory fortification, the number of babies born in the U.S. with neural tube defects has dropped by roughly 35 percent — or about 1,300 babies a year — since the 1990s.

"The story of folic acid is one of the great public health stories of — ever," says Dr. R.J. Berry, who works with the Division of Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

But there's one notable exception to this success story — Hispanic women — and researchers think the reason may lie in a staple of their diet: tortillas.

Under current FDA rules, tortillas, corn chips and other foods made with corn masa flour can't be fortified with folic acid. So a coalition of groups including the March of Dimes Foundation and the National Council of La Raza has petitioned the FDA to change its stance and allow corn masa flour to be fortified with folic acid.

According to the March of Dimes, about 3,000 pregnancies in the U.S. are affected by neural tube defects each year. The rates are highest among Hispanics: Latina women are roughly 20 percent more likely to have a baby with a neural tube defect compared to non-Latina white women.

The exact cause of this discrepancy isn't known. Researchers say there may be genetic factors that predispose the children of some Hispanic women to neural tube defects. But they suspect diet is also a factor: "Part of the reason was that these groups just weren't consuming the same level of wheat flour products. Instead, they were consuming corn masa flour products, because that was the staple grain in that diet," says Cynthia Pellegrini, senior vice president of public policy and government affairs at the March of Dimes.

Research has shown that women who consume at least 400 micrograms of folic acid daily have a significantly reduced risk of having a pregnancy affected by neural tube defects — including spina bifida, which can involve paralysis, and anencephaly, in which large parts of the brain are missing. The catch: Folic acid is only protective if consumed in the earliest weeks of pregnancy.

"Most women, by the time they know they're pregnant, they've already passed that critical window," says Dean Appling, a biochemistry professor at the University of Texas at Austin. "If they had a problem with folic acid, it would be too late at that point to prevent the birth defect."

Mandating fortification helps ensure that women are getting enough folic acid even before they know they need it. And studies suggest that fortifying corn masa with folic acid could prevent an additional 40 to 120 cases of neural tube defects among babies born to Hispanic mothers each year.

So why does the FDA currently ban dosing corn masa flour with folic acid? It all has to do with nixtamalization, the process by which tough corn kernels are softened by soaking in an alkaline solution, usually of slaked lime. The process, which hails from ancient Mesoamerica — what's now Mexico and Central America — dates back thousands of years. It renders the corn more pliable for grinding into masa flour and gives the masa its distinctive aroma and flavor.

But the FDA worries that this alkaline treatment could also "affect the stability of added folic acid," the agency told The Salt in a statement. "The FDA is concerned that the breakdown of folic acid in corn masa flour could yield a substance that raises concerns about safety."

The March of Dimes and others first petitioned the FDA to allow added folic acid in corn flour masa in 2012. As part of its review, the FDA asked the petitioning groups to study whether folic acid would stay stable in corn masa flour.

The petitioners filed the results of that study in October. Michael Dunn, the Brigham Young University food scientist who led the study, cannot comment on the test results while they're under FDA review, but he has previously called them encouraging. As The Seattle Times has reported, Dunn's early results suggested no loss of folic acid in fortified masa after three months of storage.

The March of Dimes' Pellegrini says she believes the FDA will respond to the results of Dunn's study later this month. But the FDA might have more questions related to the study before making a final ruling.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story mentions a study about the potential impact of fortifying corn flour on Hispanic women at higher risk. The study is a high-quality one.
We wish the story had talked more explicitly about the quality of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Sept. 27, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- In a head-to-head comparison of drug-coated stents -- the metal mesh tubes used to keep clogged arteries open -- the well-established model using the drug sirolimus came out on top, South Korean researchers report.

A newer version, one coated with zotarolimus, fell short, the study found.

Coating stents with time-released drugs can help prevent infection or clogging in stents, but researchers have questioned the safety and effectiveness of different coatings.

"Drug-coated stents have reduced re-stenosis rates compared to bare metal stents, but require prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy to prevent clotting of the drug-coated stent," said Dr. Gregg Fonarow, an American Heart Association spokesman. "There has been great interest in developing stents coated with alternative drugs and different polymers," he explained.

The study was released online Sept. 27 ahead of print publication in the Oct. 5 issue of the Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

In preventing major cardiac events, the researchers found that zotarolimus-coated stents, the new entry in the field, were less effective than the sirolimus-eluting stents, but better than stents coated with paclitaxel.

"Similar to other comparative stent trials, the sirolimus-eluting stent seemed to come out ahead in safety and efficacy," said Fonarow, who is also a cardiology professor at the University of California, Los Angeles.

For the study, a team led by Dr. Duk-Woo Park from the University of Ulsan College of Medicine and Asan Medical Center in Seoul randomly assigned 2,645 patients undergoing angioplasty, a procedure to restore blood flow through the artery, to one of the three stents.

After a year, Park's team tallied the number of adverse cardiac events the patients experienced, including death, heart attack and the need for a new angioplasty on the same artery in which the stent was placed.

The researchers found that 10.2 percent of the patients who received zotarolimus-coated stents suffered a major adverse cardiac event, compared with 8.3 percent of the patients who received sirolimus-coated stents and 14.1 percent of those with paclitaxel-coated stents.

The number of heart attacks and deaths was about the same in each group, but the rate of blood clots in the stents was significantly lower with sirolimus-eluting stents, Park's team also found.

"In this large-scale, practical randomized trial, the use of zotarolimus-eluting stents resulted in similar rates of major adverse cardiac events compared with sirolimus-eluting stents and in fewer major adverse cardiac events compared with paclitaxel-eluting stents at 12 months," the researchers concluded in their report.

However, they said a limitation of their study is the one-year follow-up period, and noted that a longer, ongoing study pitting zotarolimus-eluting stents against sirolimus-eluting stents will provide more safety information.

The trial was partially funded by Medtronic, maker of the zotarolimus-eluting stent.

Fonarow said the study results can help cardiologists arrive at treatment decisions. "These studies help to better inform interventional cardiologists in the optimal choice of drug-eluting stents for their patients being treated for coronary artery disease," Fonarow said.

For more information on stents, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There are some valuable details about the study in this article, including the number of subjects, the 3 treatment arms, randomization, the follow-up period, a definition of the endpoint—a composite called “major adverse cardiac events”—and what actual events that means. It gets kudos for identifying the key limitation of the one-year follow-up with a nod to important results from a longer ongoing study.
There were some aspects of the evidence missing, which is not surprising in a short article about a fantastically complex topic. In a quote the researchers laud their study as a “practical” one. We’re not told what that means. And see our comment under Benefits regarding the explanation of the results. 
Also, an article of this length doesn’t have the real estate to go into all the nooks and crannies (and limitations) of composite endpoints, like MACE, which are very standard in such trials. But we appreciated that the author unpacked it a bit by noting that rates of death and heart attacks did not differ. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WASHINGTON (Reuters) - An experimental drug being developed to fight influenza may fight a common but little-known virus called parainfluenza virus, researchers and the company said on Friday.

Tests in rats showed Fludase, made by privately held NexBio, could stop parainfluenza viruses from replicating, the researchers reported in the Journal of Infectious Diseases.

Dr. Anne Moscona of Weill Cornell Medical Center in New York and colleagues tested varying doses of the drug, also known as DAS181, in lab dishes and on cotton rats, a species accepted by scientists for testing parainfluenza.

“Therapies for parainfluenza are urgently needed,” Moscona, an expert on parainfluenza viruses, said in a statement.

“Development of effective antiviral drugs and vaccines for human parainfluenza virus has lagged far behind influenza, despite the recognized impact of these diseases in children” and adults, “particularly the elderly, immunocompromised and patients with underlying airway disease.”

Parainfluenza viruses are not closely related to flu but belong to another family of viruses called paramyxoviruses. They cause most cases of croup and can cause pneumonia and bronchiolitis — an inflammation of the small air passages in the lungs.

There is no treatment or vaccine for parainfluenza.

Fludase is already in phase 2 clinical trials for use against influenza. Adding parainfluenza to its approved indications would provide a unique and potentially large market for San Diego-based NexBio.

Parainfluenza uses the same receptors — molecular doorways — to infect cells as flu does. Fludase inactivates these receptors.

The researchers said that means patients with flu-like symptoms could get the drug without the need for a test to show whether their infection was caused by influenza or parainfluenza.

There were some weaknesses in the study. The rats were pre-treated with the drug an hour before they were infected with parainfluenza. And infection in rats does not follow the same disease course as in humans.

Moscona said tests were needed that would show the drug actually helped reduce disease symptoms in animals.

A spokesman for NexBio, David Wurtman, said the company would seek Food and Drug Administration approval to test Fludase in people with parainfluenza.

Because Fludase affects the human cells that viruses infect, not the virus itself, it is less likely to cause the virus to develop resistance, the company believes.

Influenza viruses have already developed widespread resistance to three commonly used flu drugs — amantadine, rimantadine and Roche AG and Gilead Sciences Inc’s Tamiflu.

A fourth drug, GlaxoSmithKline’s and Biota Inc’s Relenza, works by the same mechanism as Tamiflu.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:        
 
To its credit, this story states upfront that the drug was tested in Petri dishes and on cotton rats.  The story also includes the qualifier that “infection in rats does not follow the same disease course as in humans.” Another limitation mentioned by the writer is that the rats were given the drug an hour before they were infected with the parainfluenza, which is not likely to be the chain of events in the real world.  
Of course why this is newsworthy given all these caveats is another question. 
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new test can accurately predict within minutes if an individual has Ebola Virus Disease (EVD), according to new research published in The Lancet. The study is the first to show that a point-of-care EVD test (ReEBOV Antigen Rapid Test; Corgenix) is faster than and as sensitive as a conventional laboratory-based molecular method used for clinical testing during the recent outbreak in Sierra Leone.

This new rapid diagnostic test (RDT) could cut back on the lengthy process usually required to confirm if a patient has EVD, help identify case contacts, and ultimately curb the spread of Ebola.

Currently, diagnosis of EVD requires a full vial of venous blood to be shipped to a laboratory with a high level of biosafety and staff expertise for testing by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This method poses substantial risks to the healthcare workers responsible for blood collection, transport, and testing, and efforts to contain the Ebola epidemic in west Africa have been hampered by this slow and complex diagnostic test.

"Laboratory results can sometimes take days to return. Delays like this result not only in the failure to diagnose and treat Ebola-infected patients, but also in individuals without Ebola being admitted to holding units where they may be subsequently infected with the virus," [1] explains Dr Nira Pollock, senior author and Associate Medical Director of the Infectious Diseases Diagnostic Laboratory at the Boston Children's Hospital, USA.

"This new test, on the other hand, is capable of detecting the Ebola virus in just a small drop of blood tested at the bedside, and could help us in the fight against Ebola." [1]

In this study, the researchers compared the diagnostic accuracy of the new RDT against the benchmark RT-PCR test (altona Diagnostics) being used for clinical diagnosis in the field reference laboratory run by Public Health England at Port Loko in Sierra Leone.

106 suspected Ebola patients admitted to two treatment centres in Sierra Leone (run by the Ministry of Health and Sanitation of Sierra Leone and supported by the non-governmental organisation Partners In Health) during February 2015 were tested by both RDT (performed on a fingerstick blood sample at the point-of-care) and by standard RT-PCR (performed on plasma in the laboratory). Both RDT (on whole blood) and RT-PCR (on plasma) were also performed on 284 samples in the laboratory.

The RDT detected all confirmed cases of EVD that were positive by RT-PCR in both point-of-care (28/105 patients) and laboratory testing (45/277 patients), with sensitivity of 100% (identifying all patients with EVD as per the benchmark method), and a specificity of 92% (identifying patients who didn't have EVD).

Surprisingly, the findings also revealed that the standard altona RT-PCR test, under the conditions deployed in the field, was itself an imperfect reference standard. The altona RT-PCR assay failed to detect a small number of EVD cases that tested positive by both RDT and by an alternative RT-PCR test (Trombley), all with relatively low amounts of virus. Both the RDT and altona assays failed to detect a small number of EVD cases that tested positive by the Trombley test, all with very low amounts of virus. The authors caution that given the limitations of the performance of the altona RT-PCR reference test in patients with low levels of the virus in their blood, more research is needed to assess how the new RDT will perform in patients very early in the course of EVD.

According to co-author Dr Jana Broadhurst from Partners In Health, Boston, USA, "This test could have an immediate impact on patient care and infection control by reliably detecting patients well into their illness who are likely to be highly infectious. Earlier test results would improve triage of patients, enabling staff to focus on those most likely to have Ebola, and reducing the opportunity for infection of non-Ebola 'suspects'. Although the RDT requires refrigeration, this is already available in many health centres in endemic areas, particularly those that store vaccines and other medical products." [1]

Writing in a linked Comment, Dr Nahid Bhadelia from Boston University School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center, Boston, USA says, "[This study] validates the accuracy of the ReEBOV RDT in patients who are well into their illness...suggesting it could be used to triage this subset of patients if RT-PCR is not available, particularly in those with a high index of clinical suspicion for a differential diagnosis...the data presented provide crucial information about the point of-care function of this rapid diagnostic test, such as ease of use, quality of samples taken at the bedside, and the concordance with venous samples...the results raise caution regarding the performance of the widely used altona RT-PCR assay, which the authors suggest might have underperformed because of laboratory specific technical and performance factors."

This study was funded by a gift from the Abundance Foundation (Stephen Kahn). Corgenix provided the test kits.

[1] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in text of Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release runs through key statistics with the efficacy of the new test. It also discusses its shortcomings, attaches numbers to those, and discloses that further testing is required to better understand the limitations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fasting diets have gained popularity in the past few years, but the scientific evidence proving that they keep us healthy while they help us lose weight is sparse. Now, researchers have shed light on what one type of time-restricted eating does to the body.

In a small, preliminary study, researchers put 23 obese volunteers on the 16:8 diet, a form of intermittent fasting. Followers of the popular regime eat during an eight-hour window, in this case between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. And for the 16 hours in between, they consume only calorie-free drinks, such as water.

For 12 weeks, the scientists measured various factors, including the participants' fat mass, blood pressure and cholesterol and glucose levels. The researchers compared the results to existing data from a separate weight loss trial carried out between 2011 and 2015.

Individuals who ate between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. consumed around 350 fewer calories, resulting in a loss of 3 percent body weight, and their blood pressure dropped by around 7mm Hg. However, their fat mass, insulin resistance and cholesterol levels were similar to the control group's.

Krista Varady, one of the study's authors and associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the University of Illinois at Chicago's School of Applied Health Sciences, said in a statement that the take-home message from the study is that cutting out certain foods or counting calories aren’t the only effective methods for losing weight.

The authors noted that the results mirror those from previous studies of other forms of intermittent fasting, including alternate day fasting, where an individual eats normally every other day.

"But one of the benefits of the 16:8 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain. We observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets,” said Varady.

Further research is now needed to uncover whether 16:8 works better than other fasting diets in terms of weight loss and health benefits.

The study's authors acknowledged that their preliminary data offers "promise for the use of time-restricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults, but longer-term, large-scale randomized controlled trials [are needed]."

Varady stressed that "when it comes to weight loss, people need to find what works for them, because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health."

Commenting broadly on fast-style diets, James Catterson of the Institute of Healthy Ageing at University College London, who was not involved in the study, previously told Newsweek the jury is still out on fasting diets.

He said that the data on the effects of fasting in animals are more convincing, probably because animals can be investigated in large sample sizes and in a highly controlled environment that is almost impossible to replicate in humans.

"There are also many studies that either report no overall effect or sometimes the opposite. And this is where it gets a bit murky, as it is very difficult to put proper controls in place when performing studies to do with nutrition," Catterson said.

He concluded, "So far, the consensus seems to be ‘let’s wait until more rigorous studies, with larger sample sizes that adjust for confounding lifestyle behaviors, have been performed before we conclude anything prematurely.'"
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job of explaining the need for larger and longer-term studies and the difficulty in conducting diet studies generally. It could have been more direct in explaining that there wasn’t a real control group.
Also, it’s unknown whether people could sustain these weight-loss results for a year or longer, especially outside the monitoring of a clinical trial. And these were healthy volunteers, so  it’s unknown whether time-restricted eating could help those who have risk factors for metabolic disease.
Finally, the story didn’t mention that six people reportedly dropped out of the trial, so only 17 completed it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, Nov. 4, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Obese patients who swallowed balloon capsules that helped them eat less lost an average of 15 pounds, roughly two times more weight than patients who just dieted and exercised, researchers report.

The capsule was inflated with gas via a catheter when it reached the stomach. As many as three balloons were placed over three months, and all of the balloons were removed after six months. The balloons made patients feel full, the researchers explained.

In addition to the balloons, patients followed a moderate diet and behavior modification program. Whether the weight loss will last over the long term isn't known, said lead researcher Dr. Aurora Pryor, director of the Bariatric and Metabolic Weight Loss Center at Stony Brook University in New York.

The study lasted a year, but "we don't know what happens after that," Pryor said.

"If they are able to stick to their newfound lifestyle with their diet and exercise program, they could maintain their weight loss," she said. "The long-term results are dependent on patients keeping their motivation to stay with their diet and exercise programs."

The balloon treatment will be available starting in January, but the cost hasn't been announced, Pryor said. The device, called the Obalon Balloon System, was approved in September by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

An advantage of the balloons is that patients have no downtime and can go back to work the same day, the researchers said.

"There is no sedation or recovery time when the balloons are placed, but there is sedation when the balloons are removed, so you wouldn't want to go back to work after that," Pryor added.

Pryor believes balloons are a better option for patients who are candidates for weight loss surgery but don't want surgery. "For people who want to lose some weight but don't feel they are heavy enough for surgery or they're afraid of surgery, this is a really good next step to help them jump start their weight loss," she suggested.

The findings were to be presented Friday at the annual meeting of the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery and the Obesity Society in New Orleans. Research presented at meeting is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

One weight-loss expert expressed some doubts about the findings.

"I still question the efficacy of balloons," said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of obesity surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "While there is potentially easier insertion that does not require sedation, I still doubt after removal there will be weight loss," he said.

Roslin said patients who have other treatments that restrict their ability to eat -- such as bands and bypass operations that reduce the size of the stomach -- often regain lost weight over time. "As time goes on, weight loss will be about lifestyle changes," he said.

The only argument for the balloon is that it starts the lifestyle changes, Roslin said. "It may make it easier to become motivated," he said. "But I believe that few will maintain weight loss two years after any balloon."

For the study, Pryor and her colleagues randomly assigned nearly 400 obese patients to receive a real or sham device. All patients also had 25 minutes of lifestyle therapy every three weeks. After six months, patients with the Obalon balloons had them removed.

During the time patients had the balloons, and for six months after, the researchers monitored their weight loss. The investigators also followed those who had not received the balloon therapy.

People treated with the balloons lost an average of 7 percent of their weight, compared to less than 4 percent for those who received the sham device, the researchers found. Six months after the balloons were removed, nearly 90 percent maintained the weight loss they achieved during treatment, Pryor said.

As for side effects, one patient had a bleeding stomach ulcer while taking high doses of pain pills after a knee replacement. Most patients (91 percent) suffered from stomach cramps and nausea, which nearly 100 percent said were mild or moderate.

The results were also presented at a medical meeting in May.

One health and nutrition expert noted that a balloon does not equal a lifestyle change.

"A gastric balloon may help with weight loss, but will do nothing to improve diet quality and overall health," said Dr. David Katz. He is director of the Yale-Griffin Prevention Research Center in Derby, Conn., and president of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine.

The role for such technology-based approaches to weight control should be a small one, he said.

"Such devices may be alternatives to bariatric surgery in some cases. But they should not distract us from the far better solution at the population level: practices, programs and policies that make eating well and being active a cultural norm," Katz said.

Visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for more on obesity.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story reports the key features of the trial. It also notes that, “Research presented at meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.”
The story would have been stronger if it clearly reported that the trial does not provide any evidence about whether the Obalon device is any better or worse than other options, because it did not compare it to similar balloons or to other weight loss interventions, other than the lifestyle counseling offered to all study participants.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET), THURSDAY, JULY 20, 2017

The commentary, “YAG Laser Vitreolysis—Is It as Clear as It Seems?,” by Jennifer I. Lim, M.D., of the University of Illinois at Chicago; and Editor, JAMA Ophthalmology, also is available at the For The Media website.

To place an electronic embedded link to this article in your story Link will be live at the embargo time: http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamaophthalmology/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.2388

Patients reported improvement in symptoms of eye floaters after treatment with a laser, according to a study published by JAMA Ophthalmology.

Floaters become more prevalent with age and although most patients grow accustomed to them, many find them bothersome, and they can worsen visual quality. Three management options exist for floaters: patient education and observation; surgery; and the laser procedure, YAG vitreolysis, of which there are limited published studies on its effectiveness for treating floaters.

Chirag P. Shah, M.D., M.P.H., and Jeffrey S. Heier, M.D., of the Ophthalmic Consultants of Boston, randomly assigned 52 patients (52 eyes) to receive YAG laser vitreolysis (n = 36) in one session or a sham (placebo) laser treatment (control; n = 16).

Six months after treatment, the YAG group reported significantly greater improvement in self-reported floater-related visual disturbance (54 percent) compared with sham controls (9 percent). A total of 19 patients (53 percent) in the YAG laser group reported significantly or completely improved symptoms vs 0 individuals in the sham group. Several measures of quality of life also improved compared with those in the sham laser group, including general vision and independence. No differences in adverse events between groups were identified.

A limitation of the study was its small sample size and short follow-up period.

“Greater confidence in these outcomes may result from larger confirmatory studies of longer duration,” the authors write.

For more details and to read the full study, please visit the For The Media website.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: While the release could have included much more detail about the sham-controlled, randomized trial design, it at least noted the study’s small sample size and short follow-up period (6 months).
The study excluded patients who had symptoms that were less than six months duration. It would have been good for the release to briefly describe the “natural history” of these floaters and how likely it is that floaters will resolve spontaneously over time. The study design was very good with blinding on the part of patients and masking (a form of blinding) on the part of the physician assessing the follow-up photos looking for floaters.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Measuring blood levels of the recently discovered hormone irisin may improve diagnosis rates of teenagers with polycystic ovary syndrome, according to research presented today at the 55th Annual European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology Meeting

Measuring blood levels of the recently discovered hormone irisin may improve diagnosis rates of teenagers with polycystic ovary syndrome, according to research presented today at the 55th Annual European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology Meeting. The findings may reduce the number of unnecessary treatments prescribed to otherwise healthy girls.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine disorder affecting up to 12% of women. Women with PCOS are more likely to suffer from irregular periods, have excessive levels of male hormones and may have difficulty in conceiving due to irregularities in the ovaries. Doctors are cautious when diagnosing PCOS in teenagers because the symptoms can be confused with normal pubertal changes. Having tools that make diagnoses more accurate can reduce unnecessary treatment for otherwise healthy teenagers at a critical stage in their lives.

The cause of PCOS is unknown and there is currently no cure for the condition. Previous studies have associated high levels of irisin, a newly discovered hormone which is released from muscles and regulates energy metabolism, with PCOS in adults.

In this study, Greek researchers from Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital in Athens compared the hormones of 23 teenagers with PCOS with 17 healthy teenagers of the same age and BMI. They found that teenagers with PCOS had significantly higher irisin levels compared to the control group, and that this was associated with higher levels of the male sex hormone testosterone, a key marker of PCOS.

The findings suggest that irisin could be a marker for PCOS allowing the condition to be diagnosed more easily. "Teenagers who get an early diagnosis of PCOS can sooner start to deal with the physical and psychological symptoms caused by this lifelong condition," said lead researcher Dr Flora Bacopoulou. "Whether it's through counselling or medication, girls can manage their symptoms and decrease the risk of further complications such as fertility problems, hirsutism (excessive hair growth) and type-2 diabetes".

The group will next focus on confirming their results and investigate the biological role of irisin in PCOS. "If high irisin levels in teenagers with PCOS is established, this could lead to the development of treatments for PCOS. Lifestyle changes and different exercise-related signals that regulate the secretion of irisin could provide a potential option for the management of PCOS. The potential of irisin as a meaningful drug target in PCOS is very promising," said Dr Bacopoulou.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release explains the study in concise terms, so it gets a borderline satisfactory rating. However, we do have one question that’s not addressed here. Some readers may have heard of irisin because it was referred to as the “exercise hormone” in some news coverage after its discovery in 2012. This is because research has found that irisin levels increase after physical exercise. Testosterone levels can also increase after physical exercise. The news release says that teens with PCOS had higher levels of irisin and testosterone, but doesn’t discuss exercise at all. The release does tell us that control and experimental groups were matched by age and BMI, but where they also matched by physical activity level? Is it possible that exercise may have skewed results, particularly given that this was a small study with only 40 participants? We don’t know, and the release doesn’t shed any light on the issue.
In addition, with such a small sample of study volunteers, there is limited ability to draw any conclusions about possible associations with exercise.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A biotech company today will begin offering the first genetic test to assess a woman's risk for the most common forms of breast cancer, reigniting debate about the growing number of unregulated genetic tests.

The test by Decode Genetics of Reykjavik, Iceland, a respected pioneer in genetic research, promises to determine a woman's risk through a simple blood sample or cheek swab. Previously, the only tests for breast cancer risk were for relatively rare genes, leaving most women with no way to assess their individual genetic predisposition.

"What this does for women is allow them to assess their personal risk for the common forms of breast cancer," said Kári Stefánsson, Decode's chief executive. "That's what you need to do to make early diagnoses or take preventive measures. This test will most definitely save lives."

While welcomed by some patient advocates and doctors, the $1,625 test raises concerns among others. Some questioned its reliability, while others worried that the results could either lull women into a false sense of complacency or needlessly alarm them, prompting them to take unnecessary tests or even undergo unneeded surgery.

"There is at least a significant chance this test will could falsely reassure some women and alarm others," said Eric Winer, a breast cancer expert at Harvard Medical School and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology. "I fear for many women the results could be quite misleading."

"I wouldn't recommend to anyone that she have such a test. I certainly wouldn't want my daughter to have such a test," said Mary-Claire King, a geneticist and breast cancer expert at the University of Washington. "It's meaningless, and it could very easily introduce real confusion."

The test comes as concern has been rising about the proliferation of genetic tests. Hundreds of laboratories are now offering genetic testing for more than 1,200 conditions. The Food and Drug Administration does not regulate such tests when they are performed by the labs offering them.

"There is concern about the validity of many genetic tests that are being offered," said Joan Scott, deputy director of the Center for Genetics and Public Policy at Johns Hopkins University. "Without an external review, the consumer -- be it the physician or the patient directly -- is not going to know which ones have been validated."

An FDA spokeswoman said the agency had just become aware of the new test and could not say whether it would take any action, though she noted that in August the agency sent a letter expressing concern to another company marketing a questionable genetic test for ovarian cancer.

"I can't speculate on this one," said Karen Riley, the spokeswoman.

Breast cancer strikes more than 180,000 women each year in the United States and kills more than 40,000, making it the most common form of cancer after skin cancer and second leading cancer killer among women.

Doctors can estimate a woman's chances of developing breast cancer based on a variety of factors, including her age and family history, but most women have no way of knowing their precise risk. Women with a strong family history can get tested for two genes that sharply increase their predisposition, but they account for only 1 to 3 percent of all breast cancers.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does not provide any evidence about the test itself (despite alluding to it). The story does mention that this test has not been validated in an external review, so any evidence would be from company-sponsored studies. Additionally, peer-reviewed studies need to be done to determine the best course of prevention if a woman chooses to take the test and discovers she is at higher risk of developing breast cancer. Because the story raised appropriate questions about the quality of the evidence, we give this a satisfactory score. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For hours on a recent morning at the , Dr. Andrew Lowy painstakingly performed the therapy on a patient.

After slicing the man’s belly wide open, he thrust his gloved hands deep inside, and examined various organs, looking for . He then lifted the small intestine out of the body to sift it through his fingers.

As he found tumors, he snipped them out. “You can see how this is coming off like wallpaper,” Dr. Lowy said as he stripped out part of the lining of the man’s abdominal cavity.

After about two hours of poking and cutting, Dr. Lowy began the so-called shake and bake. The machine pumped heated chemotherapy directly into the abdominal cavity for 90 minutes while nurses gently jiggled the man’s bloated belly to disperse the drug to every nook and cranny.

The treatment is formally called cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, or Hipec.

Recent converts include University Hospitals Case Medical Center in Cleveland, in the , and even Massachusetts General. The is looking at it, according to people in the field. Advocates predict that the number of procedures could grow to 10,000 a year from about 1,500 now.

The therapy has even been featured on an episode of the TV series “Grey’s Anatomy.”

But Dr. Ryan, a gastrointestinal oncologist, suggested in an interview that the procedure was being extended to because “you can’t make a living doing this procedure in appendix cancer patients.”

He debated the procedure publicly at the recent annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. While some patients did seem to live much longer than expected, he said that they had been carefully selected and might have fared well even without the therapy.

Proponents say that if cancer has spread into the abdominal cavity but not elsewhere, then lives can be prolonged by removing all the visible and killing what’s missed with Hipec.

By contrast, said Dr. Paul Sugarbaker, a surgeon at Washington Hospital Center and the leading proponent of Hipec, “there are no long-term survivors with systemic chemotherapy — zero.”

Dr. Sugarbaker, who opposed Dr. Ryan in the debate, said that it has long been known that cancerous cells are unable to withstand as much heat as healthy cells. And putting the chemotherapy on top of tumors should be more effective than systematically delivering it through the bloodstream.

One randomized trial done more than a decade ago involving 105 patients in the did show a striking benefit. The median survival of those getting surgery and Hipec, plus intravenous chemotherapy, was 22.3 months, almost double the 12.6 months for those getting only the intravenous chemotherapy. But 8 percent who got the surgery and Hipec died from the treatment itself. And critics say that since that trial was conducted, new drugs have come to market that allow patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to live two years with intravenous chemotherapy alone.

A new trial in the has been temporarily suspended so that researchers can find a way to recruit patients. After nearly a year only one patient had enrolled, because people were reluctant to chance winding up in the control group, according to one of the investigators.

While proponents contend that the risk of dying from the surgery has been reduced since the Dutch trial, the procedure still lasts eight hours or more and full recovery can take three to six months. “It’s maximally invasive,” said Dr. Sugarbaker, who often removes the “spare parts” — organs a patient can live without, like the spleen, the gall bladder, the ovaries and the uterus.

The cost of the surgery and Hipec, including hospitalization, ranges from $20,000 to more than $100,000, doctors said. While and insurers generally pay for the operation, the heated treatment may not be covered. But doctors added it may be if it is described merely as chemotherapy. Some patients, like Ms. Borges, who is a fitness devotee, recover well and say the procedure staved off a death sentence.

But Dr. Alan Venook, a colon cancer specialist at the , said that a couple of patients referred by him had “died miserable deaths. One lost much of her abdominal wall to infection and just died in misery.”

Another risk is that the surgery may be done unnecessarily. CT scans cannot pick up many of the small tumors, so it is often unclear how much cancer is inside until the patient is opened.

In June, Dr. Lowy sliced open a woman and saw, to his horror, that she had more tumors than he could remove. Taking out only some would not improve her chances of survival, so he closed the incision, and she is now starting intravenous chemotherapy.

Things with the male patient, Andy S., went better. A 41-year-old father of two from near , Mr. S. agreed to let a reporter observe the surgery, but asked that his full name not be published because he did not want his cancer history to surface through searches.

Mr. S. had eventually diagnosed as . But the appendix was found to be cancerous. Such cancers typically spew mucus containing tumor cells into the abdominal cavity. So he signed up for surgery and Hipec with Dr. Lowy.

“I’ve had to say my goodbyes to everybody,” Mr. S. said the day before the operation. “I had to talk to my priest. I had to do all these things I never thought I’d have to do at 41. I wouldn’t wish it on my worst enemy, but I have to go through with it.”

Dr. Lowy explored the entire cavity from the diaphragm to the pelvis. He found mucus in several spots that he sopped up with a cloth and also tiny tumors the size of a pencil eraser that had implanted in several spots. He snipped those out and sewed up the wounds. He removed the right side of the man’s colon and the omentum, a fatty structure.

Then two Y-shaped tubes hooked to the Hipec machine were inserted into the abdominal cavity, one to deliver the chemotherapy and the other to bring the drug back to the machine to be reheated. The incision was sewn up around the tubes so the chemotherapy would not leak.

The man’s belly was filled with three liters of saline fluid and the chemotherapy, a generic drug called mitomycin C, heated to 42 degrees Celsius, or nearly 108 degrees Fahrenheit. Any hotter could have caused injuries. Bloated with liquid, the man’s torso resembled a water bed.

After 90 minutes, the fluid was drained and the incision reopened for a final check before the patient was stitched up. The procedure took six hours.

“We got all of the visible disease, and he didn’t have a lot of visible disease,” Dr. Lowy said with satisfaction.

Mr. S. left the hospital eight days later, happy to have undergone the treatment. “I want to have the best chance I can have to never see this again,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Includes one expert statement:  ““We’re practicing this technique that has almost no basis in science.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- A new study calls into question the value of removing blood clots from a patient's heart arteries during angioplasty, a procedure to open blocked arteries.

Although manually removing clots has become common medical practice, this study of more than 10,000 heart attack patients found no benefit in terms of reducing death, heart attack or heart failure in the six months after the procedure. Removing clots appears to have increased the risk of stroke in the month after clots were removed, the Canadian researchers report.

"There has been some controversy about removing blood clots during the treatment of heart attacks," said lead researcher Dr. Sanjit Jolly, an associate professor of cardiology at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.

A study in 2008 suggested that removing clots during an angioplasty might save lives, he said. "Guidelines changed based on this study," Jolly noted. Another trial in 2013, however, suggested that removing clots was not beneficial, he added.

In this latest trial, researchers found that routinely removing clots was not beneficial, Jolly said.

Jolly isn't sure why removing clots causes additional problems. It is possible that parts of the clot break off and travel elsewhere in the heart or brain, he said.

"This is an unexpected finding, and we want to confirm this in other studies," Jolly said.

Jolly said there are mechanical methods of removing clots, which were not tested in this study. Whether these methods would have produced better results isn't clear. "The jury is out on that. It needs to be tested in large trials," he said.

However, preliminary results from small trials of mechanical clot removal have not been promising, Jolly noted.

Jolly said the lesson from his team's trial is that clot removal should be used only as a rescue treatment when an angioplasty fails to clear an artery.

"As a routine therapy, clot removal is not beneficial and could have some significant downsides," he said.

The results of the study were published online March 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with a planned presentation of the findings at the American College of Cardiology's annual meeting in San Diego.

For the study, Jolly and colleagues randomly assigned 10,732 patients undergoing an angioplasty after a heart attack to have clots manually removed or to not have them removed.

Among all the patients, 6.9 percent who had clots removed, and 7 percent of those who didn't, died, had another heart attack or developed heart failure in the 180 days after the procedure.

In the 30 days after the procedure, 0.7 percent of the patients who had clots removed suffered a stroke, as did 0.3 percent of those who only had angioplasty, Jolly's team found.

Dr. Gregg Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, said, "This is a very important and eagerly awaited clinical trial."

A number of studies have suggested a benefit from manually removing clots during an angioplasty, but this trial found no clinical benefits for doing so, he said.

"These findings will likely have important implications for clinical practice," Fonarow said.

Visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine for more on angioplasty.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story reports that this was a large randomized trial done by a team who has been doing research in this area. It quotes an expert who says that this has been an “eagerly awaited trial” that “will likely have important implications for clinical practice.” So there’s enough information here to discern that this was a well-conducted study that produced meaningful results, and we’ll award the story a Satisfactory rating on that basis. However, we wish the story had pushed just a bit harder as to what the “important implications” of this study will likely be. It seems that there’s a lot of conflicting data in this area, and it’s not clear from the story how the results may change practice — and that’s perspective that readers would like to have.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBUS, Ohio - Anti-inflammatory diets -- which tend to be high in vegetables, fruits, fish and whole grains -- could boost bone health and prevent fractures in some women, a new study suggests.

Researchers examined data from the landmark Women's Health Initiative to compare levels of inflammatory elements in the diet to bone mineral density and fractures and found new associations between food and bone health. The study, led by Tonya Orchard, an assistant professor of human nutrition at The Ohio State University, appears in the Journal of Bone and Mineral Research.

Women with the least-inflammatory diets (based on a scoring system called the Dietary Inflammatory Index) lost less bone density during the six-year follow-up period than their peers with the most-inflammatory diets. This was despite the fact that they started off with lower bone density overall.

Furthermore, diets with low inflammatory potential appeared to correspond to lower risk of hip fracture among one subgroup of the study -- post-menopausal white women younger than 63.

The findings suggest that women's bone health could benefit when they choose a diet higher in beneficial fats, plants and whole grains, said Orchard, who is part of Ohio State's Food Innovation Center.

"This suggests that as women age, healthy diets are impacting their bones," Orchard said. "I think this gives us yet another reason to support the recommendations for a healthy diet in the Dietary Guidelines for Americans."

Because the study was observational, it's not possible to definitively link dietary patterns and bone health and fracture outcomes.

Rebecca Jackson, the study's senior author and director of Ohio State's Center for Clinical and Translational Science, said the new findings support a growing body of evidence that factors that increase inflammation can increase osteoporosis risk.

"By looking at the full diet rather than individual nutrients, these data provide a foundation for studying how components of the diet might interact to provide benefit and better inform women's health and lifestyle choices," said Jackson, who is national chair of the Women's Health Initiative steering committee.

Previous studies have connected high levels of inflammatory markers in the blood to bone loss and to fractures in older women and men, which prompted Orchard and her colleagues to wonder what they'd find if they took one more step back - to the dietary choices that contribute to inflammation in the body.

The Dietary Inflammatory Index - developed to assess the quality of diet from maximally to minimally inflammatory based on nutrients consumed - helped them accomplish that. Dietary information as well as data on bone density and fracture were collected from a large group of the participants in the Women's Health Initiative, the largest study of postmenopausal women's health undertaken in U.S. history.

Participants in the WHI were 50 to 79 when they enrolled in the study of prevention and control of common diseases impacting older women. Enrollment ran from 1993 to 1998.

For the new analysis - the first of its kind - the research team looked at dietary data from 160,191 women and assigned inflammation scores based on 32 food components that the women reported consuming in the three months prior to their enrollment.

The researchers used bone-mineral-density data from a subset of 10,290 women. Fracture data was collected for the entire study group.

Orchard and her colleagues found a correlation only between high-inflammatory diets and fracture in younger white women in the study. Higher scores were associated with an almost 50 percent larger risk of hip fracture in Caucasian women younger than 63, compared with the risk for women in the group with the lowest inflammatory scores.

"This suggests that a high-quality, less-inflammatory diet may be especially important in reducing hip fracture risk in younger women," the researchers wrote.

But in the study group overall, more-inflammatory diets were not linked to fracture and - in fact - the researchers found a modestly lower risk of lower-arm and total fracture in women with the highest dietary inflammation scores. One possible explanation included in the study: The women with lower inflammation scores were more physically active as a group and therefore were at a slightly greater risk of falls.

Women with the least-inflammatory diets had lower bone mineral density overall at the start of the study, but lost less bone than their high-inflammation peers, the researchers found. The lower bone density to start could be because women with healthier diets are more likely to be of a smaller build, Orchard said. Larger people have higher bone density to support their larger frames.

"These women with healthier diets didn't lose bone as quickly as those with high-inflammation diets, and this is important because after menopause women see a drastic loss in bone density that contributes to fractures," Orchard said.

Vedat Yildiz of Ohio State's Center for Biostatistics also worked on the study, which was supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is where the release really does provide a model for other releases. It nicely describes the structure of the study, the period of time it covered, its weaknesses, and other relevant details. It references a positive finding from a subgroup of the study but does not treat that finding as if it were the main result of the study. And it may seem a small thing, but the release uses the term “inflammation markers.”  Use of the term “marker” is a caveat that gives it some distance from the actual cause or definitive proof.  A marker is an indicator of a possible disease or condition and not a sign of the disease or condition itself.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DURHAM, N.C. -- Swimmers and divers who are prone to a sudden and potentially life-threatening form of pulmonary edema in cold water could benefit from a simple and readily available dose of sildenafil, according to findings from a small study by Duke Health researchers.

The drug -- best known as Viagra™ -- is normally used for treatment of male impotence, but also for pulmonary arterial hypertension. It dilates blood vessels, giving it the potential to ease an abrupt cold water-induced constriction of blood vessels in the arms and legs that can lead to blood pooling in the heart and lungs.

Athletes and others with this condition -- called swimming-induced pulmonary edema, or SIPE -- cough up blood, labor to breathe and have low blood-oxygen typically brought on by swimming or scuba diving, usually in cold water. Often the symptoms dissipate over 24 hours, but the condition can be serious and even fatal and medical attention is recommended. Many don't know they are prone to the problem until they are in the water and quickly develop symptoms.

"During immersion in water, particularly cold water, susceptible people have an exaggerated degree of the normal redistribution of blood from the extremities to the chest area, causing increased pressure in the blood vessels of the lungs and leakage of fluid into the lungs," said Richard Moon, M.D., an anesthesiologist and medical director of the Duke Center for Hyperbaric Medicine & Environmental Physiology.

"Some cases of SIPE appear to have been the result of cardiac problems," said Moon, who was lead author of the study published online February 16 in Circulation: Journal of the American Heart Association.

Moon and colleagues studied these responses in 10 athletes who had experienced the condition while exercising or competing in triathlons. During a carefully monitored test in Duke's hyperbaric center, the researchers had the participants exercise under water in a dive pool that recreated the conditions of a swim that could trigger the SIPE response.

They compared those participants with 20 others who did not have a history of SIPE. None of the participants in either group had heart abnormalities, but the SIPE-susceptible athletes had higher pulmonary arterial pressure and pulmonary artery wedge pressure during the underwater exercise, confirming that SIPE is a form of pulmonary edema caused by high pressure in the blood vessels within the lungs.

When the SIPE participants were given sildenafil and then performed the same underwater exercise, the pressures were no longer as elevated.

"This is a small study, but also very intensive with direct, accurate pressure measurements," Moon said. "It appears that the drug, which dilates the blood vessels, could be creating more capacity in the blood vessels in the arms and legs, reducing the tendency for blood to redistribute to the thorax, and therefore reducing the high pressure in the pulmonary vessels."

One study participant, triathlete Katherine Calder-Becker, said her bouts with SIPE threatened to end her competitive career. She said she would have no problems during training in swimming pools, but then experienced debilitating shortness of breath and distress during the swim portions of competitions in colder open water. She coughed up blood and was once hospitalized.

Triathlete Calder-Becker, 51, was diagnosed with SIPE and enrolled in studies at Duke in 2011. Afterward, she consulted her cardiologist and was prescribed a low dose of sildenafil that she takes shortly before competitions.

"I have successfully raced in 20 triathlons since I started taking sildenafil, including five ultra events that require 10-kilometer swims," Calder-Becker said. "I have not had an incident since then. I didn't want to give up racing -- this is something my husband and I do together, and we travel together to competitions -- so it has meant everything to me to continue."

Moon said larger studies are needed to replicate the results and learn more about possible adverse side effects of the drug. He also said research is ongoing to further illuminate the causes of SIPE and potential ways of diagnosing it early.

In addition to Moon, study authors include Stefanie D. Martina, Dionne F. Peacher, Jennifer F. Potter, Tracy E. Wester, Anne D. Cherry, Michael J. Natoli, Claire E. Otteni, Dawn N. Kernagis, William D. White, and John J. Freiberger.

This study received funding from the Divers Alert Network and U.S. Naval Sea Systems Command Contracts (N61331-03-C-0015, N0463A-07-C-0002).
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release describes the published study in some detail, and the first author goes on record calling for larger studies “to replicate the results and learn more about possible adverse side effects of the drug.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
With calcium, adolescent girls may be the only group that is getting too little, the panel found. Older women, on the other hand, may take too much, putting themselves at risk for . And there is evidence that excess calcium can increase the risk of heart disease, the group wrote.

As for vitamin D, some prominent doctors have said that most people need supplements or they will be at increased risk for a wide variety of illnesses, including heart disease, and autoimmune diseases.

And these days more and more people know their vitamin D levels because they are being tested for it as part of routine physical exams.

“The number of vitamin D tests has exploded,” said Dennis Black, a reviewer of the report who is a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at the .

At the same time, vitamin D sales have soared, growing faster than those of any supplement, according to The Nutrition Business Journal. Sales rose 82 percent from 2008 to 2009, reaching $430 million. “Everyone was hoping vitamin D would be kind of a panacea,” Dr. Black said. The report, he added, might quell the craze.

“I think this will have an impact on a lot of primary care providers,” he said.

The 14-member expert committee was convened by the Institute of Medicine, an independent nonprofit scientific body, at the request of the and Canadian governments. It was asked to examine the available data — nearly 1,000 publications — to determine how much vitamin D and calcium people were getting, how much was needed for optimal health and how much was too much.

The two nutrients work together for bone health.

Bone health, though, is only one of the benefits that have been attributed to vitamin D, and there is not enough good evidence to support most other claims, the committee said.

Some labs have started reporting levels of less than 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood as a deficiency. With that as a standard, 80 percent of the population would be deemed deficient of vitamin D, Dr. Rosen said. Most people need to take supplements to reach levels above 30 nanograms per milliliter, he added.

But, the committee concluded, a level of 20 to 30 nanograms is all that is needed for bone health, and nearly everyone is in that range.

Vitamin D is being added to more and more foods, said Paul R. Thomas of the Office of Dietary Supplements at the National Institutes of Health. Not only is it in orange juice and milk, but more is being added to breakfast cereals, and it now can be found in very high doses in supplement pills. Most vitamin D pills, he said, used to contain no more than 1,000 international units of it. Now it is easy to find pills, even in places like , with 5,000 international units. The committee, though, said people need only 600 international units a day.

To assess the amounts of vitamin D and calcium people are getting, the panel looked at national data on diets. Most people, they concluded, get enough calcium from the foods they eat, about 1,000 milligrams a day for most adults (1,200 for women ages 51 to 70).

Vitamin D is more complicated, the group said. In general, most people are not getting enough vitamin D from their diets, but they have enough of the vitamin in their blood, probably because they are also making it naturally after being out in the sun and storing it in their bodies.

The American Society for Bone and Mineral Research and other groups applauded the report. It is “a very balanced set of recommendations,” said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a endocrinologist and the society’s president.

But Andrew Shao, an executive vice president at the Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group, said the panel was being overly cautious, especially in its recommendations about vitamin D. He said there was no convincing evidence that people were being harmed by taking supplements, and he said higher levels of vitamin D, in particular, could be beneficial.

Such claims “are not supported by the available evidence,” the committee wrote. They were based on studies that observed populations and concluded that people with lower levels of the vitamin had more of various diseases. Such studies have been misleading and most scientists agree that they cannot determine cause and effect.

It is not clear how or why the claims for high vitamin D levels started, medical experts say. First there were two studies, which turned out to be incorrect, that said people needed 30 nanograms of vitamin D per milliliter of blood, the upper end of what the committee says is a normal range. They were followed by articles and claims and books saying much higher levels — 40 to 50 nanograms or even higher — were needed.

After reviewing the data, the committee concluded that the evidence for the benefits of high levels of vitamin D was “inconsistent and/or conflicting and did not demonstrate causality.”

Evidence also suggests that high levels of vitamin D can increase the risks for fractures and the overall death rate and can raise the risk for other diseases. While those studies are not conclusive, any risk looms large when there is no demonstrable benefit. Those hints of risk are “challenging the concept that ‘more is better,’ ” the committee wrote.

That is what surprised Dr. Black. “We thought that probably higher is better,” he said.

He has changed his mind, and expects others will too: “I think this report will make people more cautious.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job of describing how the expert committee conducted its review and what evidence they found. Importantly, it noted that  claims of benefit from extra vitamin D are based on observational studies that most scientists agree “cannot determine cause and effect.” We also like that the story solicited opinions from a variety of experts with no obvious stake in the controversy. This produced a number of quotes that emphasized the need for restraint when interpreting the research on vitamin D. Examples: “I think this report will make people more cautious” and “The onus is on the people who propose extra calcium and vitamin D to show it is safe before they push it on people.”
Although we agree with the story’s skeptical overall message, we think it may have slammed the door just a bit too hard on the possibility of benefit from supplemental vitamin D. While claims of benefit may not be supported by the currently available evidence, they have not been conclusively disproved in randomized controlled studies, either. In fact, research is now underway to determine whether the benefits found in observational studies of vitamin D can be replicated in more rigorously designed trials. The story probably should have mentioned this research, and left the door to potential benefits open just a crack.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OAK BROOK, Ill. - Playing "brain-training" video games may help improve some cognitive abilities of people with multiple sclerosis (MS) by strengthening neural connections in an important part of their brains, according to a new study published online in the journal Radiology.

MS is a disease of the central nervous system that results in damage to the protective covering of nerve fibers. Symptoms include weakness, muscle stiffness and difficulty thinking--a phenomenon often referred to as "brain fog." MS affects an estimated 2.5 million people worldwide, according to the Multiple Sclerosis Foundation.

Damage to the thalamus, a structure in the middle of the brain that acts as a kind of information hub, and its connections with other parts of the brain play an important role in the cognitive dysfunction many MS patients experience.

Researchers led by Laura De Giglio, M.D., Ph.D., from the Department of Neurology and Psychiatry at Sapienza University in Rome, recently studied the effects of a video game-based cognitive rehabilitation program on the thalamus in patients with MS. They used a collection of video games from the Nintendo Corporation, called Dr. Kawashima's Brain Training, which train the brain using puzzles, word memory and other mental challenges. The games are based on the work of Japanese neuroscientist Ryuta Kawashima, M.D.

Twenty-four MS patients with cognitive impairment were randomly assigned to either take part in an eight-week, home-based rehabilitation program--consisting of 30-minute gaming sessions, five days per week--or be put on a wait list, serving as the control group. Patients were evaluated by cognitive tests and by 3-Tesla resting state functional MRI (RS-fMRI) at baseline and after the eight-week period. Functional imaging when the brain is in its resting state, or not focused on a particular task, provides important information on neural connectivity.

"Functional MRI allows you to study which brain areas are simultaneously active and gives information on the participation of certain areas with specific brain circuits," Dr. De Giglio said. "When we talk about increased connectivity, we mean that these circuits have been modified, increasing the extension of areas that work simultaneously."

At follow-up, the 12 patients in the video-game group had significant increases in thalamic functional connectivity in brain areas corresponding to the posterior component of the default mode network, which is one of the most important brain networks involved in cognition. The results provide an example of the brain's plasticity, or ability to form new connections throughout life.

"This increased connectivity reflects the fact that video gaming experience changed the mode of operation of certain brain structures," Dr. De Giglio said. "This means that even a widespread and common use tool like video games can promote brain plasticity and can aid in cognitive rehabilitation for people with neurological diseases, such as multiple sclerosis."

The modifications in functional connectivity shown in the video game group after training corresponded to significant improvements in test scores assessing sustained attention and executive function, the higher-level cognitive skills that help organize our lives and regulate our behavior.

The results suggest that video-game-based brain training is an effective option to improve cognitive abilities of patients with MS.

In the future, the researchers hope to study whether the plasticity induced by video games in MS patients is also related to improvements in other aspects of their daily lives. They also plan to look at how the video game can be integrated into a rehabilitation program together with other rehabilitative techniques.

"Multiple Sclerosis: Changes in Thalamic Resting-State Functional Connectivity Induced by a Home-based Cognitive Rehabilitation Program." Collaborating with Dr. De Giglio were Francesca Tona, M.D., Francesca De Luca, Psy.D., Nikolaos Petsas, M.D., Ph.D., Luca Prosperini, M.D., Ph.D., Valentina Bianchi, Psy.D., Carlo Pozzilli, M.D., Ph.D., and Patrizia Pantano, M.D.

Radiology is edited by Herbert Y. Kressel, M.D., Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass., and owned and published by the Radiological Society of North America, Inc. (http://radiology. )

RSNA is an association of more than 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release adequately frames the trial and its findings and describes how outcomes were measured through cognitive and imaging tests. But the release could have gone further in providing the specific outcome data, which we addressed in the benefits section above. This was a very small study using only two dozen patients, half of which were controls. While the release states that brain scans showed increased connectivity in game-playing patients, it fails to offer evidence of improvements in the patients’ disease or in their ability to cope with it.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Testing women for human papillomavirus (HPV) may catch more pre-cancerous growths than standard cervical cancer screening does — but more evidence is needed before the newer tests become routine, a study published Monday concludes.

The report, in the Annals of Internal Medicine, sums up a research review done for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), an expert medical panel supported by the federal government.

The USPSTF is set to update its recommendations on cervical cancer screening, which were last laid out in 2003.

At that time, the task force recommended that sexually active women get regular Pap tests to screen for cervical cancer. But it said there was not enough evidence to recommend for or against newer types of testing — including HPV tests and the “liquid-based” Pap tests that are now more often used than the old-fashioned version.

During Pap tests, cells are swabbed or scraped from the cervix for examination under a microscope to find cancer or possible pre-cancerous changes. In the so-called liquid-based version, the cells are placed in special preservative liquid designed to make the specimen easier to “read”; those same cells can also be used for HPV testing (unlike the cells collected with conventional Pap tests).

Exactly what impact the new research review will have on the USPSTF recommendations is anyone's guess. A draft of the guidelines will not be published until Wednesday, when it will be available for public comment on the task force website (here: 1.usa.gov/4xXexl).

A lot of research has been done since the 2003 recommendations, said Dr. Evelyn P. Whitlock, a senior investigator with Kaiser Permanente Northwest in Portland, Oregon, who led the review.

But there are still questions about the effects of HPV screening, and “more complete evidence” is needed before it becomes widely used, Whitlock and her colleagues write.

HPV is a common virus that causes warts, including genital warts. Usually, the immune system clears the infection, but persistent infection with certain strains of HPV leads to cervical cancer in some women.

So in recent years, tests for those “high-risk” HPV strains have been developed to help in screening for the disease. A few HPV tests are approved for use, along with Pap tests, for screening women age 30 or older. (The tests are not approved for younger women because they give doctors little information; younger women commonly have HPV infections that go away on their own.)

It has not been clear exactly how HPV testing, or liquid-based Pap tests, measure up against standard Pap tests.

In their review, Whitlock’s team examined four clinical trials including more than 140,000 women that compared older Pap tests with the liquid-based version.

They found that both tests had nearly the same “sensitivity” — which refers to their ability to detect cancer or pre-cancer. The tests also had the same “specificity,” which can be used to measure how often a screening test produces false-positive results.

Across studies, the false-positive rate ranged between about six percent and 16 percent for both conventional and liquid-based Pap tests.

“It’s reassuring to know that they perform equivalently,” Whitlock told Reuters Health.

In an interview, she noted that the decision of whether to do a conventional or liquid-based Pap test is not the patient’s. It may not even be the doctor’s — but may instead depend on whatever health system he or she is part of.

Several other clinical trials in the review looked at HPV testing. In general, Whitlock’s team found, HPV tests were more sensitive than conventional Pap tests, but they were less specific, meaning they had a higher false-positive rate.

In a 2003 trial of more than 3,000 women, for example, HPV testing caught 96 percent of potentially pre-cancerous growths, versus 65 percent with Pap tests. But the false-positive rate was 15 percent, compared with two percent with Pap testing.

The problem with that higher false-positive rate is that it could lead to needless biopsies and other tests, or treatment to remove abnormal-looking tissue.

“It’s a tricky thing to get your mind around,” Whitlock said. “It may seem that if a test is more sensitive, it must be better. But it’s more subtle than that. You’re trying to make a tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity.”

Since cervical cancer screening is repeated over time, what’s needed is evidence of the longer-term effects of different tests, according to Whitlock. How often, for example, does HPV testing lead to biopsies, versus Pap testing?

And no one knows yet whether HPV testing actually catches cervical cancer at an earlier stage, or reduces deaths from the disease, compared with Pap tests.

Clinical trials are ongoing, Whitlock said. “The state of the science will be changing relatively quickly, so we’ll have to keep looking at this.”

Right now, the American Cancer Society (ACS) and other medical groups recommend that women start Pap tests at age 21 or three years after they become sexually active, whichever comes first. Those should be done every one to two years until age 30; after age 30, women who’ve had three normal Pap tests in a row can be screened less often — every two to three years.

Pap plus HPV testing, done every three years, is considered a “reasonable option” for women age 30 and up, according to the ACS.

Nationally, the cervical cancer death rate dropped by 70 percent between 1955 and 1992, and routine Pap testing is credited for most of that decline.

But many women still do not get regular Pap screening, Whitlock pointed out. It’s thought that more than half of cervical cancer cases in the U.S. occur in women who’ve never been screened, or haven’t been in the past five years.

If more women received the screening that already exists, “that would be a huge step forward,” Whitlock said.

An estimated 12,700 U.S. women will be diagnosed with cervical cancer this year, and nearly 4,300 will die from the disease, according to the ACS.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story does a sophisticated job of explaining the large review of four clinical trials involving 140,000 women, and why there remain questions that require further study. This researcher’s comment was especially important: “It’s a tricky thing to get your mind around. It may seem that if a test is more sensitive, it must be better. But it’s more subtle than that. You’re trying to make a tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity.” Evidence from four different trials did not produce a firm conclusion about whether testing women for presence of the human papilloma virus  should become routine.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago (CNN) -- For the first time, patients with the deadliest form of skin cancer have two new treatment options that prolong survival, according to new research presented at a cancer conference in Chicago on Sunday.

One drug specifically targets a mutated gene that tells a cancer cell to grow, the other boosts a patient's immune system in the fight against the disease. Both drugs cause tumors to shrink and prolong survival for patients with melanoma that has spread to other parts of the body, but neither is a cure.

"This is an unprecedented time of clinical options -- it is truly practice-changing," said Dr. Lynn Schuchter, who heads the Melanoma Center at the University of Pennsylvania and is not involved with the research.

MayoClinic: Find out more about melanoma

One study presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology's (ASCO) conference on Sunday focused on the experimental drug vemurafenib. About half of all melanoma patients have a mutated BRAF gene. This mutation tells the cell to continue to grow.

"It's like the on-switch is stuck," said Dr. Paul Chapman, from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Center in New York and lead author of the study. Vemurafenib blocks the mutated gene, which kills the cancer cell and shrinks tumors.

Researchers compared this new drug, which comes in pill form, to the only FDA-approved chemotherapy drug for melanoma, dacarbazine: It has been used to treat melanoma patients since 1975, but is only effective in about 10% of patients.

Nearly 90% benefited from this new targeted drug, Schuchter said.

In a large, phase 3 study involving 675 people worldwide, patients on vemurafenib did much better than those on chemotherapy. Forty-eight percent of patients on vemurafenib had substantial tumor shrinkage that lasted for more than a month, compared to 5.5% of patients in the chemotherapy group.

Those taking vemurafenib had a 63% reduced risk of death compared to those on chemo. Patients on vemurafenib saw the drug work within 72 hours and 84% of the patients were still alive after six months, compared with 64% of patients getting dacarbazine.

"These are truly striking results" ASCO president Dr. George Sledge said.

Patient advocates like Tim Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation, are thrilled because "the incidence of melanoma is going up all over the world and the treatment landscape has been terrible."

Drugs that treat breast cancer found to prevent it, too

Sledge and other cancer experts are confident that based on these study results, vemurafenib will almost certainly will get FDA approval this year.

A second study showed that the recently approved drug Ipilimumab, sold under the name Yervoy, also extends survival for melanoma patients with advanced disease.

It doesn't target a specific part of the cell. Instead, it stimulates the patient's immune system to allow it to better fight the cancer. Patients with and without the BRAF mutation were eligible to participate.

Among 502 patients enrolled in this clinical trial, half were given Yervoy plus dacarbazine and the other half were given a placebo and chemotherapy.

"Twenty-one percent of (the Yervoy) population was alive after three years," lead study author Dr. Jedd Wolchok said, compared to 12% who got the placebo and chemo. Wolchok, also an oncologist from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said patients taking Yervoy saw the drug work for them for 19 months, compared to only eight months in patients in the chemo group.

Schuchter says melanoma patients are celebrating this moment because there are now two good treatment options for patients, when there really were none before.

"I've been doing this for 25 years, and we've not had drugs that extended survival. That is what is so remarkable here," Schuchter said.

While patients taking vemurafenib do very well, Schuchter said the drug stops working after about nine or 10 months. But in many cases that are nine or 10 months they otherwise would not have had.

Yervoy takes a while to work, and some patients may not have that time, study author Chapman said. He also points out that both drugs do have side effects so patients have to be monitored.

Doctors and researchers will now explore how to best use these drugs -- give one before the other, or simultaneously.

Wolchok says manufacturers of both drugs (Genentech's vemurafenib and Bristol-Myers Squibb's Yervoy), which also funded these studies, have agreed to work with researchers to study how these drugs are tolerated by patients when taken together, giving doctors even more possible treatment options. This is very unusual in the world of drug development, he said.

According to the American Cancer Society, melanoma is one of the most common cancers in young adults today. More than 68,000 people were diagnosed with melanoma last year and about 8,700 died.

Not all melanomas can be prevented, but limiting exposure to strong sunlight and other sources of UV light like tanning beds can significantly reduce the risk of getting this very deadly cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Adequate explanation of the evidence. Interestingly, both this story and the one from Reuters provided information from the ASCO meetings and neglected to tell readers that both studies have been published in a peer reviewed journal. The NY Times provided both sources.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 28, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Breast-conserving surgery for early stage breast cancers may result in better survival than mastectomy, according to a new study.

For those with early stage breast cancer, "lumpectomy is just as effective if not more effective than mastectomy," said researcher Dr. Shelley Hwang, chief of breast surgery at Duke Cancer Institute in Durham, N.C.

"There are lots of women who think the more [treatment] they do, the better they will do," she said. "This refutes that."

The findings, published online Jan. 28 in the journal Cancer, are especially strong for women over 50 with hormone-sensitive cancers, the researchers found.

Earlier research had also concluded that the two procedures are similarly effective, but Hwang's is a more "real-world" study.

Hwang's team looked at 14 years of data from the California Cancer Registry, following more than 112,000 women with early stage breast cancer (stages 1 or 2) between 1990 and 2004. Ages ranged from 39 to 80.

More than half (55 percent) had lumpectomy and radiation, while 45 percent had mastectomy (complete breast removal) alone.

Hwang compared lumpectomy and radiation with mastectomy alone, not mastectomy plus radiation. "We wanted to look at early stage disease, and those patients typically don't get radiation after mastectomy," she said.

The researchers tracked the women's progress for a median of more than nine years (half followed longer, half less). During that time, more than 31,000 women died, nearly 40 percent of them from breast cancer. The others died of other causes.

For the first three years after treatment, those who had a mastectomy had a higher risk of dying from heart disease and other ailments than those who had lumpectomy. This may indicate that the women who underwent lumpectomy were generally healthier, Hwang said.

Over the entire follow-up, those who underwent lumpectomy were more likely to survive the breast cancer.

"The group that benefited the most -- who had the biggest difference in breast cancer survival -- were those women over 50 with estrogen-receptor positive disease," Hwang said. This means their cancer depends on estrogen to grow.

Among those women, the lumpectomy group had a 13 percent lower risk of death from breast cancer and a 19 percent lower risk of death from any cause than those who had a mastectomy.

Not all women with early stage breast cancers can have a lumpectomy, Hwang said. In this procedure, just the tumor and some healthy tissue are removed, sparing the rest of the breast. Among the exceptions are those whose cancers are too large, or those who have different cancers in the same breast.

The percent of women with early breast cancers choosing a mastectomy has risen recently, after a dip in previous years. Hwang and others suspect that women told they could safely opt for lumpectomy were still afraid to try it.

The new research, which was funded by the U.S. National Cancer Institute, suggests that if a lumpectomy is possible, it may actually increase survival, Hwang said.

The findings may reverse the mastectomy trend, said Dr. Laura Kruper, co-director of the breast oncology program at the City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center in Duarte, Calif., who was not involved in the study.

The study is scientifically sound in many ways, Kruper said. "They broke it down by year of diagnosis and by age category," she said. "They looked at socioeconomic status, and they kept it early stage."

Dr. Wendy Woodward, section chief for breast radiation oncology at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, said that for women with early cancers, the study "clearly reiterates there is no detriment to cancer control in having a lumpectomy and radiation for breast-conserving surgery candidates."

But, Woodward added, "I am not sure the study convinces us that lumpectomy and radiation is better for breast cancer survival, but it may be."

The study was observational, Hwang stressed. It found a link or association but could not provide cause-and-effect proof that the breast-conserving treatment is more effective than mastectomy in early stage breast cancer.

Hwang believes the study does arm women with valuable information. However, "I don't want women who chose mastectomy to think they did the wrong thing," Hwang said. "At the end of the day, personal preference trumps everything else. I fully support the patient's options to choose the best treatment for themselves."

To learn more about lumpectomy, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did turn to two independent sources to evaluate the quality of the evidence, one of whom said, “I am not sure the study convinces us that lumpectomy and radiation is better for breast cancer survival, but it may be.”
The story also pointed out that the “study was observational… It found a link or association but could not provide cause-and-effect proof that the breast-conserving treatment is more effective than mastectomy in early stage breast cancer.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers hope that a simple brain scan performed in infants and toddlers can presage the development of autism, leading to early detection and early intervention.

The test involved using functional MRI to measure brain responses to spoken words in sleeping children.

"We're focusing on this earliest time period, when the brain is still developing and still changing," explained study author Lisa Eyler, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Diego. "If we could use this with other markers, we could probably identify people early on and, if we could do that, we'd have a much better chance of helping to make sure that their language development is normal."

The finding is slated to be presented Wednesday at the International Meeting for Autism Research in Philadelphia.

But another expert pointed out that the study is still extremely preliminary.

"It's a very early study. They have a long way to go before they're actually able to implement a test like this," said Keith Young, vice chairman of research in psychiatry and behavioral science at the Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine in Temple.

Before bringing it to clinics, researchers need to make sure this test isn't detecting other developmental delays such as dyslexia, he noted.

"I wouldn't want to be telling people your kid has autism when the problem is that they're dyslexic," Young said.

And when it is ready for prime time, it probably won't be applicable to all children with autism.

"This is probably not going to be used for wide-scale screening but it could be used for children who we have some sense that they have autism and want to gather more information," said David Amaral, president of the International Society for Autism Research and research director of the University of California Davis MIND Institute. "There are many, many different types of autism. There are some children with autism who don't have these specific abnormalities in brain function."

Right now, experts have little to go by in detecting autism other than carefully monitoring the regular developmental milestones in children, Young said.

"We do need something," he said.

"One of the hallmark features of autism is deficits in language acquisition," Eyler explained. "Whereas the typical developing kid will have an explosion of their language ability starting at about 12 months in both comprehension and production, kids in autism delay don't start comprehending or producing until later, and they don't ever have that kind of explosion. About 50 percent of kids with autism never develop language," she noted.

"We were interested in what was going on in the earliest period of life that could account for these differences," she continued.

For this study, Eyler and her colleagues monitored the brain activity of 30 children with an autism spectrum disorder (aged 14 months to 46 months) and 14 "typical" children of roughly the same age.

Children slept in the MRI machine while researchers read them bedtime stories. This allowed the investigators to see which parts of the brain were being activated in typical children versus children with autism.

"We were looking for areas of the brain that are more responsive during listening to bedtime stories than when they're not hearing that," Eyler said.

In the typically developing children, both sides of the brain involved in language processing were activated. In the youngest children, the activation was about equal in both the right and left hemisphere, while in the older children, activity became more pronounced on the left side, which is similar to adult patterns and to be expected, Eyler explained.

But in the autistic children, there was slightly more right hemisphere response than left hemisphere, and there was no change in activity across the age range.

"We didn't see that growth of the left hemisphere [in the children with autism]," Eyler said.

"We now feel pretty confident that, in many children with autism, there are alterations either in structure growth or connectivity of the brain, but we really don't understand the implications of that for core features of autism, one of which is problems with communication," Amaral said. "This provides more evidence for abnormal connectivity in the brain."

The Autism Society of America has more on this disorder.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag.  The first quote introduces one hesitation in the story. The researchers say, "If we could do this with other markers, we could probably identify people early on…" Two graphs later it says, "But another expert pointed out that the study is extremely preliminary." So preliminary, in fact, that it does not appear to have been published in a peer reviewed journal, which is one thing that isn’t clear from the article. Still, the overall sense of the story is that the evidence is preliminary and needs more study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Jay Konduros used to rush home several times a year after accidentally cutting or bumping himself. There he would inject himself with refrigerated blood-clotting factor to prevent internal bleeding and extensive bruising and swelling. “I was walking on eggshells all the time,” said the former aerospace engineer who has a blood disorder called hemophilia B.

Then, last year, Konduros enrolled in a clinical trial, receiving an experimental gene therapy at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Almost immediately, he began producing the missing clotting factor. Several weeks later, after he dropped a heavy box on his shin, he watched a bruise develop and shrink within hours. “Are you kidding me?” he thought. “Life's easy if this is what happens.”

Konduros, 53, who runs a bakery and cafe in southeastern Ontario, is one of 10 men in an early-stage trial sponsored by Spark Therapeutics. (The disorder is much more common in men than women.) On Wednesday, researchers reported that a single intravenous infusion of Spark's novel gene therapy enabled patients to safely produce sufficient clotting factor to prevent dangerous bleeding episodes.

The treatment also “nearly universally eliminated” the need for preventive infusions of clotting factor a few times a week, the scientists said. And its effects lasted; after a year and a half, the longest patient follow-up, the therapy was continuing to work.

The results, published Wednesday online in the New England Journal of Medicine, represent “another example of the gene-therapy renaissance,” Matthew Porteus, a pediatrician at Stanford University, wrote in an accompanying editorial. He said the data suggests that the treatment ultimately might provide an “ideal cure” for hemophilia B.

Still, he noted, the study has some limitations. The follow-up period was relatively short, from 28 to 78 weeks in the new report; longer-term studies are needed to prove safety and effectiveness over extended periods. In addition, he said, researchers need to find ways to provide the therapy to a broader group of people, including children, and to figure out how to reduce the costs involved.

The researchers presented earlier findings on the gene therapy a year ago at the American Society of Hematology's annual meeting, but the latest data covers a larger patient group and a longer time period.

The hemophilia gene therapy is one of several being tested for conditions including sickle cell anemia and Huntington's disease. The one-time treatments seek to fight the disease by adding correct copies of a patient's defective genes. If approved, such treatments are expected to command stratospheric prices. For example, a separate Spark gene therapy for a rare type of childhood blindness, which is on track for Food and Drug Administration clearance soon, could cost $1 million per patient for infusions in both eyes, according to some Wall Street analysts.

Still, the therapies can produce at least some offsetting savings. Porteus noted in his editorial that the hemophilia therapy resulted in savings of about $200,000 a year per patient because of the elimination of clotting-factor infusions.

Other experts also were impressed by the results. The hemophilia study “is small but very promising, and it gives me the sense that gene therapy for hemophilia B is going to be at our disposal in no time, maybe a few years from now,” said Aric Parnes, who is associate director of the Boston Hemophilia Center at the Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center and wasn't involved in the study. “One of the key things is, how long will the treatment last? Does it wane over time? So far, with a full year, it doesn’t look like that is happening.”

Lindsey George, the lead investigator and a hematologist at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, said that nine of the 10 men in the trial didn't experience any bleeding episodes after the gene therapy treatment. The one patient who needed clotting factor because of bleeding used 91 percent less than before, she said.

“People were planning their lives around hemophilia, and now they are doing activities that they weren't before,” George said. “One man who came in a wheelchair is now out of a wheelchair and is coaching Little League.”

People with hemophilia B inherit a gene mutation on the X chromosome that interferes with their ability to produce normal levels of blood-clotting factor IX. (Because women have two copies of the X chromosomes, the other one can compensate, so they may carry the disease but not suffer from it.) Bleeding episodes — which can result from injury or occur spontaneously — can cause extensive damage and be life threatening.

The therapy developed by Spark, a biotech company spun off from the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia in 2013, involves a bioengineered gene designed to prompt the body to produce increased levels of a different clotting factor. The gene is transported to the liver, where clotting factor is made, by a harmless virus called an adeno-associated viral vector. For the current trial, which is being funded by Spark and Pfizer, researchers used a clotting factor that is 8 to 10 times as strong as the normal version. The stronger factor is called Factor IX-Padua, because it was discovered in 2009 in an Italian family.

Patients produced clotting-factor levels that were enough to allow blood to clot but not to spur an undesirable immune-system response, the researchers said.

FDA advisers urge approval for first gene therapy for inherited disease

In a first, scientists edit genes inside a man's body to try to cure a disease. What's next?

'This is not the end': Using immunotherapy and a genetic glitch to give cancer patients hope
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: It is clear from the story that the study is small and an “early-stage trial.” One source also notes that the researchers tracked individuals in the study for no more than a year and a half, making longer term assessments unavailable. The story could have done more, though, to signal to the reader that, despite the encouraging outcomes of the study, the treatment is still very much under development.  The next stage—Phase 3 trials—requires more participants, more careful study design, and takes, on average, three years to complete.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Also missing, Nelson said, are randomized studies that would indicate how often patients should be screened. One of the best studies the panel found focused on healthy women over age 65 and concluded that screenings spaced eight years or less apart did not make much of a difference in identifying which women would be more at risk for fractures.

The report identified possible benefits of screening, but noted that there is no solid evidence — in the form of randomized trials, medicine’s gold standard — comparing fracture rates of patients who have been screened with those who have not been screened.

But the panel is in the process of updating its recommendations, which were issued in 2002. A preliminary report in July packed a surprise: No direct evidence was found that testing patients for low bone density helped avoid broken bones. “It’s still amazing to me,’’ said the report’s lead author, Dr. Heidi Nelson, a professor at Oregon Health & Science University.

The task force offers no advice for women younger than 60 or for men of any age, though men account for at least 20 percent of US patients with osteoporosis.

The US Preventive Services Task Force, which sets standards on disease prevention and primary care, suggests that all women get a bone density screening by age 65, or by 60 if a patient might be at high risk for fractures. Risk factors include being female, having a family history of osteoporosis or broken bones, being small and thin, and having low levels of sex hormones, in addition to older age.

One of the first dilemmas patients typically encounter is when to get screened for osteoporosis, and then how often to repeat the test — a painless body scan that measures bone density.

“What is right in 2010,’’ she said, “might not be right in 2011 in a rapidly evolving medical science.’’

Dr. Felicia Cosman, clinical director of the National Osteoporosis Foundation and a professor at Columbia University, said the swirl of new information makes it critical for patients to review with their physicians their treatment decisions.

Even the issues of how much vitamin D adults should take and whether calcium supplements help keep bones strong have been matters of debate.

The safety of one of the most popular types of medication used to lessen the risk of fractures — bisphosphonates, such as Fosamax and Boniva — has also been questioned.

Over the past several months, studies have raised questions about the effectiveness of screening for osteoporosis, a silent disease that weakens the bones of an estimated 10 million Americans, most over age 50.

Sorting through all the recent news about osteoporosis, or low bone density, can be dizzying.

A task force of specialists appointed by the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research reported last month that long-term use of bisphosphonates, typically beyond five years, may increase a patient’s risk of an unusual but serious type of thigh fracture. The panel reviewed 310 such cases and concluded that they represent less than one-half of 1 percent of all American patients taking bisphosphonates. However the panel also said it believed the number of such fractures is under-reported.

There is little dispute over the conclusion of several studies that bisphosphonates can be effective in lowering patients’ risk of fractures, some by as much as 50 percent. But in recent months, questions have grown about their safety.

Bisphosphonates — the class of drugs that includes Fosamax, Boniva, and others — were approved by federal regulators in 1995 and have since been prescribed for millions of patients. Taken orally or by injection, the drugs work by slowing the growth of cells that break down bones, giving the edge to other cells that rebuild them.

When it comes to the most popular type of osteoporosis treatment, bisphosphonates, the question is not so much about how much to take, but whether there are harmful consequences from long-term use.

An updated report on recommended levels for both nutrients is due next month from the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academy of Sciences, which advises the federal government.

There are fewer differences of opinion among health professionals about calcium levels, with most recommending about 1,200 daily milligrams for adults over 50. However, the most extensive study on the calcium question, done by the Women’s Health Initiative as a randomized controlled trial, was inconclusive. It found no significant reduction in fractures in the study population, which received supplements of 1,000 milligrams of calcium and 400 international units of vitamin D daily.

Beyond the screening question, many physicians routinely ask patients about their calcium and vitamin D intake. The federal government recommends just 400 international units daily of vitamin D for adults over age 50, while the National Osteoporosis Foundation recommends 800 to 1,000 units. Some doctors suggest doubling those higher amounts for post-menopausal women.

Waiting until women are in their 60s to scan will result in missing many who could be diagnosed and treated, she said. “The reason you want to find people at the time of menopause is because there is acceleration [of bone loss] at this time,’’ Cosman said. This is when estrogen plummets, and estrogen helps protect bone health.

“I believe all women should have a bone screening test approximately at the time of menopause,’’ said Cosman, emphasizing that “this is my personal opinion as a specialist who treats women,’’ and not representative of her position with the National Osteoporosis Foundation.

In the absence of clear guidelines, many physicians make their own judgment calls.

“The thigh is one of the strongest bones in the body and it’s unusual for it to break,’’ said Columbia University professor Dr. Elizabeth Shane, the task force cochair and a specialist who has prescribed the medications to many of her osteoporosis patients.

Her task force recommended that an international registry be created for tracking such cases to help researchers better pinpoint which patients might be at risk. It also called on the US Food and Drug Administration to change medication labeling to alert physicians and patients to the possibility of these unusual fractures, and to urge awareness of possible warning signs: prolonged groin or thigh pain.

In a statement, the FDA said it is reviewing the data and is considering changing the labeling on bisphosphonates. It also recommended that patients report groin or thigh pain to their physicians, but did not suggest they stop taking the medications unless ordered to do so by their doctors.

In August, a team of researchers reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association that bisphosphonate use was not linked to an increased risk of stomach or esophageal cancer. The scientists reviewed about 80,000 patient records from a 6 million-person database in Britain.

But in September, a different group of scientists used the same database and concluded in an article in the British Medical Journal that bisphosphonates appeared to double the risk of esophageal cancer after about 5 years of use. Still, this group stressed the risk was very small, resulting in 2 cases of throat cancer in 1,000 people ages 60 to 79, compared with the normal rate of 1 per 1,000.

Some doctors are giving their patients “drug holidays’’ in which they take them off the prescriptions for a while.

Physicians face a tough choice when it comes to frail patients who have brittle bones. If they pull them off the medications because of the possible risk of serious side effects with longer-term use, there is little else to prescribe.

For Dr. Douglas C. Bauer, a professor at the University of California-San Francisco and a researcher who also treats many osteoporosis patients, the hardest decision is when to stop the drugs in patients who still have low bone density after five years of treatment but are not especially frail.

“It was appropriate to treat them to begin with, but you are not clear on added benefit for prolonged use beyond five years,’’ he said. “So I ask them, ‘What would you like to do?’ And I explain the data and say it’s a gray area, and I say we can decide together.’’
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:  The article provided accurate information on the quality of evidence supporting different management approaches. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Robots may not help doctors do a better job on some surgeries, according to a new study.

Surgeons treating women with endometriosis - a chronic condition that affects more than 5 million women and adolescent girls in the U.S. - didn’t get better or faster results when they used a robotic system.

With the surgeon alone, “the incision is smaller (and) the manipulations are more controlled,” Dr. Ceana Nezhat, an author on the study and the chair of Obstetrics & Gynecology at Northside Hospital in Atlanta, told Reuters Health.

Because the robot lets the surgeon get a better picture of the inside of the body, the authors had expected that surgeries using the robot would go more smoothly than those without it.

To test this idea, they looked back at 78 minor surgeries that were done on women with endometriosis - half using the assistance of a robot, half without it.

There was no difference in how much blood patients lost, and there were no complications in either group. But robotic surgeries took longer than non-robotic surgeries by about 40 minutes - 3 hours and 11 minutes compared to 2 hours and 29 minutes, on average. Longer surgeries often mean a more tired surgeon and more chances for things to go wrong.

The robot-surgeon team might not have outperformed the surgeon alone because the procedure was a relatively simple one.

Surgical robots do not operate on their own. Rather, surgeons move electronic instruments that are linked to the movement of other instruments inside the body, while they watch a three-dimensional image of what’s going on inside. One robot can cost around $1.5 million.

“We were surprised that (surgery with the robot) did not have better outcomes than (the surgeon alone), as we have always believed if you can see more and see better you can do more and do better,” the authors write.

However, they suggest that more complicated procedures for severe endometriosis, which might require open surgery, would benefit from the help of a robot.

Inexperienced doctors might also take advantage of the robot for surgery if they don’t think they have the skills to do the surgery with only a small cut, Dr. Nezhat said. In this case, the robot could turn what would have to be an open surgery into a simpler one.

Dr. Tommaso Falcone, chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Cleveland Clinic, said this study shows that more technology is not always better. Using a robot for basic surgery, like the kind studied here, would be like using a computer to do addition, he told Reuters Health.

“I just need a calculator to add a few things,” said Falcone, who was not involved in the study. “Yes it’s true that if I’ve got that supercomputer maybe it looks better. But all I need to do is add 5 and 5.”

Especially in a time of concern over rising medical costs, “we should not simply use the highly sophisticated technology just because it’s there,” Falcone said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The study seems fairly simple and perhaps a bit too small to draw any big conclusions. The story has a measured tone, though, and provides all of the necessary information for readers to judge for themselves whether a robotic surgery is a good buy. Note: originally we ruled this unsatisfactory but we missed the fact that the online story linked to the journal article.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are We Overselling The Sunshine Vitamin?

Dr. Cliff Rosen of Portland, Maine, knows a lot about vitamin D. It's necessary for strong bones, and Rosen is a leading bone specialist. So he was surprised recently when his wife's new physician thought she might be deficient in vitamin D.

"She's a runner. She's in great shape," Rosen says. "She drinks dairy. She gets a lot of sun exposure." Sun exposure is key for vitamin D, known as the sunshine vitamin. When skin is exposed to sun, it makes vitamin D.

Still, the doctor wanted to run a blood test to see if Rebecca Rosen had adequate vitamin D.

"So my wife said, 'Well, why do I need to have a vitamin D [test]?' And the physician said, 'Well, that's part of our measurement for wellness.' "

It's not just Rebecca's doctor, and it's not just in Portland, Maine. Increasingly, doctors all over the country are convinced that checking patients' vitamin D levels is as important as monitoring their cholesterol.

Medicare payments for vitamin D testing, at $40 a pop, nearly quadrupled between 2006 and 2008, to $129 million. A decade ago, Medicare payments were only about $1 million. The figures for 2009 and this year are bound to be higher.

"There's overwhelming evidence ... that increasing your vitamin D intake can make substantial improvement in your overall health and welfare," says Dr. Michael Holick of Boston University. "And there is no downside to increasing your vitamin D intake. As a result I think that most people are now getting on the bandwagon."

Holick is leading the band. Forty years ago, he discovered the active form of the vitamin, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. He has written several popular books on the subject and has another one, The Vitamin D Solution, coming out next month. Its cover calls vitamin D deficiency "our most common health problem."

"In my opinion, everybody should be taking either a vitamin D supplement, take a prescription that the doctor recommends," Holick says. "All adults should be taking at least 1,000 to 1,500 international units a day." Dietary intake, mainly through sources such as vitamin D-fortified dairy products and juice, may add up to 200 to 400 units a day.

Holick is convinced that if people boost their vitamin D levels, they'll be substantially less likely to develop not only osteoporosis but also many types of cancer, heart attack, diabetes (both types), autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer's, autism, even tuberculosis and the flu.

Not so fast, other experts say.

Dr. JoAnn Manson, chief of preventive medicine at Harvard-affiliated Brigham and Women's Hospital, points out that nearly all of the proliferating studies involving vitamin D are what scientists call "observational." That is, they compare people with high and low levels of vitamin D and correlate those levels with whether or not the person has a disease.

But these studies, she points out, are fraught with possible error. People with higher vitamin D levels may be healthier because they exercise more, have better diets, are out in the sun more. Those who are sick may have low levels because they don't have those healthy habits.

"We don't yet have the large-scale, randomized clinical trials showing benefits in terms of prevention of cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, hypertension, cognitive decline, depression, autoimmune disease," Manson says.

Manson and her colleagues are launching such a trial. The National Institutes of Health is devoting $22 million for a five-year study. Twenty-thousand people across the country will be randomly assigned to take daily doses of vitamin D, omega-3 fatty acid — also linked in many studies to lower levels of heart disease — together or alone. Others will be assigned to take inert placebo pills. Neither study subjects nor investigators will know until the end which regimen they are on.

'Promising But Not Yet Proven'

Manson says she thinks there is promising evidence that vitamin D supplements may protect against heart disease and perhaps some cancers. The evidence is strongest for colorectal cancer, she says. The fact that the government is funding the study is an indicator that the idea has traction.

Until those results are in, Manson advises patients and doctors to view vitamin D claims as "promising but not yet proven."

"We need to keep in mind the lessons of history," she says. "It was believed that megadoses of vitamin E, beta-carotene, selenium, folic acid and the B vitamins would confer a large array of health benefits. And in fact, the trials were very disappointing for all those nutrients."

In the case of beta-carotene, scientists were surprised to find that when the results of randomized trials were in, those taking the supplement actually had a higher risk of lung cancer.

Holick and others say there is little or no downside to ingesting even high levels of vitamin D.

"I've been treating patients with 50,000 units of vitamin D once a week for eight weeks followed by 50,00 every other week for over a decade, and I've not seen any untoward toxicity," Holick says.

He says he has seen dramatic results in patients he has treated with vitamin D supplements for disorders such as fibromyalgia, involving generalized muscular aches and pains, and multiple sclerosis. He is convinced that the vitamin D supplements lower patients' risk of cancer and heart disease, although he acknowledges that's harder to show.

How Much Is Enough?

Holick himself takes 3,000 international units of vitamin D every day.

Set by the National Institute of Medicine in 1997, the current recommended intake is 400 units a day for adults ages 50 to 70, and 200 units a day for younger adults. The American Academy of Pediatrics currently recommends 400 units a day for infants.

The recommendations may change soon. An Institute of Medicine panel is working on a vitamin D update, which may come out this summer. The panel may raise the Dietary Reference Intake, which has replaced the old Recommended Dietary Allowance. But the group is not expected to embrace the newer claims being made for vitamin D supplementation.

The Institute of Medicine panel has a difficult task. "We don't know exactly where to draw the line in terms of calling someone deficient in vitamin D," says Manson, who is a member of the committee, as is Rosen, the Maine bone specialist.

Meanwhile, an increasing number of patients are getting their vitamin D levels tested, and more are being told they need to take supplements.

"I've been surprised at the number of patients who are significantly vitamin D deficient," says Dr. Elizabeth Ross, a cardiologist in Washington, D.C., who has been testing patients routinely for the past year. "Whether or not we'll affect the incidence of cardiovascular disease or other diseases remains to be seen. But it appears to be a relatively benign intervention, and we may be benefiting people."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:  The story first presented the assertions of Dr. Holick that vitamin D supplementation had the capacity to prevent a wide range of conditions without substantiating his claim.  This was followed by a more balanced explanation about the limitations of observational studies which have yielded the suggestions about the possible multifaceted roles for vitamin D in maintaining health.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pediatricians Decide Boys Are Better Off Circumcised Than Not

The American Academy of Pediatrics on Monday announced its first major shift on circumcision in more than a decade, concluding that the health benefits of the procedure clearly outweigh any risks.

"There is clear evidence that supports the health benefits of circumcision," said Susan Blank, who led the 14-member task force that formulated the new policy being published in the journal Pediatrics.

The statement, and accompanying technical report, marks the first revision of the organization's position since 1999, when the academy backed away from circumcision. At that time, the group, which represents about 60,000 pediatricians nationwide, concluded that there was no clear evidence for or against circumcising newborns. The group affirmed that position in 2005.

Since then, the popularity of circumcision in the United States has declined. Only about 56 percent of newborn males are circumcised.

The academy's task force spent seven years combing through the latest research, analyzing more than a thousand studies. Their conclusion?

For starters, Blank says, circumcision helps baby boys pretty much immediately.

"The health benefits of male circumcision include a drop in the risk of urinary tract infection in the first year of life by up to 90 percent," she says.

But there's a much bigger reason to do it, Blank said. Circumcised males are far less likely to get infected with a long list of sexually transmitted diseases.

"It drops the risk of heterosexual HIV acquisition by about 60 percent. It drops the risk of human papillomavirus [HPV], herpes virus and other infectious genital ulcers," she says.

It also reduces the chances that men will spread HPV to their wives and girlfriends, protecting them from getting cervical cancer.

"We've reviewed the data and, you know, we have gone through them with a fine-tooth comb, and the data are pretty convincing," she says.

Critics, however, were not convinced. They liken the procedure to female genital mutilation.

"We have no right as parents or as physicians or adults to strap them down and chop off a normal part of their body. To do that is a human rights violation and an ethical travesty," says Georgeanne Chapin of the anti-circumcision group Intact America.

Chapin and other critics argue that the scientific evidence is questionable. For one thing, the studies about HIV have only been done in Africa, where AIDS is much more common among heterosexuals.

"They're cherry-picking their evidence," she says. "They act as though there's this huge body of literature. It's all the same couple of studies that have been regurgitated and reprogrammed. Over the past 150 years, all kinds of medical benefits have been proposed as resulting from cutting off the foreskin, and they have all been disproven."

Critics also question the safety of the procedure, saying too many boys are damaged for life by botched circumcisions.

But many experts say the academy is making the right call. They dismiss any comparison to female genital mutilation as grossly misleading and say male circumcision is about as safe as any procedure could be.

Some think the academy's position is long overdue, and that the group should have gone even further and more forcefully recommended circumcision.

"I think that all healthy newborn babies should be circumcised," says Edgar Schoen, a professor emeritus at the University of California, San Francisco. "I feel about newborn circumcision the way I do about immunization: It's a potent preventive health procedure that gives you a health advantage."

For its part, the pediatricians group hopes the new recommendations will encourage more parents to circumcise their sons — and more insurance plans to pay for it. As Shots reported last week, a lot of state Medicaid programs have stopped covering circumcision.

"Those families who choose circumcision should have access to circumcision. Cost should not be a barrier," Blank says.

The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been promising for years now to issue the government's first guidelines about circumcision. But the CDC keeps delaying it and still has not said when that will happen.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story attempted to discuss some of the limitations of the evidence by citing the HIV health benefit was mainly based on evidence from Africa. But the story was short on the specifics of the research methods other than noting, the task force, “….analyzed more than a thousand studies.”  Nonetheless, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Even though her mammogram showed no sign of cancer, Sandra Litt knew she could feel a lump. She had a second mammogram. Nothing there, the radiologist assured her. "Then one night, I found the 'nothing there' had grown bigger," Litt said. Her self-exam had proved accurate. Two years ago, Litt underwent a double mastectomy and months of chemotherapy to survive an aggressive breast cancer. It defies common sense, she says, for scientists to conclude that breast self-exams do women more harm than good. "It's a very important tool," the 67-year-old Portland woman says. "Why throw away an important tool?" A scientific review, published in August by the

, highlighted the downside of doing breast self-exams: Women taught to perform the monthly ritual wind up having unnecessary biopsies. They are about twice as likely to undergo biopsies that won't find cancerous tumors, according to two studies tracking hundreds of thousands of women in China and Russia. Conflicting news coverage has heightened the confusion. "Breast self-exam has no benefit," one headline proclaimed. "Breast self-exam key in catching what mammogram may miss," another said. What is clear is that studies don't supply an answer that fits all women.

Dr. Elizabeth Steiner, director of the breast health education program at

, said each woman must decide for herself, with full knowledge of the pros and cons, whether to perform self-exams. And there's not a right or wrong answer. Some may do the exams and accept the risk of unnecessary biopsies, she said. Others may decide that either they can't commit the time to do them right, or that the potential for false alarms and anxiety isn't worth it. "That's a very personal decision," Steiner said.

When doctors began promoting breast self-exams in the 1950s, the benefits seemed obvious. Here was a simple, inexpensive do-it-yourself way for women to find tumors before it was too late. During the women's health movement of the 1970s, the self-exam gained importance as a means for women to take charge and rely less on a paternalistic health system. But researchers have learned that self-exams aren't at all simple. The technique is complicated and difficult to learn to do well. Guidelines on how to do them correctly have evolved, leaving many women and doctors with outdated ideas. Further, decades of research still have not produced good evidence that self-exams make any difference in breast cancer survival. "Not only do the trials not find a benefit, the trials demonstrate harm in terms of increased physician visits and benign breast biopsies," said Dr. Nancy Baxter, a University of Toronto surgeon who reviewed the evidence on self-exams for the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. She said self-exams may not reveal tumors early enough to improve survival. "By the time a breast cancer is large enough to be detected by self-exam, tumor biology is the most important predictor of outcome, not finding a tumor a few months before it would have become apparent," she said. Given the lack of evidence, the

considers the exams unproven. And the

has recommended against routine teaching of breast self-exams since 2001. Unnecessary biopsies may not be the only hidden cost. "One danger of pushing breast self-exams on patients is that they may be falsely reassured by it and opt out of their mammograms," said Dr. Heidi Nelson, medical director of the

in Portland. She stopped routinely teaching self-exams to patients after the large trials in China and Russia showed no benefit.

Some evidence does suggest that self-exams done properly could make a difference. For instance, they provide a means to search for tumors in outer parts of the breast where mammography may not reach. About half of breast cancers develop in the upper-outer quadrant of the breast, which is largely inaccessible to mammography scanners. A small study in Canada in 1997 found that self-exams seemed to improve survival among a subset of women using proper technique. The preferred method, known as the vertical strip, three-pressure test, has proved the most sensitive and least likely to produce false alarms, Steiner said. In the largest and most influential study to date, involving 266,000 women in Shanghai, Steiner said researchers taught an inferior method of exams. She said that could partly explain why the Shanghai study failed to find improved survival. Self-exams also appeal strongly to some younger women, whose main screening test is a manual exam done by a doctor or nurse. Mammography is considered inappropriate for women younger than 40, and many doctors don't recommend it until age 50. If a woman decides to do self-exams, Steiner said, it's important to learn to do them right -- and do them every month without fail. "Done haphazardly and irregularly, it is probably worse than no breast self-exam at all," Steiner said. She encourages women to schedule an appointment devoted to learning the technique, which should take at least a half-hour. A few minutes squeezed into a routine annual exam aren't enough, she said. Steiner said not all doctors are up to speed on breast exam technique, which calls for lying down, not taking a few minutes standing in the shower -- the form pushed for years by physicians and even anti-breast cancer groups. "It's important to ask, 'Do you feel confident in your own technique and training me how to do it?'" she said. Nelson cautions women not to skip their mammograms if they don't find lumps during self-exams. But finding a lump also is no reason to panic, given the limited accuracy of the self-test. Litt, the breast cancer survivor, has another piece of advice: "Do not ignore your own judgment; and be assertive," she said. "You don't get a do-over."

What to make of breast cancer's "1-in-8" statistic.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story presents a balanced discussion of the pros and cons of BSE, including a solid discussion of the Cochrane review and subsequent changes to screening guidelines in the U.S. and other countries as a result of the findings of this and other published meta-analyses.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Dupixent (dupilumab) injection to treat adults with moderate-to-severe eczema (atopic dermatitis). Dupixent is intended for patients whose eczema is not controlled adequately by topical therapies, or those for whom topical therapies are not advisable. Dupixent can be used with or without topical corticosteroids.

“FDA’s approval of Dupixent demonstrates our commitment to approving new and innovative therapies for patients with skin disease,” said Julie Beitz, M.D., director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “Eczema can cause significant skin irritation and discomfort for patients, so it is important to have a variety of treatment options available to patients, including those patients whose disease is not controlled by topical therapies.”

Atopic dermatitis, a chronic inflammatory skin disease, is often referred to as “eczema,” which is a general term for several types of inflammation of the skin. Atopic dermatitis is the most common of the many types of eczema; onset typically begins in childhood and can last through adulthood. The cause of atopic dermatitis is a combination of genetic, immune and environmental factors. In atopic dermatitis, the skin develops red, scaly and crusted bumps, which are extremely itchy. Scratching leads to swelling, cracking, “weeping” clear fluid, and finally, coarsening and thickening of the skin.

Dupixent is administered as an injection under the skin. Dupixent’s active ingredient is an antibody (dupilumab) that binds to a protein [interleukin-4 (IL-4) receptor alpha subunit (IL-4R )], that causes inflammation. By binding to this protein, Dupixent is able to inhibit the inflammatory response that plays a role in the development of atopic dermatitis.

The safety and efficacy of Dupixent were established in three placebo-controlled clinical trials with a total of 2,119 adult participants with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis not adequately controlled by topical medication(s). Overall, participants who received Dupixent achieved greater response, defined as clear or almost clear skin, and experienced a reduction in itch after 16 weeks of treatment.

Dupixent can cause side effects such as serious allergic reactions and eye problems, such as pink eye (conjunctivitis) and inflammation of the cornea (keratitis). If patients experience new or worsening eye symptoms such as redness, itching, pain or visual changes, they should consult a health care provider. The most common side effects include injection site reactions; cold sores in the mouth or on the lips; and eye and eyelid inflammation, including redness, swelling and itching.

The safety and efficacy of Dupixent have not been established in the treatment of asthma. Patients who also have asthma should not adjust or stop their asthma treatment without talking to their physicians.

The FDA granted the application for Dupixent Priority Review and Breakthrough Therapy designation.

The FDA granted the approval of Dupixent to Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The Agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release describes who was studied and for how long, and offers a bare-bones description of the types of studies: “The safety and efficacy of Dupixent were established in three placebo-controlled clinical trials with a total of 2,119 adult participants with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis not adequately controlled by topical medication(s).”
The FDA doesn’t provide a link to the studies or their titles and where they were published. The release would be more complete had that information been included. It would help journalists and people with eczema and would be a significant improvement to FDA releases.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Breast-feeding a premature infant may help reduce the risk of a serious eye problem known as retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), new research suggests.

The researchers said that when babies were exclusively fed breast milk, the risk of any-stage ROP appeared to drop by about 75 percent. And the risk of severe ROP seemed to be reduced by 90 percent, the researchers added.

"Human milk feeding potentially plays a strong role in protecting very preterm newborns from any-stage ROP and severe ROP," the international team of study authors wrote.

Retinopathy of prematurity causes blood vessels to grow in the retina, the light-sensitive tissue in the back of the eye. When the vessels grow, they can cause the retina to detach, destroying vision, according to the U.S. National Eye Institute.

For the study, researchers from China, Canada and the United Kingdom reanalyzed the results of five published studies on ROP. The studies included more than 2,200 preterm infants, comparing how often babies had been fed human milk or formula, and whether or not they developed ROP.

However, the new analysis only showed an association between breast milk and a reduced risk of ROP. It did not prove a cause-and-effect relationship due to the study's design.

Results of the study were published online Nov. 16 in Pediatrics.

Extremely preterm babies are most at risk of ROP. In the United States, 59 percent of babies born at 22 to 28 weeks have the disorder, said study researcher Dr. Chao Chen, a neonatologist at Children's Hospital of Fudan University, in Shanghai. He added that in China, a previous study showed the incidence of ROP was 50 percent in infants with a birth weight under 1,000 grams (2.2 pounds).

ROP "has become a leading cause of childhood blindness in recent time," Chen said. "In general, there are more ROP cases in developed countries, but more severe cases and higher rates of blindness in developing countries."

The greater incidence of ROP is likely due to the increasing survival rate of very preterm babies in developed countries, according to Chen. In developing countries, preterm babies are less likely to survive. When they do, the screening and treatments are not as good, Chen said, so blindness may be more likely.

Babies in the studies had a range of gestational ages, from 26 to about 30 weeks. Their weights ranged from about 1.7 pounds to about 3 pounds. No information was given about how long the breast-feeding continued.

In re-evaluating the studies, Chen's team found that breast-feeding in any amount appeared to reduce the risk of ROP. And it appeared that the more breast milk, the better. Exclusive breast-feeding seemed to drop the odds of ROP by 75 percent compared to exclusive formula use. And any breast-feeding appeared to reduce the odds of the serious eye disease by 46 percent, the research showed.

How might human milk offer protection from the eye disorder? The antioxidants in human milk may help, Chen said. Human milk also has immune-protective properties, the researchers said. Breast-feeding also seems to help prevent two conditions known as sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis that may require oxygen therapy, which has also been linked to a higher risk of ROP, the study authors said.

Dr. Adolfo Llanos, a neonatologist at Nicklaus Children's Hospital in Miami, who was not involved with the new study, said the "quality of this analysis is very good. It's reassuring to see the benefit we see with breast milk."

He said breast milk may help by reducing inflammation in the body. "Preemies don't regulate inflammation in their bodies well," he said.

Llanos cautioned that the study looked only at a mother's own breast milk, not donor milk, which can be used when the biological mother doesn't have enough of her own breast milk.

The takeaway from this study, Llanos said, is to breast-feed as long as possible, if possible.

To learn more about breast-feeding, visit American Academy of Pediatrics.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Sometimes statisticians sound like broken records with their “correlation is not causation” warnings. The article is one step ahead in this case. We find the following sentences that would make every statistician proud:
However, the new analysis only showed an association between breast milk and a reduced risk of ROP. It did not prove a cause-and-effect relationship due to the study’s design.
Also, the article shows a good grasp of the evidence quality by reporting some of the limitations of the study, including the limitation that the study looked only at a mother’s own breast milk, not donor milk.
The story safely clears our bar here, but it could have done even better to avoid phrases such as this one: “Breast-feeding a premature infant may help reduce the risk of a serious eye problem known as retinopathy of prematurity.” The active verb “help reduce” suggests a cause-and-effect relationship that, as the story tells us, is not appropriate to imply with a study such as this one.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 7, 2009 (HealthDay News) -- Diabetes, heart attacks and other cardiovascular problems appear to be more common in men with prostate cancer who are treated with androgen deprivation therapy, which reduces or eliminates the male sex hormones that can promote cancer growth, a new study has found.

The finding indicates that androgen therapy is overused because its benefits have not been shown to outweigh its dangers in many cases, said Dr. Nancy L. Keating, associate professor of medicine and public health at Harvard Medical School and lead author of a report on the study published online Dec. 7 in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

"There are areas where hormone deprivation therapy has been shown to have a clear benefit," Keating said. "We're not suggesting that men who need hormone deprivation therapy should not have it. But lots of men get the therapy where it has not been shown to have a benefit."

One example is so-called PSA-recurrent cancer. Hormone deprivation therapy is started, Keating said, when levels of cancer-associated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) increase after surgery or radiation therapy, but there are no other indicators of danger.

"There has never been a trial showing an overall benefit in such cases," she said. "When you can have potentially serious adverse effects, you want to show caution."

Similarly, Keating said, no trial has shown an overall benefit for androgen deprivation therapy in cases where "watchful waiting" is chosen rather than radiation therapy or surgery for prostate cancer, Keating said.

"One third of men over 65 who don't have surgery or radiation get this therapy," she said. "Yet its effects have never been studied in a controlled trial."

Previous studies have shown potential dangers related to androgen deprivation therapy in older men, Keating said. The study she led looked at its effects on about 37,000 men treated for prostate cancer at Veterans Affairs hospitals.

Surgical removal of the testes was associated with a 40 percent increased risk for heart disease and a more than doubled risk for heart attack. Use of multiple hormone-blocking agents was associated with a 27 percent increased risk for heart disease.

The greatest risk was found for drugs that target gonadotropin-releasing hormone: 159.4 cases of diabetes per 1,000 person-years, compared with 87.5 for men who did not have androgen deprivation therapy, as well as a 35 percent increased risk for sudden cardiac death, a comparable increase in heart attack risk and a 22 percent increased risk for stroke.

Observational studies, which include all people with a condition, can never conclusively prove cause and effect, Keating acknowledged, because "the thing we can't account for is whether people who are on a treatment are different from those who aren't." But detailed evidence about the potential dangers of androgen deprivation therapy has not emerged from the more rigorous controlled trials that have been done "because they have looked only at cardiovascular deaths, and most patients who have heart attacks do not die of those heart attacks," she said.

Dr. Peter Albertsen, a professor and chief of urology at the University of Connecticut Health Center, said that "the point of this paper is to help physicians understand that long-term use of this therapy carries consequences." Albertsen wrote an accompanying editorial in the journal.

Anti-hormone therapy was developed to treat the pain and other problems of advanced prostate cancer, Albertsen said, and so it was generally used for only three to five years.

"Now, many more men are being started on androgen deprivation therapy long before there are any symptoms of prostate cancer so they may be on it for up to 15 years," he said. "We are beginning to realize that there can be significant problems in terms of cardiovascular risk. So the lesson is that if you start the therapy early, you should be sure that there is increased survival because there is a downside."

Dr. Eric A. Klein, chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Glickman Urological and Kidney Institute, said that the study "is confirmatory of a lot of other, smaller studies.

"There is a growing realization that we cannot use androgen deprivation therapy in a haphazard fashion," Klein said. "It does save lives or delay progression for men with metastatic prostate cancer so the trade-offs there are reasonable. But in many other cases, the downside probably exceeds the benefit."

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Big A grade on this one.  The story mentioned that the study reported on was an observational study and explained that this meant that it could not demonstrate cause and effect. Oh, how we wish we’d see this more often! 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers at Johns Hopkins Medicine have identified in live human brains new radioactive "tracer" molecules that bind to and "light up" tau tangles, a protein associated with a number of neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease and other related dementias. Two studies will be published back-to-back in the December issue of Journal of Nuclear Medicine--one as featured article of the month--describing testing of three candidate molecules in patients with Alzheimer's disease, as well as the use of one molecule to measure the accumulation of tau proteins.

"One of the greatest public health challenges is Alzheimer's disease, for which there currently is no cure and no definitive diagnostic until autopsy," says Dean Wong, M.D., Ph.D., professor of radiology and radiological sciences, psychiatry and behavioral sciences, neurology and neuroscience, and director of the Section of High Resolution Brain PET Imaging, Division of Nuclear Medicine at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. "We have been working hard to identify new radiopharmaceuticals that can help speed the discoveries of diagnostics and treatments for these devastating neurodegenerative disorders."

Alzheimer's disease is characterized in the brain by the appearance of two abnormal protein structures: amyloid plaques and tangled fibers made up of a protein called tau. One of the biggest challenges in studying Alzheimer's disease thus far, according to Wong, is the inability to watch these so-called neurofibrillary tangles develop in real time.

As part of a longer term project funded by F. Hoffman-La Roche, the team previously tested a collection of approximately 550 potential tracer molecules and identified six promising tracers, eventually narrowing them down to three to be made and tested as candidate Tau PET radiopharmaceuticals. These three most promising tracers were previously tested in nonhuman primates, and the results looked promising enough to test in people.

The researchers recruited a total of 12 patients with Alzheimer's disease, seven younger healthy controls (ages 25-38 years old) and five older healthy controls (age 50 or older) for brain-only PET scans. An additional six older healthy controls were recruited for full-body scanning. The study was divided into three parts. In the first part, each person was injected with two of the three randomly designated tracers (on separate visits) prior to receiving a brain PET scan with subsequent evaluation to determine which molecule performed best. In the second part of the study, researchers tested the optimal tracer, called F-18 RO948, with additional brain imaging in five patients with Alzheimer's and five older controls, with follow-up of previously seen patients to evaluate the potential progression of tau protein tangling after an average span of approximately 16 months.

The third part of the study examined six older controls undergoing whole-body scanning. In total, the researchers looked at 80 different regions in the brain to evaluate how well the tracers were taken up by the brain, how well they penetrated through the tissue and how specifically they bound to the tau protein rather than just sticking indiscriminately to anything. Regions of the brain that typically contain accumulated tau protein include the temporal lobe, parietal lobe and occipital lobe, among others; grey matter in the cerebellum is thought to contain low or no tau in patients with Alzheimer's. They found that healthy brains retained little to no tracer, whereas the brains of those with Alzheimer's showed tau to be in regions of the brain consistent with previously reported postmortem data on filamentous tangles.

In the second paper, the team examined the detailed quantification of tau binding via F-18 RO948 in 11 patients with Alzheimer's disease, five young cognitively normal controls and five older cognitively normal controls. They verified that detailed quantification of the tested and retested tracer in those five patients with Alzheimer's and five older controls generated good and reproducible results. According to Wong, this body of work reveals that, as compared with the currently used Tau tracer, F-18 AV1451, the new tracer, F-18 RO948, does not bind randomly to other tissue, offering greater clarity into quantification of potential tau burden within the human brain.

"It really takes a village to make progress in biomedical research, and this project was no exception, with the involvement of the PET team at Hopkins, a CRO who helped recruit healthy subjects, colleagues in psychiatry and behavioral sciences, colleagues at the National Institute of Aging and neuroscience imaging experts at Roche," says Wong. "This is a true example of cross-disciplinary collaboration, and I'm honored to have such great collaborators."

This study was made available online in May 2018 ahead of peer-review and publication. It was published in the December 2018 issue of the journal.

Authors of the first Journal of Nuclear Medicine featured paper "Characterization of 3 Novel Tau Radiopharmaceuticals, 11C-RO-963, 11C-RO-643, and 18F-RO-948, in Healthy Controls and in Alzheimer Subjects" include Dean F. Wong, Hiroto Kuwabara, Paul B. Rosenberg, Esther Oh , Constantine G. Lyketsos, Noble George, Lorena Gapasin, Kelly Kitzmiller, Josh Roberts, Ayon Nandi, James Brasic, Chakradhar Mishra, Abhay Moghekar, Anil Mathur, Marilyn Albert and Robert F. Dannals of The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert A. Comley, Susanne Ostrowitzki, Cristina Vozzi, Frank Boess, Michael Honer, Luca Gobbi, Gregory Klein, Jeff Sevigny and Edilio Borroni, Pharma Research and Early Development, Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland; and Susan M. Resnick and Madhav Thambisetty, Lab of Behavior and Neuroscience, NIH's National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland.

This study was funded by an F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. contract to The Johns Hopkins University. Susan Resnick and Madhav Thambisetty are employees of the NIH, National Institute on Aging.

The authors report no other relevant potential conflict of interest.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of describing the work and the design of the studies covered by the two journal articles. The release also provides background context for the studies, which is useful.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Dec. 27, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Heart failure patients have weakened hearts, but researchers say an experimental drug used for the first time in humans may repair heart cells and improve heart function.

According to the results of a small phase 1 trial, a single intravenous infusion of the drug cimaglermin was safe and, at high doses, improved heart function for at least three months.

"Right now we have many therapies that we use for heart failure, and these patients [in the study] were on all of those therapies and still had significant heart dysfunction," said lead researcher Dr. Daniel Lenihan. He's a professor of medicine and director of Vanderbilt University's heart clinical research program in Nashville.

People with heart failure often take a combination of drugs, Lenihan said. These include medications to lower blood pressure and diuretics to help remove excess fluid that builds up as a result of the heart's labored pumping ability. In addition, some people have implanted defibrillators or pacemakers.

Even with all these options, the death rate among these patients is "unacceptably high," Lenihan said.

Heart failure, a condition where the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs, is among the leading causes of death worldwide. A significant number of heart failure patients don't respond well to current treatments, particularly those patients whose left lower heart chamber, which pumps blood into the arteries, is weak, Lenihan said.

Cimaglermin acts as a growth factor for the heart, helping it repair itself following injury, Lenihan said. Specifically, it binds to the HER2 and HER4 receptors on the surface of heart cells that are important for cellular repair and survival, he explained.

Researchers have tried using stem cells to repair heart muscle in much the same way, he said, but these efforts have not been effective. "You don't see any sustained effect," he added.

A phase 1 trial like this one is designed to see if a new drug is safe, not to test its effectiveness. Before cimaglermin could be used to treat patients, it must prove its worth in a series of progressively larger and challenging trials and then be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The process can take several years. Based on these preliminary findings, larger trials are being planned, Lenihan said.

"This drug, although still in an experimental phase, might be an important way to improve heart function in patients with heart failure," he said.

For the study, Lenihan and his colleagues randomly assigned 40 patients to get an infusion of cimaglermin or a placebo.

Compared with patients who received a placebo, patients given a high dose of cimaglermin had a sustained increase in the heart's ability to pump blood. The improvement lasted 90 days, with the maximum increase in heart function reached in 28 days, the researchers found.

The most common side effects were headache and nausea directly after receiving the drug. One patient who received the highest dose of cimaglermin developed abnormal liver function, which cleared up over a two-week period, Lenihan said.

The study was funded by Acorda Therapeutics, the maker of cimaglermin, and the report was published online Dec. 26 in the journal JACC: Basic to Translational Science.

Dr. Nanette Bishopric is a professor of medicine at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine and the author of an accompanying journal editorial. "There haven't been breakthrough treatments for heart failure for a long time," she said.

Cimaglermin, however, may be such a drug, she said. "It's a remarkable thing that you could give a drug once and have it affect heart function three months later -- it's really extraordinary," she said.

Every drug currently used to treat heart failure has to be given daily or several times a day to get it to work, Bishopric said. "And when you stop taking it, it stops working," she said.

Despite the encouraging results of this first trial, a lot more testing will be needed before cimaglermin can be considered a standard treatment for heart failure, Bishopric said.

"These findings need to be replicated in larger trials, and you have to be able to predict whether improved heart function from cimaglermin will help people live longer and feel better," she noted.

For more on heart failure, visit the American Heart Association.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a strong point of the story: It clearly establishes that this was a small phase one randomized controlled trial, and the story explains what that means for the drug’s development.
A phase 1 trial like this one is designed to see if a new drug is safe, not to test its effectiveness. Before cimaglermin could be used to treat patients, it must prove its worth in a series of progressively larger and challenging trials and then be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The process can take several years. Based on these preliminary findings, larger trials are being planned, Lenihan said.
But, as noted in quantify benefits criterion above, readers might be confused by why so much of the story focused on the drug’s effectiveness, if this preliminary study wasn’t designed to test that.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There may be a seed of truth amidst the many health claims for pomegranate juice, researchers from Israel said Thursday, at least for kidney patients on dialysis.

They found that such patients who gulped a few cups of the tart liquid every week lowered their chances of infections, the second-leading killer of the more than 350,000 Americans on dialysis.

The findings were presented at the American Society of Nephrology’s meeting in Denver — aka Renal Week — and have not yet been vetted by independent experts.

“It’s a very intriguing study,” said Dr. Frank Brosius, who heads the nephrology division at the University of Michigan Health System and was not involved in the research.

“I certainly don’t know of anything else that would have such a profound effect,” he told Reuters Health, cautioning at the same time that the study needed to be replicated by other centers.

The results come in the wake of a U.S. crackdown on allegedly false advertising by POM Wonderful, which claims its pomegranate products can help everything from heart disease to prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction.

The Israeli researchers, led by Dr. Batya Kristal of Western Galilee Hospital in Nahariya, did not use POM juice, but a brand sold by Naturafood.

In lab tests, Kristal told Reuters Health, that brand ranked highest in polyphenol antioxidants, which can reduce cell damage caused by so-called free radicals.

Antioxidants are found in different levels in fruits and vegetables, such as blueberries or broccoli.

“Pomegranate juice was shown in the last three years to contain the highest levels of polyphenols among a variety of products,” Kristal said. “Much higher than red wine, for instance.”

The researchers figured an antioxidant-rich diet might help patients with kidney failure, because the level of free radicals in their blood increases as the blood circulates through the dialysis device. That, in turn, may rev up inflammation in their tissues.

In the study, funded by the Israeli Ministry of Health, 101 patients were randomly assigned to either a concoction without pomegranate juice, or the real thing.

After downing about half a cup three times a week over a year, those who drank the real thing had a reduction of inflammatory molecules in their blood.

They also made fewer trips to the hospital.

“We found significant reductions in hospitalization due to infections, with more than 40 percent reduction in the first hospitalization and 80 percent in the second,” said Kristal.

However, the researchers were only able to rule out chance as the cause of the reduction in the second visit to the hospital.

According to the findings, among 50 patients drinking pomegranate juice for a year, about two would have to go to the hospital at least twice. By comparison, that number would be nearly 11 in patients not drinking the juice.

The researchers say they don’t know if their results extend to other brands as well, and suggest squeezing your own juice. A 16-oz bottle of POM Wonderful sells for about $4.

She said her team had found no side effects, but added that kidney patients should be aware of the high potassium content in the juice, given the delicate balance of nutrients in their blood, and talk to their doctor if they consider drinking it.

Brosius was skeptical of the benefits, although he said the juice was unlikely to cause harm.

“I would prefer to see this validated at other centers before we come out and say this is the thing to do,” he said. Even if the findings hold up, he said, it is still unclear what accounts for them. “Who the heck knows what the active ingredients are?”

Marion Nestle, a nutrition expert at New York University, said the effects might not be unique to pomegranate juice.

“This study does not demonstrate anything special about pomegranate juice,” she told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “The effects of juice were compared to a placebo, not to any other kind of juice that might have exactly the same effect.”

“The pomegranate people are spending millions to prove what I could have told them in the first place,” she added. “Pomegranate juices — like most if not all fruit and vegetable juices — have antioxidant activity. Does this make pomegranates better than any other fruit? Investigators have yet to show this.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Strong evaluation of the evidence, including several caveats and perspectives of skeptical independent experts.
The story also emphasized:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, June 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- There's too little evidence to say definitively whether treating early, localized prostate cancer with radiation is a better option than "watchful waiting," new research finds.

In a study funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), researchers from Tufts University reviewed the available literature on radiation and prostate cancer, including 10 randomized controlled trials and 65 observational studies.

They concluded there was "insufficient evidence" to say with certainty whether radiation treatment compared to watchful waiting is more likely to save lives.

"We just don't have sufficient information to say much of anything," said Dr. Stanley Ip, an assistant professor of medicine at Tufts University Medical Center.

In part, that's because researchers found no randomized controlled trials -- considered the gold standard of research -- that compared radiation therapy with watching waiting, Ip said. Though there were observational studies, those may be biased because men who opt to hold off on treatment may be those whose tumors are lower risk to begin with, he said.

The study is published in the June 6 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine.

Watchful waiting -- which does not involve cancer treatment -- means having regular exams while keeping an eye on the tumor to see if it grows or spreads. It is usually recommended when doctors feel someone's advanced age will allow them to outlive the generally slow-moving cancer or when someone has other conditions that are more likely to prove lethal.

Men who are diagnosed with early prostate cancer -- meaning it's confined to the prostate gland and has not spread -- are confronted with a bewildering array of options for treating it: surgery; radiation; drugs to deprive the tumor of the hormone androgen that may drive its growth; or watchful waiting.

In 2008, AHRQ also commissioned a review of studies on other prostate cancer treatment options, but that report could not draw conclusions on the best approach either.

"What all of these analyses have found is there is very limited data that allows us to determine which of these approaches in the best approach," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate cancer for the American Cancer Society.

Brooks said more comparative effectiveness research, which compares different kinds of treatments, is needed.

In the meantime, what are men diagnosed with early prostate cancer to do?

Men and their doctors need to consider what the tumor looks like under the microscope, which can help gauge how aggressive it may be. They should also consider age and overall health status, including whether or not the patient has other conditions more likely to cause death than the prostate cancer.

Finally, patients and their doctors should weight the potential debilitating side effects of the treatments, such as incontinence and erectile dysfunction, against how comfortable the man is with holding off on treatment, experts say.

"Men need to learn as much as they can about the possible outcomes and benefits of the various treatments and the potential side effects, and choose which direction they are most comfortable with," Brooks said.

In the current review, researchers found several trials that compared different doses of radiation and different types of radiation therapy, including external beam radiation therapy, in which a radiation is delivered through a beam through the skin, or brachytherapy, in which radioactive isotopes are delivered via injection into the prostate.

For those methods, too, there was too little research to say with confidence which method was superior in preventing deaths from prostate cancer, the researchers said. Retrospective studies, however, found that radiation treatments were associated with increased urinary or bowel problems, compared with no treatment or no initial treatment.

There was also "moderate strength evidence" that a higher external beam radiation was more effective than a lower dose.

Taken together, the review "does point out that based on current evidence, doctors should not be telling their patients that this form of radiation is better than that form," Brooks said. "Some of the distinctions being made are not really supported by the evidence."

Proton beam therapy in particular is expensive, but according to this report, there isn't enough evidence to show it's any better than other option.

Radiation, he noted, may be the best option for men whose tumors have spread outside the gland, since simply removing the prostate gland surgically is not likely to be as effective, he said.

The American Cancer Society estimates that in 2009, approximately 192,000 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer and approximately 27,000 men died of the disease.

The National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story made it clear that it was based on a systematic review of the literature.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After decades of dreaming about getting patients' immune systems to fight cancer, immunotherapy is finally here. The Food and Drug Administration approved Provenge this spring to treat advanced prostate cancer.

But now the study that led to FDA approval is finally out in this week's New England Journal of Medicine. And it's clear that experts are still scratching their heads about just how Provenge works.

It does work, sort of.

In the study, men with prostate cancer that no longer responds to hormone therapy (basically, chemical castration) lived about four months longer if they took Provenge than if they got placebo treatment. That's better than the only other approved treatment for such advanced cancers.

But, as the study's lead author Dr. Philip Kantoff acknowledges, "It's not a home run; this is not going to cure prostate cancer."

The primary mystery is how Provenge extends life, since it doesn't shrink prostate tumors, as far as anyone can tell. "Prolongation of survival without a measurable antitumor effect is surprising," writes Dr. Dan Longo of the National Institute on Aging in a NEJM editorial.

Deep in the data is further mystery.

Provenge is supposed to work by, in effect, vaccinating patients against their own cancers using a patient's own white blood cells.

The theory is that the custom-made vaccine incites patients' immune cells to attack the cancer. The study shows that patients who got Provenge were indeed more likely to mount immune-cell responses to a prostate cancer antigen in the test tube. But oddly, the patients who had these activated immune cells didn't survive any longer than those who didn't.

The other side of the immune system – the antibody arm -- showed a different picture. Patients who had a good antibody response to Provenge lived longer than those who didn't.

Nobody yet knows just how to explain these results. Longo, the NEJM editorialist, says he'd be more convinced if the placebo patients had received infusions of white blood cells that had been exposed just to the general immune-stimulating part of the Provenge treatment, without the prostate antigen part.

The way the study was done, he says, "does not allow one to conclude" that Provenge is working because it mobilizes the immune system specifically against prostate cancer.

But, after all, Provenge is just the first cancer immunotherapy on the market. So it's not surprising there's a lot to be learned, and that it's pretty pricey.

Other immunotherapy approaches are in the pipeline, along with fancier versions of drugs to block the hormones that feed prostate cancer.

Meanwhile, Dendreon, the Seattle-based company that makes Provenge, says there's a waiting list for the drug. The company estimates 100,000 American men have the kind of hormone-resistant, metastatic cancer the drug is approved to treat. But the company can only make enough at this point for 2,000 patients in the first year.

So does the waiting list contain thousands of men? Tens of thousands? "Can't say," replies Dendreon COO Hans Bishop.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Excellent, understandable evaluation of the evidence.  Thorough.  Raises many important questions we haven’t seen in other stories. There are many angles one could take with the Provenge story.  For example, ABC News chose a cost angle (but in so doing, still injected a glowing personal anecdote, something the NPR story thankfully didn’t.)  Both of these angles are important.  But the cost angle is low-hanging fruit – an easy target.  Evaluating the evidence, as NPR did in this tight little story, can be difficult but is really important.  Big props! 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Biesecker acknowledged that there was no guarantee of success. He and his colleagues know the gene mutation in the Del Sontro family must be rare. Otherwise, lots of people would have early heart disease but no obvious risk factors. To keep the focus on truly rare mutations, the researchers are excluding those that are present in both members of the Del Sontro family and 3 percent or more of the other study participants. That strategy alone, Dr. Biesecker said, has eliminated the vast majority of candidate genes.

The researchers are now searching for culprits among genes that remain — a search that could take years. Or the change might be in a poorly understood region of DNA that controls genes rather than in a gene itself. Researchers’ ignorance of these control regions and what many of them do might doom the effort. So the researchers are hoping the Del Sontro family’s heart disease is caused by a mutated gene.

“Our main job is to find the gene,” Dr. Biesecker said.

Still, Mr. Del Sontro is preparing for the worst. He has life insurance and long-term care insurance.

“I keep waiting for the day when I have shortness of breath,” he said.

When his heart disease was first diagnosed four and a half years ago, Mr. Del Sontro, now 50, told his cardiologist he wanted to run one more Bay to Breakers race, a century-old 12-kilometer race in San Francisco. His doctor told him absolutely not, saying, “You are the kind of guy we will read about who dies during the race of a massive heart attack.” Mr. Del Sontro could still exercise, his cardiologist said, but no more than 45 minutes a day.

Mr. Del Sontro is all too aware that the cause of his heart disease is a mystery, but he worries that if he fails to eat right and exercise he might make his illness even worse.

So he left for the gym before dawn on a recent chilly morning. He lifted weights, using dumbbells and bars, moving quickly from exercise to exercise. Forty-five minutes later, sweating, he was done.

His disease casts a dark shadow, not just on him, but on his entire family. At dinner one recent evening at their yellow brick townhouse in the Georgetown neighborhood in Washington, his wife, Pura, admitted to worrying, but said, “We don’t talk about it a lot.” She served Indian takeout — saffron rice, tandoori chicken, eggplant. Tall, slender and elegant in skinny jeans and a long beige sweater, she ate sparingly and drank a Coke Zero. Mr. Del Sontro drank only water and took small portions.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story introduces some notes of caution, acknowledging that this is very complicated research and that there is “no guarantee of success.” It notes that researchers can’t even be sure that the heart disease in this family is caused by the kind of genetic mutation that the researchers are looking for.
As already noted, the story ignored evidence about who is helped by stenting and bypass surgery.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two new studies add substantial weight to one side of a long-running controversy over whether to give antibiotics to young children suffering from ear infections.

The "wait and see" approach has been enshrined in current guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics. It's based on a slew of studies over the past couple of decades indicating that most children with ear infections get better without antibiotics. Some researchers also worry that too many prescriptions are fueling resistance to the drugs.

But the new studies, from the United States and Finland, come down firmly on the side of early antibiotic therapy for kids under age 2 or 3. Both studies, which appear today in the New England Journal of Medicine, find these kids get over painful ear infections faster, and have less severe symptoms, if they get prompt treatment with Augmentin, an inexpensive antibiotic often used to treat respiratory infections.

But there's a big "if." Study authors and other experts say doctors should be sure the child really is suffering from an ear infection before writing that prescription.

Much of the confusion, experts say, has been caused by studies that weren't careful enough about the diagnosis. If many children in prior studies didn't really have ear infections, then it's not surprising the antibiotics didn't work for them, says Dr. Jerome Klein of Boston University, who wrote an editorial that accompanies the new studies.

But here's the rub – diagnosing ear infections in very young children, who tend to squirm, is not easy.

To do a correct diagnosis, says Dr. Alejandro Hoberman of the University of Pittsburgh, the doctor needs to be able to see the child's eardrum, which may mean cleaning out earwax first. If the eardrum is red and bulging outward, that's a strong sign of a middle-ear infection. The bulge is most likely caused by pus from a bacterial infection that needs antibiotic treatment.

"It is a two- and sometimes a three-person operation to see the eardrum," says Hoberman, who led the US study.

Dr. David Spiro of the Oregon Health Sciences University is an advocate of the wait-and-see approach to treating ear infections. He coauthored a 2006 study that supported it. But Spiro thinks "the pendulum will swing the other way" – that is, toward immediate antibiotic treatment – because of the new studies.

So what's a concerned parent to do? Hoberman says they can cut through some of the fog by asking doctors if their child has the telltale "bulging eardrum" sign that indicates a true ear infection.

And, he notes, they shouldn't be afraid to press their pediatrician. "How bulging is the eardrum? Is it really bulging this time? Or does it look like fluid in the ear? It's OK to ask the question," Hoberman said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The blog post did not discuss the study’s design or say much about the evidence, but the accompanying radio story did. It said that the studies involved more than 600 kids with infections and that half were given immediate antibiotics and half were given a placebo. It would have been nice to know that these were “randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled” studies, as the journal articles note. This would have distinguished them from what the writer calls “a slew of studies over the past couple of decades indicating that most children with ear infections get better without antibiotics.” As the study from Finland notes, “Several guidelines for the management of acute otitis media recommend an observation period before antimicrobial therapy is even considered. These recommendations are based largely on meta-analyses that concluded that for 1 child to have relief of symptoms, 7 to 17 children must be treated with antimicrobial agents. However, some experts have suggested that the original studies included in the meta-analyses had important limitations, such as biases in patient selection, varying diagnostic criteria, and suboptimal spectrum or dosage of antimicrobial agents.” This is important context that would be helpful for readers in sorting out the importance of the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
From the Jewish to Mesoamerican “houses of heat,” people all over the world have long associated a good sweat with a wide assortment of health benefits. And some of the latest research seems to support those ideas.

One long-term study of middle-aged Finnish men found those who spent time in a sauna 2-3 days a week enjoyed a 23% drop in their risk for a fatal heart disease or episode. The heart health benefits were even greater for men who sweated it out in a sauna more frequently.

“Sauna bathing leads to a significant increase in heart rate and reduction in total vascular resistance, thereby decreasing blood pressure,” says Dr. Ernst van der Wall, chief of cardiology at the Netherlands Leiden University Medical Centre.

In a recent editorial appearing in the , van der Wall lays out the research in support of sauna bathing as a safe and salubrious habit for healthy people of all ages. He also says expert concerns about the safety of sauna bathing for those with heart conditions may be overblown. “Death in the sauna is a rare event, even in Finland where the frequency of sauna bathing is high,” he writes.

Still, the big questions surrounding sauna bathing’s safety have always centered on its occupant’s (and her heart’s) ability to withstand the heat. Traditional saunas use either wood or electricity to warm the air in a chamber to a temperature of 185 degrees, which many people find unendurable for more than a few minutes.

Infrared saunas, by contrast, do not heat the air around you. Using electromagnetic radiation, infrared lamps warm your body directly. That may sound freaky or even unsafe, but neonatal beds for newborns have long utilized infrared heating elements to ensure babies are kept warm without being stifled.

“As infrared heat penetrates more deeply than warmed air, users develop a more vigorous sweat at a lower temperature than they would in traditional saunas,” says Dr. Richard Beever, a clinical assistant professor of family medicine at the University of British Columbia.

While there’s not a ton of published research looking specifically at infrared saunas, Beever has published a review of all the existing studies he could turn up on the subject. He says there’s evidence to support the use of infrared saunas for high blood pressure, congestive heart failure and chronic pain.

People who spent 15 minutes a day for two weeks in an infrared sauna enjoyed a significant drop in blood pressure compared to a control group who spend the same amount of time in a “room-temperature” space, one Japanese study reported. More research found time spent in an infrared sauna could help even out irregular heartbeats, improve scores on physical fitness tests and boost endothelial function in the heart’s vessels.

Beever’s review also looked at some of the other purported health benefits of infrared saunas—including pain management. Among 46 chronic pain sufferers, those who spent time each day in a sauna for four weeks enjoyed a 54% improvement in sleep quality and were 27% more likely to return to work compared to a no-sauna group.

Beever makes it clear all of these reports were based on small groups and require further study. Also, he found no strong evidence of lost weight, improved cholesterol scores or some of the other benefits frequently linked to sauna bathing—infrared or otherwise.

But he also points out that no accidents or adverse reactions occurred in any of the studies he reviewed. (For men hoping to father children, spending time in hot saunas or baths has long been a no-no. Healthy sperm and heat don’t play well together. Beever says infrared heat may damage sperm as do other forms of heat, but at this point there’s no data on those risks.)

So what to think of infrared saunas? The existing evidence, though scanty, suggests spending up to 15 minutes a day in one could benefit your heart and ease symptoms associated with chronic pain. And, for now, there don’t seem to be any significant health risks.

Ask your doctor first. But if you’re wondering whether an infrared sauna is worth a try, the evidence suggests you have little to lose and possibly something to gain by checking one out.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We’re told that there isn’t a lot of research and that the studies are with low numbers and almost all looked at traditional saunas–yet it might be better if the conclusion re-emphasized these important limitations, instead of “you have little to lose and possibly something to gain.” Readers do stand to lose money from trying out an infrared sauna, especially if it does nothing for their health.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A less common form of obesity surgery may spur more weight loss than its far more popular cousin, gastric bypass — but at the price of greater long-term risks, researchers reported Tuesday.

The study, published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, followed 60 severely obese patients who were randomly assigned to either gastric bypass surgery or a more extensive procedure known as duodenal switch.

Two years after surgery, duodenal switch patients had lost more weight: about 50 pounds more, on average.

People shed a substantial amount of weight with either type of surgery. Gastric bypass patients cut an average of 111 pounds, while duodenal switch patients dropped about 162.

But those extra pounds came with nearly double the complication rate.

Of the 29 duodenal switch patients, 62 percent had problems like abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea and intestinal obstruction. And several suffered long-term malnutrition — something not seen in the gastric bypass group.

Duodenal switch is not a popular procedure. In a 2008 study, it accounted for just 1 percent of weight-loss, or bariatric, surgeries done in the U.S., and 5 percent in Europe.

The technique is often reserved for “superobese” patients with a body mass index (BMI) of 50 or higher — though some surgeons perform it with less severely obese patients too, explained Dr. Torgeir T. Sovik of Oslo University in Norway, the lead researcher on the new study.

“As duodenal switch can be associated with more adverse events, this procedure should only be performed in carefully selected patients by a dedicated bariatric team,” Sovik told Reuters Health in an email. “And a closer follow-up after surgery is required after such procedures.”

But an expert not involved in the study went further.

“This is an operation that should probably go away,” said Dr. Edward H. Livingston, a professor and surgeon at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

The average weight loss seen with either gastric bypass or duodenal switch will improve or reverse obesity-related ills like diabetes, sleep apnea and knee arthritis, according to Livingston, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

So for those medical conditions, it probably wouldn’t matter if a person lost 100 pounds or 150 pounds over two years.

BMI is a measure of weight relative to height. A BMI between 18.5 and 24.9 is considered normal weight, and above 30 is obese.

The patients in the current study were a fairly healthy group despite having a BMI of 50 or more.

After two years, those who’d had a duodenal switch showed a greater improvement in their cholesterol levels. But those levels were near-normal (in both groups) to begin with, Livingston noted.

That begs the question, he said, of whether the extra weight loss “actually accomplished anything.”

In the U.S., where about 220,000 people underwent weight-loss surgery in 2009, gastric bypass is the most common form chosen.

During gastric bypass, the upper portion of the stomach is stapled off to create a smaller pouch that restricts the amount of food a person can eat at one time. The surgeon also creates a bypass around the rest of the stomach and a portion of the small intestine, which limits the body’s absorption of food.

Duodenal switch is more extensive. The surgeon removes part of the stomach, and the remaining “sleeve”-like stomach is attached to the final section of the small intestine; that puts even greater limits on the body’s absorption of calories and nutrients.

Both surgeries carry the long-term risk of nutritional deficiencies, and people need to take supplements and carefully monitor their diets for a lifetime afterward.

But the risks of nutrient deficiencies are greater with duodenal switch, and include some not seen with gastric bypass, Livingston pointed out.

Some people, for instance, may have severe calcium and vitamin D loss leading to weak and fragile bones. Other problems include severe protein deficiency and night blindness caused by vitamin A deficiency (which is also reversible with extra vitamin A treatment).

In this study, three of the 29 duodenal switch patients developed protein malnutrition, two developed night blindness, and one had a severe iron deficiency that needed to be treated with iron infusions.

Livingston said his advice to people considering weight-loss surgery is to avoid duodenal switch. “It’s just not a good operation,” he asserted.

But he also questioned the value of weight-loss surgery, in general, for severely obese people who do not have medical conditions that stand to improve or resolve after surgery.

In general, experts say that surgery could be an option for anyone with a BMI of 40 or higher; that translates, roughly, to a man who is at least 100 pounds overweight or a woman who is 80 pounds overweight.

Livingston said he thinks more caution is in order when a very obese person is otherwise healthy.

Along with the risks of surgery, he said, there is still uncertainty about whether it actually lengthens people’s lives. Some studies have suggested it might, but not all.

In a study recently published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, Livingston and his colleagues found no survival advantage among severely obese patients who’d undergone weight-loss surgery versus those who hadn’t.

The study involved 850 U.S. veterans who underwent some form of weight-loss surgery, at an average age of about 50, and more than 41,000 vets who had only non-surgical care. There was no evidence that surgery improved longevity over the next seven years.

“We really don’t even know if there’s a survival benefit,” Livingston said.

That, he added, makes the risks of duodenal switch seem even less worthwhile.

But according to Sovik, duodenal switch might be appropriate for some superobese patients.

In the U.S., he said, about one in three weight-loss surgery candidates have a BMI of 50 or higher. And studies suggest that a sizable percentage of those people will still have a BMI higher than 40 after gastric bypass.

In this study, one-quarter of gastric bypass patients still had a BMI that high two years after surgery — versus none of the duodenal switch patients.

More extensive monitoring after duodenal switch, Sovik noted, can help detect and manage side effects.

He pointed out, though, that larger, longer-term studies are still needed to show whether the extra weight loss with duodenal switch ultimately improves severely obese patients’ health and extends their lives.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story reports on a very small study – just 58 patients in total and 29 received the duodenal surgery. Only one comment addressed the quality of the evidence: “Larger, longer-term studies are still needed to show whether the extra weight loss with duodenal switch” improves the health and lengthens the lives of obese patients, explained lead researcher Torgeir Sovik. We would have liked a reminder of the preliminary nature of the conclusions higher up in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You might not want to rush into knee surgery. Physical therapy can be just as good for a common injury and at far less cost and risk, the most rigorous study to compare these treatments concludes.

Therapy didn't always help and some people wound up having surgery for the problem, called a torn meniscus. But those who stuck with therapy had improved as much six months and one year later as those who had arthroscopic surgery right away, researchers found.

"Both are very good choices. It would be quite reasonable to try physical therapy first because the chances are quite good that you'll do quite well," said one study leader, Dr. Jeffrey Katz, a joint specialist at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School.

He was to discuss the study Tuesday at an American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons conference in Chicago. Results were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine.

A meniscus is one of the crescent-shaped cartilage discs that cushion the knee. About one-third of people over 50 have a tear in one, and arthritis makes this more likely. Usually the tear doesn't cause symptoms but it can be painful.

When that happens, it's tough to tell if the pain is from the tear or the arthritis — or whether surgery is needed or will help. Knee surgery for a torn meniscus is done about half a million times each year in the U.S.

The new federally funded study compared surgery with a less drastic option. Researchers at seven major universities and orthopedic surgery centers around the U.S. assigned 351 people with arthritis and meniscus tears to get either surgery or physical therapy. The therapy was nine sessions on average plus exercises to do at home, which experts say is key to success.

After six months, both groups had similar rates of functional improvement. Pain scores also were similar.

Thirty percent of patients assigned to physical therapy wound up having surgery before the six months was up, often because they felt therapy wasn't helping them. Yet they ended up the same as those who got surgery right away, as well as the rest of the physical therapy group who stuck with it and averted an operation.

"There are patients who would like to get better in a 'fix me' approach" and surgery may be best for them, said Elena Losina, another study leader from Brigham and Women's Hospital.

However, an Australian preventive medicine expert contends that the study's results should change practice. Therapy "is a reasonable first strategy, with surgery reserved for the minority who don't have improvement," Rachelle Buchbinder of Monash University in Melbourne wrote in a commentary in the medical journal.

As it is now, "millions of people are being exposed to potential risks associated with a treatment that may or may not offer specific benefit, and the costs are substantial," she wrote.

Surgery costs about $5,000, compared with $1,000 to $2,000 for a typical course of physical therapy, Katz said.

One study participant — Bob O'Keefe, 68, of suburban Boston — was glad to avoid surgery for his meniscus injury three years ago.

"I felt better within two weeks" on physical therapy, he said. "My knee is virtually normal today." He still does the recommended exercises several times a week.

Robert Dvorkin had both treatments for injuries on each knee several years apart. Dvorkin, 56, director of operations at the Coalition for the Homeless in New York City, had surgery followed by physical therapy for a tear in his right knee and said it was months before he felt no pain.

Then, several years ago, he hurt his left knee while exercising. "I had been doing some stretching and doing some push-ups and I just felt it go 'pop.'" he recalls. "I was limping. It was extremely painful."

An imaging test showed a less severe tear and a different surgeon recommended physical therapy. Dvorkin said it worked like a charm — he avoided surgery and recovered faster than from his first injury. The treatment involved two to three hour-long sessions a week, including strengthening exercises, balancing and massage. He said the sessions weren't that painful and his knee felt better after each one.

"Within a month I was healed," Dvorkin said. "I was completely back to normal."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Adequate discussion:
“The new federally funded study compared surgery with a less drastic option. Researchers at seven major universities and orthopedic surgery centers around the U.S. assigned 351 people with arthritis and meniscus tears to get either surgery or physical therapy. The therapy was nine sessions on average plus exercises to do at home, which experts say is key to success.”
Ideally, the story might have touched on a few study limitations, such as the fact that only about a quarter of eligible patients agreed to be enrolled in the study. Patients who agree to be randomized to surgery or physical therapy in a study like this might be different in important ways from the average patient — and these differences might have affected the results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, April 19, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- More evidence is emerging that women who take calcium supplements to prevent bone deterioration may, in fact, be risking their heart health.

But even when added to previous studies with similar findings, the new conclusions don't necessarily mark a death knell for calcium supplements, say the authors of a study released online April 19 in the BMJ.

"There is a lack of consensus at the present time as to what recommendations should be regarding the use of calcium supplements," said study senior author Dr. Ian Reid, who fully expected that the new results will have a "significant impact on recommendations."

"Our own recommendation is to critically review the use of calcium supplements, since the data in this paper suggests that they do more harm than good," added Reid, who is professor of medicine and endocrinology at the University of Auckland in New Zealand.

"The cautious way forward seems to be to encourage people to obtain their calcium from the diet, rather than from supplements, since food calcium has not been shown to carry this increased risk of heart disease," Reid added.

A recent meta-analysis done by the same group of researchers found a 27 to 31 percent increased risk of heart attacks in women taking calcium without vitamin D.

Many older women take calcium supplements with or without vitamin D to keep their bones strong, especially since that has long been standard medical advice. In addition, the mammoth, U.S.-government funded Women's Health Initiative (WHI) earlier found no negative link between calcium and heart health.

But, as the current authors point out, more than half of the women in that study were already taking their own calcium supplements on top of what they had been prescribed for the trial, which may have clouded the results.

For this analysis, the authors looked only at the 16,718 women in the WHI who had not been taking personal calcium supplements before entering the trial.

In this case, women who were randomized to take calcium and vitamin D as part of the study protocol had a modest 13 to 22 percent increased risk of cardiovascular problems, particularly heart attacks. Women in the control arm had no change in risk.

The case against calcium became stronger when researchers added in data from 13 other, unpublished trials involving almost 30,000 women. Now the increased risk for heart attack was 25 to 30 percent and, for a stroke, 15 to 20 percent.

While the authors speculate that an increased risk could be biologically plausible given that calcium is connected with hardening of the arteries, another expert thinks not.

While calcium does tend to be a marker of inflammation, explained Dr. Philip Houck, assistant professor of internal medicine at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine, "lesions with calcium are actually more stable so there's less of a chance of having a heart attack than in vessels that are less calcified."

Moreover, the results may have been statistically significant but that doesn't mean they're clinically significant, he added. "If women have good reason to take calcium because their bones are thin, then they should not be afraid of taking the calcium," said Houck, who is also a cardiologist with Scott & White in Temple, Texas.

Dr. Susan V. Bukata, associate professor of orthopaedic surgery at the University of Rochester Medical Center, said that the study really doesn't provide enough information to make a definitive conclusion.

Nevertheless, accumulating evidence has her urging patients to get their calcium from their diet, rather than reflexively telling them to take 1,200 milligrams of calcium a day. "With diet plus a supplement combined, women should be getting 1,000- to 1,500-milligrams a day," she said.

And in an accompanying journal editorial, medical professors Dr. Bo Abrahamsen and Dr. Opinder Sahota wrote that due to study limitations, "it is not possible to provide reassurance that calcium supplements given with vitamin D do not cause adverse cardiovascular events or to link them with certainty to increased cardiovascular risk. Clearly further studies are needed and the debate remains ongoing."

The National Osteoporosis Foundation has more on osteoporosis.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story presents good information about the design of the latest study, although we would have liked to have seen more details. The story also addresses the study’s limitations, saying, “And in an accompanying journal editorial, medical professors Dr. Bo Abrahamsen and Dr. Opinder Sahota wrote that due to study limitations, ‘it is not possible to provide reassurance that calcium supplements given with vitamin D do not cause adverse cardiovascular events or to link them with certainty to increased cardiovascular risk. Clearly further studies are needed and the debate remains ongoing.’”

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Three long-awaited studies have shown that mechanically removing a blood clot from a stroke patient’s brain is no more useful than the older treatment of giving an IV dose of a clot-dissolving drug to the whole body.

The results of the clinical trials, presented this week at a meeting in Hawaii, shocked and surprised stroke physicians. Many had already adopted the more aggressive strategy over the past decade.

“For the stroke field, this is a really big deal,” Walter Koroshetz, deputy director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, said of the findings, which were presented over three days at the International Stroke Conference in Hono­lulu.

NINDS paid for two of the trials, one of which cost $27 million. One study took eight years to complete because it was so difficult to enroll patients willing to take the chance that they would be randomly assigned to get the older treatment.

Practitioners hoped that “endovascular treatment,” in which a catheter is threaded into a blocked artery and the clot pulled out, would do for stroke patients what it has done for heart attack patients. In them, going after clots with angioplasty balloons and stents is clearly more effective than giving clot-dissolving drugs through a vein in the arm.

“We did this study with the strong expectation that we would find a positive benefit. We were surprised,” said Joseph P. Broderick of the University of Cincinnati Neuroscience Institute, who headed one of the studies.

His view was echoed by Alfonso Ciccone, a neurologist from Milan who led a clinical trial in Italy: “We were surprised. We wanted the superiority of endovascular treatment.”

Whether the findings will cause physicians to abandon the practice is uncertain.

Insurance companies and Medicare, the health insurer for the elderly, already cover the endovascular procedure. It costs about $23,000 compared with $11,000 for acute stroke treatment using intravenous clot-dissolving drugs, known as thrombolytics.

Further, many practitioners think that newer clot-retrieving devices work better than the ones used in the three trials. Because endovascular procedures were shown to be no more dangerous than IV thrombolytics, physicians may continue to perform them and assume the outcomes can only get better.

“Will it change practice? That’s a good question,” said Koroshetz. “The payers may look at this and wonder if they should continue paying for these procedures. If it gets to that point, then clearly things will change.”

Stroke is the fourth-leading cause of death in the United States. About 800,000 people suffer a stroke each year, and about 130,000 die.

Nearly 90 percent of strokes occur when a clot blocks an artery in the brain, starving the region downstream of blood and oxygen. If flow isn’t restored quickly, brain tissue and the functions it controls — movement, speech, cognition — are damaged or can die.

Over the past 20 years, studies showed that if a person having a stroke gets a thrombolytic drug within three hours of when the symptoms start (4½ hours for certain patients), the process can be reversed and a lifetime of disability avoided. Later than that, little is gained; the brain cells are too damaged to survive. In fact, giving the drugs too late can make matters worse. Uncontrolled bleeding can occur as the dying tissue breaks down.

Early observations suggested that approaching the clot with a catheter and either injecting clot-dissolving drugs into it or snagging it and pulling it out produced better results. In 2004, the FDA began approving use of the catheters in the brain because they had been proved useful elsewhere in the body. The three studies reported this week (which will eventually be published in the New England Journal of Medicine) tested the hypothesis in a rigorous way.

In the largest trial, called IMS III, all patients got the IV clot-dissolving drug tPA within three hours of the start of stroke symptoms. Half were then assigned to get an imaging study that looked at the arteries of the brain to see whether a blockage remained. If it did, the doctors went after it with an endovascular procedure. The other half of the patients got standard treatment, which didn’t include the procedure. Forty-one percent of patients recovered completely in the endovascular group and 39 percent recovered completely in the control group, outcomes that were no different statistically. Death within three months was essentially the same too: 19 percent vs. 22 percent.

In the Italian study, called SYNTHESIS Expansion, 362 stroke patients were randomly assigned to get either IV tPA or endovascular treatment. At three months, 35 percent of the patients in the tPA group were alive without any disabilities, compared with 30 percent of the endovascular group. That also was not significantly different.

The third study, called MR RESCUE, run out of Georgetown University, was more complicated.

It randomly assigned 118 patients less than eight hours out from the start of their strokes to receive standard care or have the clot removed with a catheter device. They also got CAT or MRI scans to see whether they had a large or small amount of brain tissue still alive and salvageable. Removing the clot wasn’t better than standard care in either group — those with a lot or a little brain tissue to lose.

“I think everybody was a little surprised. But mainly disappointed,” said Chelsea S. Kidwell, the Georgetown neurologist who headed the study.

Why endovascular treatment wasn’t better is a mystery that the researchers are struggling to explain. The answer could be in the patients, the device or the timing of the procedure.

In IMS III, patients with large strokes benefited from clot removal more than those with small ones, but there weren’t enough patients in the study to make such a fine distinction with certainty.

“It’s a hint. But it’s not proof,” Broderick said.

In MR RESCUE, only 67 percent of arteries opened up completely after the clot was grabbed. Current devices, which use a mesh stent to hold the clot more firmly, are successful more than 80 percent of the time.

“The stroke community is hopeful that with the new generation devices we will show better outcomes,” Kidwell said.

In the Italian study, patients getting endovascular treatment were 3.75 hours into their stroke — an hour longer than those getting IV treatment, because of the logistics of assembling the procedure team. “That hour could have made a difference. We know that ‘time is brain,’ ” Ciccone said.

The three trials demonstrated how hard it is to test things once they’re in widespread use. History is replete with treatments (such as supplemental oxygen for premature infants) and devices (such as pulmonary artery catheters) used routinely before being shown to be harmful or of little value.

It took from 2004 to 2011 for the MR RESCUE team to recruit the 118 patients in the trial. It had permission to run the study in 30 hospitals but found only 22 that were willing to participate. More than 10 other hospitals were invited to join but declined because their neurologists were already convinced the catheter treatment was better — a view that turns out not to be true.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Another strong point of the story.  We especially appreciate this context:
“The three trials demonstrated how hard it is to test things once they’re in widespread use. History is replete with treatments …used routinely before being shown to be harmful or of little value.
It took from 2004 to 2011 for the MR RESCUE team to recruit the 118 patients in the trial. It had permission to run the study in 30 hospitals but found only 22 that were willing to participate. More than 10 other hospitals were invited to join but declined because their neurologists were already convinced the catheter treatment was better — a view that turns out not to be true.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Novo Nordisk’s (NOVOb.CO) top-selling diabetes drug Victoza cut the risk of heart attack, stroke and cardiovascular death by 13 percent in a closely watched study, but the result disappointed investors who had hoped for more.

The stock fell around 5 percent in Copenhagen on Tuesday.

Victoza is only the second diabetes drug to show such heart benefits, after Eli Lilly (LLY.N) and Boehringer Ingelheim’s pill Jardiance. Victoza’s effect was evident across risks.

“To me, the impressive thing about this trial is the consistency across clinical endpoints and its robustness,” said John Buse, professor of medicine at the UNC School of Medicine, who worked on the study.

He believes doctors’ approach to type 2 diabetes treatment will now start to shift to a greater focus on minimising overall risks, rather than simply cutting blood sugar levels.

Because about half of deaths in people with diabetes are caused by heart disease, reducing heart risk is considered essential to their care.

But investors had been anticipating a bigger effect. Jefferies analyst Jeffrey Holford said market expectations had been for a mid-to-high teens percent reduction in complications.

There was also concern that Victoza did not appear to lower heart risks in American patients monitored in the study, despite doing so in other parts of the world and producing a solid result globally.

Novo, the world’s biggest diabetes company, had said in March that Victoza cut heart risks “significantly” in the study but the scale of the benefit was only disclosed on Monday.

Researchers told the American Diabetes Association’s (ADA) annual meeting that 13.0 percent of patients on Victoza died from cardiovascular causes or suffered non-fatal heart attacks or strokes, against 14.9 percent of those on placebo.

Deaths from heart disease were 22 percent lower in the Victoza group.

The Jardiance trial last year showed a similar 14 percent overall relative risk reduction and a 38 percent reduction in cardiovascular deaths.

The Victoza trial, known as Leader, had been designed to show Novo’s drug did not increase heart risk, so its superiority is welcome news for the company, especially as Sanofi’s (SASY.PA) rival Lyxumia failed to show heart benefits in an earlier test.

Victoza, which had sales of $2.7 billion last year, is the biggest seller in a class of drugs known as GLP-1 analogues that stimulate insulin production.

“I think physicians will look to GLP-1s with greater enthusiasm,” Buse said in an interview.

Once-daily Victoza is typically prescribed as a third or fourth option after patients have first tried various oral medicines.

“The significance of this is that now we can start to change the conversation around diabetes management from one of ‘let’s manage your blood sugar’ to one of ‘let’s manage your risk of complications’,” Buse said.

Mads Krogsgaard Thomsen, Novo’s chief science officer, said the results should encourage doctors to use Victoza earlier, since they could now see it offered “life-expanding” treatment.

The findings, which involved following 9,340 patients for a median 3.8 years, were also published online in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Gastrointestinal upset was the biggest side effect with Victoza. There were fewer cases of pancreatitis, which has been viewed as a potential problem, but more cases of pancreatic cancer, although the difference was not statistically significant.

Since 2008, U.S. regulators have demanded studies for new diabetes medicines to show there is no increase in heart risk, opening a new battleground between different treatments. Lilly is conducting a similar large study to try and prove the heart benefits of its once-weekly GLP-1 drug Trulicity.

The Leader study was funded by Novo and the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Although the strength of the evidence is not directly interrogated, the story provides sufficient details about the study, such as trial size, length of trial, and where it was published.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating a Mediterranean diet supplemented with extra virgin olive oil was associated with a relatively lower risk of breast cancer in a study of women in Spain, according to an article published online by JAMA Internal Medicine.

Breast cancer is a frequently diagnosed cancer and a leading cause of death in women. Diet has been extensively studied as a modifiable risk factor in the development of breast cancer but epidemiologic evidence on the effect of specific dietary factors is inconsistent.

The Mediterranean diet is known for its abundance of plant foods, fish and especially olive oil. Miguel A. Martínez-González, M.D., of the University of Navarra in Pamplona and CIBEROBN in Madrid, Spain, and coauthors analyzed the effects of two interventions with the Mediterranean diet (supplemented with extra virgin olive oil [EVOO] or nuts) compared with advice to women to follow a low-fat diet. Study participants in the two intervention groups were given EVOO (one liter per week for the participants and their families) or mixed nuts (30 grams per day: 15 grams of walnuts, 7.5 grams of hazelnuts and 7.5 grams of almonds).

The study was conducted within the framework of the large PREDIMED (Prevención con Dieta Mediterránea) trial, which was designed to test the effects of the Mediterranean diet on the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease.

From 2003 to 2009, 4,282 women (ages 60 to 80 and at high risk of cardiovascular disease) were recruited. Women were randomly assigned to the Mediterranean diet supplemented with EVOO (n=1,476), the Mediterranean diet supplemented with nuts (n=1,285) or the control diet with advice to reduce their dietary intake of fat (n=1,391).

The women were an average age of 67.7 years old, had an average body mass index of 30.4, most of them had undergone menopause before the age of 55 and less than 3 percent used hormone therapy. During a median follow-up of nearly five years, the authors identified 35 confirmed incident (new) cases of malignant breast cancer.

The authors report that women eating a Mediterranean diet supplemented with EVOO showed a 68 percent (multivariable-adjusted hazard ratio of 0.32) relatively lower risk of malignant breast cancer than those allocated to the control diet. Women eating a Mediterranean diet supplemented with nuts showed a nonsignificant risk reduction compared with women in the control group.

The authors note a number of limitations in their study including that breast cancer was not the primary end point of the trial for which the women were recruited; the number of observed breast cancer cases was low; the authors do not have information on an individual basis on whether and when women in the trial underwent mammography; and the study cannot establish whether the observed beneficial effect was attributable mainly to the EVOO or to its consumption within the context of the Mediterranean diet.

"The results of the PREDIMED trial suggest a beneficial effect of a MeDiet [Mediterranean diet] supplemented with EVOO in the primary prevention of breast cancer. Preventive strategies represent the most sensible approach against cancer. The intervention paradigm implemented in the PREDIMED trial provides a useful scenario for breast cancer prevention because it is conducted in primary health care centers and also offers beneficial effects on a wide variety of health outcomes. Nevertheless, these results need confirmation by long-term studies with a higher number of incident cases," the authors conclude.

In a related editor's note, Mitchell H. Katz, M.D., a deputy editor of JAMA Internal Medicine, writes: "Of course, no study is perfect. This one has a small number of outcomes (only 35 incident cases of breast cancer), the women were not all screened for breast cancer with mammography, they were not blinded to the type of diet they were receiving, and all were white, postmenopausal and at high risk for cardiovascular disease. Still, consumption of a Mediterranean diet, which is based on plant foods, fish and extra virgin olive oil, is known to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and is safe. It may also prevent breast cancer. We hope to see more emphasis on Mediterranean diet to reduce cancer and cardiovascular disease and improve health and well-being."

Editor's Note: Authors made conflict of interest and funding/support disclosures. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures

Media Advisory: To contact study corresponding author Miguel A. Martínez-González, M.D., email Jesus Diaz at jediaz@unav.es or call +34-636-355-333. To contact Editor's Note author Mitchell H. Katz, M.D., email mediarelations@jamanetwork.org
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This release described a large, multi-center, randomized trial where those analyzing the data were blinded to information that might influence their findings.  It gave ample information about the study design, it’s relationship to the larger cardiovascular study from which it is derived, and the size, scope, age and body mass of the participants.  The release also does a good job following the research paper’s example of delineating the weaknesses of the study. It even quotes the cautionary language included in an accompanying editorial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A first-of-its-kind osteoporosis drug lowers the risk of bone fractures better than some existing treatments, two studies suggest, and could soon add a more expensive but easier to manage treatment option to the booming market.

Amgen Inc. will stress that only two shots of its genetically engineered denosumab, which could be approved for sale this fall, are needed each year. That's important because many patients stop taking other drugs due to side effects or frequent dosing.

Wall Street sees denosumab as a potential blockbuster crucial to Amgen. But with many cheaper, heavily advertised treatments, doctors view its expected high cost as a drawback. Genetically engineered drugs, made by altering a cell's DNA or other genetic material, all cost more than $10,000 a year.

"It'll find a particular niche where it'll be used, but I don't see it as taking over the market," said Dr. Sundeep Khosla, a professor and osteoporosis researcher at the Mayo Clinic.

Still, he called the drug a "tour de force of modern molecular medicine" because it is potent and was designed by making antibodies cloned over and over from cells in the lab to block one pathway involved in the how the body naturally breaks down bone cells.

Denosumab would be the first osteoporosis treatment that is such a monoclonal antibody — a type of immune cell cloned from the same parent cell to bind to a specific substance. In this case, it targets a molecule in bones that drives formation of cells called osteoclasts that break down bone, a strategy that greatly reduces bone loss.

The Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday released its review of denosumab, with staff citing concerns about increased rates of skin infections and some tumors. That report comes just ahead of a meeting Thursday when outside advisers will weigh the drug's safety and effectiveness and recommend whether to approve it.

Amgen shares rose $1.57, or 2.6 percent, to close at $62.81.

Denosumab, an injection just under the skin, would have to compete against eight major types of pills and injected medicines, including estrogen and generic and brand-name Fosamax pills, long the market leader.

Most of those must be given more often, with pills swallowed once a day, week or month, a nasal spray inhaled daily, and one injection under the skin given daily. But another injection given intravenously is only needed once a year, and estrogen, while out of fashion due to its link to breast cancer, is available in skin patches changed once or twice a week.

Those drugs' annual retail cost can range from $385 for generic Fosamax, to roughly $1,250 for most brand-name pills, to $11,100 for injected Forteo, which must be injected daily.

Global sales of osteoporosis treatments, including hundreds of vitamin brands, hit nearly $8.4 billion last year, according to data from IMS Health. About 10 million Americans have osteoporosis.

Analyst Steve Brozak of WBB Securities said denosumab will pass the $1 billion annual sales threshold for blockbusters, but it's unclear by how much.

"You're going to have blowback by insurers" over how much they will pay, he said, but Amgen might try to charge more than $10,000 per year.

Dr. Lenore Buckley, a professor at Virginia Commonwealth University, said all these drugs carry some risks. The studies found denosumab caused eczema in some patients, and a dozen of the women got a serious skin infection, cellulitis, that sometimes required hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics.

"Because this drug affects the immune system, the long-term effects on cancer risk or immune function is still unknown," she warned, saying she expects FDA will require Amgen to track risks over time if the drug is approved.

The effectiveness of denosumab and existing drugs appears to plateau after two or three years, she added.

The two studies were released Tuesday by the New England Journal of Medicine.

Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., paid for both. Nearly all the researchers receive consulting, advisory and other fees from the company and competitors, or are Amgen employees. The biotech company designed the studies, handled data collection and analysis, and helped write the journal reports.

One study included 7,868 women, aged 60 to 90, with moderate to severe osteoporosis. Half got denosumab injections every six months for three years. They had 68 percent fewer spine fractures and 40 percent fewer hip fractures than the study participants who got dummy shots.

The second study included 1,468 men with prostate cancer at increased fracture risk due to cancer hormone therapy, although 556 dropped out for reasons from side effects and cancer progression to the study being extended from two to three years. Denosumab cut the risk of spine fractures 62 percent over three years compared to dummy shots. Spine bone density loss was far smaller for those given the drug.

Until recently, studies of osteoporosis drugs just measured changes in bone density, assumed to equate with lower fracture risk. Newer studies also measure fracture rates, but there are no head-to-head studies on that.

However, based on some prior studies, independent experts say denosumab appears more effective at preventing spine fractures than three older pills — Fosamax, Actonel and Boniva — and calcitonin nasal sprays, which all use various pathways to slow down cells called osteoclasts that break down bone. Experts think denosumab prevents spine fractures about as well as Reclast, an intravenously injected drug that slows bone breakdown, and daily just below the skin injections of Forteo, the only drug that stimulates bone-building cells called osteoblasts. And denosumab appears to prevent fractures of the hip, forearm and ankle about the same as all those drugs.

Dr. Jacob Warman, an osteoporosis expert at Brooklyn Hospital Center, said denosumab might have potential as an add-on to existing drugs to boost results. He expects that would be covered by insurers, who pay for multiple medicines for other conditions.

Amgen spokeswoman Kerry Beth Daly said the company has not yet set a price for the drug, but will try to keep it affordable. She said pricing also will reflect denosumab's twice-a-year dosing.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story adequately describes the methodology of each trial, as well as the patient population.  The story also does a service by alerting the reader that the drug manufacturer, Amgen, funded both of the studies and nearly all of the researchers were receiving fees from said manufacturer. Additionally, it was pointed out that Amgen designed the trials, handled data collection and analysis, and assisted in writing the journal articles.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When a couple is struggling to conceive, it's the woman who is usually the first — and often the only one — to be poked, prodded and analyzed, experts say. The burden of figuring out infertility is too often placed on the woman alone.

"Unfortunately, the majority of society looks at infertility as a women's issue, but that's just not the case," said Brad Imler, American Pregnancy Association president.

Placed among dozens of pregnancy, ovulation and female fertility kits, an at-home sperm test that hit retail shelves in April could help change that mentality, experts said.

SpermCheck Fertility, which determines in minutes whether a man's sperm count is low, offers almost instant insight into one of the many aspects of male fertility. Although it's not a comprehensive evaluation and could give some consumers a false sense of security, the test does provide a starting point while drawing attention to male infertility as a legitimate health concern.

"It may provide (an opportunity for) both physicians and couples to take a closer look at ways for men to step up to the plate and optimize their reproductive potential," said Dr. Robert Brannigan, urologist at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. "I think anything that highlights the fact that men can have issues, that men do play a role in infertility, is important."

Approximately 15 percent of U.S. couples of reproductive age who are trying to conceive face infertility issues, said Brannigan, an expert in male fertility.

Male infertility contributes to 50 percent of those cases, he said. Male infertility alone is the cause 30 percent of the time; a combination of male and female factors account for the other 20 percent.

SpermCheck Fertility is designed to help couples determine more quickly whether male infertility might be a problem for them, said Ray Lopez, CEO of SpermCheck, based in Charlottesville, Va. Many men put off having a semen analysis because they don't want to provide a sample in a doctor's office or lab, he said.

"No one wants to go through the embarrassment of jumping in that room and looking at dirty magazines," Lopez said.

Giving men the opportunity to take a test in the privacy of their home helps get the process moving, he said.

Men tend to think they're perfectly healthy, especially when it comes to their sexuality, APA's Imler said. This test, which is noninvasive, could be wake-up call for some.

"If there is a problem with him, it's identified a little quicker," Imler said. "We love the idea of avoiding that heartache of that month to month struggle of trying to conceive without success."

SpermCheck Fertility is the only FDA-approved home sperm test currently on the market and available in retail stores, Lopez said. The test costs about $40; the average cost of a semen analysis in a doctor's office is about $100.

At-home sperm tests are a fairly new idea, Imler said, but SpermCheck Fertility is not the first one. Four years ago an FDA-approved home test called Fertell, which is no longer for sale, offered an evaluation of both male and female fertility.

There are also several at-home sperm analysis kits available online. They each include a microscope and cost at least $80.

Although it's not the first ever at-home test, SpermCheck Fertility is the first one to use the lateral flow assay method, Lopez said. When the semen sample is applied to the test strip, the liquid works its way up the paper until it reaches the results window.

"It's very, very similar to a pregnancy test," Lopez said. "The concept behind our test is to keep it simple, user friendly."

For Brittany Scott, a Cortland resident whose husband took the SpermCheck Fertility test, however, it seemed a little more complicated than a pregnancy test. Scott said she was surprised by the number of steps involved, although none were very difficult.

Scott, a "mommy blogger" who requested and received a free test to review, said she wanted her husband to take the test to see if a recent vasectomy had worked. The result showed that the father of four's sperm count was below the test's threshold.

"It was blatantly negative. I was really glad that the test was not ambiguous at all," she said. "There was no line I could mistake."

Scott said she wished the test had been available when the couple was struggling to conceive their first child. After about 11 months of trying, she had pushed her husband to get a semen analysis from a doctor.

"If this test had been around back then, he would have definitely been more willing to do it" than the semen analysis, she said.

SpermCheck Fertility tests were created after a scientist at the University of Virginia discovered a specific protein found only in the head of sperm, Lopez said. By detecting that protein, the test indicates whether or not a semen sample contains 20 million sperm per milliliter.

About 90 percent of fertile men have sperm counts above that concentration, according to the SpermCheck Fertility instructions.

But there is not a strict cutoff point between normal or abnormal, Brannigan said. Some men might be considered in the infertile range and have no problem impregnating a woman. And others have sperm counts that seem fine, but they have difficulty.

"If his sperm concentration is indeed greater than 20 million, that's very encouraging," Brannigan said. "But it's by no means a definitive marker of proven fertility because there is a significant overlap between fertile and infertile men."

As stated in the SpermCheck Fertility instructions, sperm count is not the only factor that contributes to male fertility. The test is not intended to be a complete semen analysis or an overall indicator of a man's fertility, Lopez said.

The male reproductive system should not be oversimplified, Brannigan said. There are several characteristics of sperm alone — at least three that aren't addressed by SpermCheck — that affect male fertility. In addition, hormones and the delivery of the sperm play a part.

"There are a number of components that lead to a man having normal fertility potential," Brannigan said. "It's a complicated picture."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a nice job explaining what exactly the test does and its limitations. For example, it says, “As stated in the SpermCheck Fertility instructions, sperm count is not the only factor that contributes to male fertility. The test is not intended to be a complete semen analysis or an overall indicator of a man’s fertility, Lopez said.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Jeffrey Tice, an internist at the University of California, San Francisco, who wrote an editorial accompanying the study, said: "With hormones, we really were thinking we were preventing a lot of diseases and it was good for the long term. Maybe we were brainwashed by the industry paying people to tell us that in medical school."

Now, other drugs have come into use for hot flashes, but not much is known about their effectiveness or long-term safety. Until recently, there was little interest in studying them rigorously, because hormones worked so well for most women.

"There's a lot of hype around trying things that we haven't proven effective and, sadly, we haven't proven they're safe," said Dr. Heidi D. Nelson, the first author of the journal article and an internist and professor at the Oregon Health and Science University.

The report is based on a review of 43 studies of various nonhormonal drugs being used for hot flashes. Most were originally approved for other purposes. The drugs include the antidepressants Paxil (paroxetine), Effexor (venlafaxine), Prozac (fluoxetine) and Celexa (citalopram), the blood pressure drug Catapres (clonidine), and the seizure drug Neurontin (gabapentin). Some came into use for menopause because women taking them for other reasons told doctors the drugs seemed to diminish their hot flashes.

The researchers also examined studies of nonprescription extracts from soy and red clover, which contain plant estrogens called isoflavones and are marketed as a "natural" treatment for hot flashes.

None of the drugs or extracts are approved by the Food and Drug Administration to treat hot flashes — only hormones are approved for that purpose — but doctors are free to prescribe medicines for any use they see fit, and many recommend the drugs or plant products for hot flashes, based on study findings and their patients' experiences.

The researchers found that on average, antidepressants and Catapres each appeared to reduce hot flashes by about one per day, and Neurontin by about two per day. For women with a lot of hot flashes, that is not a very impressive performance, Dr. Nelson said, but she added that the drugs may also lessen their severity.

Estrogen, by comparison, gets rid of two to three flashes a day, and also makes them milder, Dr. Nelson said. Though hormones cause small increases in the risks for breast cancer and heart disease, a short course may still be the best choice for women with very severe symptoms, she said, though she added that women who have had breast cancer should definitely not take hormones.

All the nonhormonal drugs have side effects. The antidepressants can cause headache, nausea, dry mouth, dizziness and insomnia or sleepiness. Catapres can cause some of the same symptoms and also constipation. Neurontin causes sleepiness, and soy extracts can produce gastrointestinal troubles.

Among the antidepressants, Paxil seemed to have the strongest evidence of benefit. There were only two studies for Effexor, just one of which suggested it might help.

For the other antidepressants, Prozac and Celexa, and for the plant extracts, there was no statistically significant evidence that they worked for hot flashes.

"But I wouldn't want any drug company to get an edge," Dr. Nelson said. "It's just where we are today. It's not the end of the story."

She took a cautious view because she and her colleagues found that there was relatively little reliable data on using the drugs for hot flashes. Of 10 studies on antidepressants, for instance, the researchers judged only two of the studies to be good, and the rest fair or poor. The poor rating often meant a study, even though well conducted, was too small or too short to be conclusive.

"If there were only 20 women in the study, how do we say it's appropriate for all the women in the country?" Dr. Nelson said.

"Now we know what we need," she said. "More bigger studies on more things."

In the meantime, both Dr. Tice and Dr. Nelson said that for women who find their symptoms intolerable and want treatment, they would favor antidepressants over hormones. But Dr. Tice warned that the drugs should not be used long term.

"I wouldn't encourage the mindset of putting women on these drugs thinking they're going to be on them for life," he said, adding that patients should try the drugs for a few months and then try to stop.

"We hate to medicalize a natural process," Dr. Nelson said, but she added that severe symptoms should not be dismissed. "We want to take it seriously, but not everybody needs to be on prescription drugs for it."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There is adequate description and some evidence presented from this meta-analysis of non-hormonal treatments to reduce the number and severity of bothersome hot flashes. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, May 31, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- At the moment, a diagnosis of autism is based on subjective evaluations, but a new way of using MRI might be an objective way of spotting the disorder, Columbia University researchers report.

Autism is a spectrum disorder that includes repetitive behaviors and impairments in language, communication and social skills. It is estimated that the condition affects one in 110 children in the United States, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

"There is a serious unmet need in the autism world, where diagnosis is currently done by subjective reports, and after the child has missed many developmental milestones," said lead researcher Joy Hirsch, a professor of functional neuroradiology, neuroscience and psychology, and director of the Functional MRI Laboratory at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City.

"It is now possible to develop an objective imaging diagnostic," she said. Indeed, the researchers found a difference between autistic brains and typical brains in the level of responsiveness in language areas, Hirsch noted.

"What we can measure are signals in the brain, in a specific language area, that are depressed in autistic children and normal in typical children," she said.

Although this study was done with school-aged children and teens, the same test can be done with children as young as 18 months, Hirsch noted. "We know this technique can be used on young children," she said.

The report was released in the May 31 online edition of Radiology, in advance of publication in the August print issue.

For the study, 12 children with autism and 15 children without the condition underwent functional MRI (fMRI) exams. Both groups of children ranged in age from 4 to 17 years.

While the children were undergoing the fMRI, the researchers played recordings of their parents talking to them and watched for brain activity in areas of the brain responsible for hearing and understanding language.

The researchers found no differences in the activity in the hearing area of the brain between the two groups. However, in the language comprehension area, there was significantly more activity among typical children than among children with autism, Hirsch's group noted.

To further test this screening approach, another group of 27 autistic children, aged 5 to 17, underwent fMRI and the researchers were able to identify 26 of them as autistic.

Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York in Lake Success, said that "although the investigators did indeed find significant differences on neuroimaging between controls and autistic children, the clinical utility from a diagnostic standpoint is unclear."

There are important limitations to the study, Adesman said.

For one, this study was done in school-aged children, many of whom were actually teenagers, so it is impossible to know if these differences in neuroimaging would also be found in younger patients, Adesman pointed out.

"It is during the toddler/preschool years that autism typically presents and needs to be diagnosed," he explained.

"The other major limitation of this study is that the investigators did not look at whether these brain differences are specific to children with autism, or if they would also be seen, for example, in children with language delays who are not autistic," Adesman said.

Hirsch noted the study is preliminary and, as such, has some limitations. For one, it is not known whether this technique can identify autism across the entire spectrum of the disorder.

"There are questions about how this varies across the severity of autism. Also, can we distinguish autism from other forms of developmental delay?" she asked. "These are things that aren't known."

Further work is needed to refine the test, Hirsch added. "This is not the diagnostic that you can package and send to all community health centers in the United States. This is an announcement that this can be done," she said.

This test costs no more than a standard MRI, which runs around $1,500, Hirsch noted.

Another expert, Dr. Robert F. Lopez-Alberola, chief of pediatric neurology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, said that "it's nice to have an objective measure, but it doesn't really do much."

Ultimately, he said, "the diagnosis of autism is a clinical diagnosis. I see this as having more implications for research into the pathophysiology of autism."

However, if this test could be done in really young children, it might help identify autism so that treatment can begin early, Lopez-Alberola suggested. "We know the earlier we begin interventions, the greater the likelihood of better outcome," he said.

"Although this technique holds promise for identifying infants at risk for autism, it still needs to be determined whether the atypical patterns of brain activation are specific to autism," said Geraldine Dawson, chief science officer for Autism Speaks.

"It is possible that children who have delayed language but not autism would also show the same pattern. Regardless, this research is promising as a method for identifying young children at risk for autism," Dawson said.

For more on autism, visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story notes the limitations of the study several times and in several ways. For example, it says, “For one, this study was done in school-aged children, many of whom were actually teenagers, so it is impossible to know if these differences in neuroimaging would also be found in younger patients, Adesman pointed out.”  We would have liked more details about the correlation between clinical symptoms and the fMRI findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A fresh look at the medical evidence shows women who eat more fiber are less likely to get breast cancer.

Chinese researchers found those who ate the most of the healthy plant components were 11 percent less likely to develop breast cancer than women who ate the least.

Their findings don’t prove fiber itself lowers cancer risk, however, because women who consume a lot of it might be healthier overall than those who don’t.

The results “can identify associations but cannot tell us what will happen if people change their behavior,” said John Pierce, a cancer research at the University of California, San Diego, who was not involved in the work.

While earlier research has yielded mixed conclusions on the link between cancer and fiber, it would make scientific sense: According to the Chinese researchers, people who eat high-fiber diets have lower levels of estrogen, which is a risk factor for breast tumors.

So to get more clarity, the researchers combined 10 earlier studies that looked at women’s diets and followed them over seven to 18 years to see who developed cancer.

Of more than 710,000 women, 2.4 percent ended up with breast cancer. And those in the top fifth of fiber intake were 11 percent less likely to do so than women in the bottom fifth.

That was after accounting for differences in risk factors like alcohol drinking, weight, hormone replacement therapy and family members with the disease.

Still, it’s impossible to rule out that big fiber eaters had healthier habits overall that would cut their risk, Jia-Yi Dong of Soochow University in Suzhou and his colleagues write in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

And the potential effect was “very small,” Dr. Eleni Linos of Stanford University, who wasn’t involved in the research, told Reuters Health in an email.

About one in eight American women get breast cancer at some point, with less than a quarter of them dying from it.

Although the connection between breast cancer risk and fiber is a small one, fiber is “something that we know is healthy for you anyway,” said Christina Clarke, a research scientist at the Cancer Prevention Institute of California in Fremont.

Known benefits of a high-fiber diet include lower cholesterol and weight loss. If it turns out to cut cancer risk as well, that would be an extra bonus, Clarke said.

Fruits, vegetables, beans, and whole grains are all high in fiber.

According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 2010 Dietary Guidelines, most Americans don’t get enough fiber. The guidelines recommend that women eat 25 grams of fiber per day and men eat 38 grams, while the average Americans gets just 15 grams a day.

“Increasing dietary fiber intake in the general public is of great public health significance,” the Chinese team concludes.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Strength of the piece.  It repeatedly stressed:
Perfect, easy to understand explanation of possible confounders.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Trulance (plecanatide) for the treatment of Chronic Idiopathic Constipation (CIC) in adult patients.

“No one medication works for all patients suffering from chronic gastrointestinal disorders,” said Julie Beitz, M.D., director of the Office of Drug Evaluation III in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “With the availability of new therapies, patients and their doctors can select the most appropriate treatment for their condition.”

According to the National Institutes of Health, an estimated 42 million people are affected by constipation. Chronic idiopathic constipation is a diagnosis given to those who experience persistent constipation and for whom there is no structural or biochemical explanation.

Trulance, taken orally once daily, works locally in the upper GI tract to stimulate secretion of intestinal fluid and support regular bowel function.

The safety and efficacy of Trulance were established in two 12-week, placebo-controlled trials including 1,775 adult participants. Participants were randomly assigned to receive a placebo or Trulance, once daily. Participants in the trials were required to have been diagnosed with constipation at least six months prior to the study onset and to have less than three defecations per week in the previous three months, as well as other symptoms associated with constipation. Participants receiving Trulance were more likely to experience improvement in the frequency of complete spontaneous bowel movements than those receiving placebo, and also had improvements in stool frequency and consistency and straining.

Trulance should not be used in children less than six years of age due to the risk of serious dehydration. Trulance should be avoided in patients six years of age to 18 years of age. The safety and effectiveness of Trulance have not been established in patients less than 18 years of age. Trulance should not be used in patients with known or suspected mechanical gastrointestinal obstruction.

The most common and serious side effects of Trulance was diarrhea. Patients may experience severe diarrhea. If severe diarrhea occurs, patients should stop taking Trulance and contact their health care provider.

Trulance is manufactured by New York, New York-based Synergy Pharmaceuticals Inc.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release describes the protocol of the studies used as a basis for its approval (“safety and efficacy of Trulance were established in two 12-week, placebo-controlled trials including 1,775 adult participants. Participants were randomly assigned to receive a placebo or Trulance, once daily.”)
We wish the release had included where the studies were published so that journalists and other interested readers can easily find more information. Most health intervention news releases do include these references.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hematology researchers have used a single injection of gene therapy to correct a rare bleeding disorder, factor VII deficiency, in dogs. This success in large animals holds considerable potential for a safe, effective and long-lasting new treatment in humans with the same bleeding disorder.

"Our finding has great clinical relevance for patients with factor VII deficiency," said study leader Paris Margaritis, D. Phil., a hematology researcher at the Raymond G. Perelman Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics (CCMT) at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). "These dogs have the type of mutation found in the majority of patients with this disorder, so this approach could lead to a sustained gene therapy in people."

The Margaritis team collaborated with University of North Carolina (UNC) scientists, led by Tim Nichols, M.D., professor of Medicine and Pathology at the UNC School of Medicine.

Factor VII deficiency is rare, found in about one in 300,000 to one in 500,000 people. Because a gene mutation impairs normal production of a blood clotting factor, patients may suffer excessive bleeding in the central nervous system or GI tract, or after surgery or an injury. Female patients may suffer excessive menstrual bleeding.

Factor VII (FVII) deficiency has a range of severity, with about 40 percent of patients having severe disease. They are most commonly treated with regular infusions of clotting factor. Unlike hemophilia, a better-known bleeding disorder that predominantly affects males, factor VII deficiency strikes males and females equally.

Gene therapy proposed for bleeding disorders involves introducing DNA carrying the code to produce the specific clotting factor lacking in patients. Researchers at CHOP and elsewhere have bioengineered an adeno-associated virus (AAV), which does not cause disease, as a vector to deliver DNA into cells where it can express enough factor to make the blood clot normally. Over the past 15 years, CHOP hematology researchers have performed clinical trials of gene therapy for hemophilia B that have helped define efficacy and dosing levels in humans.

The CCMT at CHOP houses a clinical-grade laboratory that manufactures gene therapy vectors, including the AAV vectors used in the current study. Margaritis, a member of the CHOP group long engaged in hemophilia research, currently leads a laboratory focused on factor VII deficiency as well as hemophilia.

"We developed a unique animal model of this disease after identifying dogs with naturally occurring factor VII deficiency," said Margaritis. "Our investigations enabled us to design the corrective gene to insert into our virus vector in the current study."

The CHOP team collaborated with scientists at UNC who have a long-established colony of dogs for hematology research. Based on previous work by Margaritis, the UNC team identified dogs for this gene therapy study.

Nichols, the director of UNC's Francis Owens Blood Research Laboratory, characterized factor VII deficiency in four individual dogs. Using the AAV vectors supplied by Margaritis, Nichols injected the dogs with varying dosages and monitored their health outcomes and biological markers over several years.

The treated dogs had expressed levels of clotting factor VII that would be therapeutic in humans, with long-term stability. In one dog, the effects persisted nearly three years. Based on kidney function, liver function, and blood measurements in the dogs, the treatment was safe, and did not elicit unwanted immune responses.

The current study sets the stage for clinical trials in humans. This gene therapy may especially benefit young children with severe bleeding from factor VII deficiency, such as patients receiving care in CHOP's hematology program.

"This work is very exciting and promising," said Nichols, who added, "The FVII-deficient dogs tolerated the initial gene therapy infusions very well and have had no adverse side effects over several years of follow up. In other related studies in dogs with hemophilia B, similar positive findings have translated to people with hemophilia B." Both Nichols and Margaritis agreed: "The table is now set to propose clinical trials that would treat people who suffer from FVII deficiency."

The National Institutes of Health (grants HL064190 and HL63098), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Pennsylvania Department of Health supported this study. In addition to his CHOP position, Margaritis is a faculty member at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.

"Sustained correction of FVII deficiency in dogs using AAV-mediated expression of zymogen FVII," Blood, published online Dec. 23, 2015.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The limited information given in the news release describes the quality of the evidence, particularly the fact that this was an animal study that is not directly applicable to humans. The release notes that the study “sets the stage for clinical trials in humans.” The release could have noted that a study with only four (canine) participants is very small.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Jan. 9, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- Women with heavy menstrual bleeding may find some relief using an intrauterine device, or IUD, containing the hormone levonorgestrel, according to new research.

British researchers found that the treated IUD was more effective at reducing the effects of heavy menstrual bleeding (also called menorrhagia) on quality of life compared to other treatments. Normally used for contraception, the intrauterine system is sold under the brand name Mirena.

"If women suffer with heavy periods and do not want to get pregnant -- as the levonorgestrel intrauterine system is a contraceptive -- then having the levonorgestrel intrauterine system is a very good first-line treatment option that does not require taking regular, daily oral medications," said the study's lead author, Dr. Janesh Gupta, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Birmingham and Birmingham Women's Hospital in England.

For women who do want to get pregnant, Gupta said, taking the blood-clotting drug tranexamic acid during periods is an alternate method of treating heavy periods.

Results of the study, which was funded by the United Kingdom's National Institute of Health Research, appear in the Jan. 10 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Heavy menstrual bleeding is a significant problem for many women. About 20 percent of gynecologist office visits in the United States and the United Kingdom are because of heavy bleeding. There are several nonhormonal and hormonal treatment options available to reduce blood loss.

The current study compared the use of traditional medical options -- tranexamic acid pills, mefenamic acid (Ponstel), combined estrogen-progestogen and progesterone alone -- to the use of the levonorgestrel intrauterine system.

The researchers randomly assigned nearly 600 women with heavy menstrual bleeding to receive either the IUD or standard medical care. They assessed improvement using a patient-reported score on a scale designed to measure severity of symptoms. The scale goes from 0 to 100, with lower scores indicating more severe symptoms. The researchers also asked about quality of life and sexual activity, and noted whether a woman needed surgery for heavy periods.

Women in the IUD group reported much greater improvement -- 32.7 points on the symptom scale versus 21.4 points in the standard treatment group. They also reported greater improvements in quality of life.

There was no difference in the rates of surgery or sexual activity between the two groups.

More women were still using the intrauterine system after two years than were still taking standard medical treatments -- 64 percent compared to 38 percent.

Gupta said the main reason she believes the IUD group was more successful at reducing symptoms is that there is "100 percent compliance with treatment as there is a continuous drug treatment effect." Women taking medications may forget to take them sometimes.

Serious side effects were similar between the groups. Gupta said the main side effect from the intrauterine system is irregular periods for up to six months.

Another expert said the findings show promise for women bothered by heavy bleeding.

"This study really adds to the evidence that shows how useful this intrauterine system is for heavy menstrual bleeding," said Dr. Eve Espey, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of New Mexico School of Medicine in Albuquerque.

Getting an intrauterine system generally just requires one office visit, Espey said. Insertion of the device may be mildly uncomfortable for some women, she said.

For women who may be hesitant to use an IUD because of pelvic infections linked to an early version called the Dalkon Shield, Gupta said that as long as women are screened for sexually transmitted diseases before getting an intrauterine system, the risk of infection is low.

Espey agreed. "Today's intrauterine systems have a great side-effect profile," she said. "They also have a high continuation and a high satisfaction rate."

Learn more about intrauterine devices from the Association of Reproductive Healthcare Professionals.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story makes clear that this was randomized trial, allowing higher confidence in its findings.  The story did discuss how the findings for the IUD group could be influenced by the fact the Mirena yields a 100% compliance but didn’t discuss how this biased results.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(New York, NY - January 18, 2017) An international phase 3 trial has found that the drug regorafenib improved survival in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a form of liver cancer, giving people who previously had no other options a better chance at survival. Results from the study, which included researchers at The Tisch Cancer Institute at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, were recently published online in The Lancet. The trial, funded by Bayer, included 152 sites in 21 countries.

About 40 percent of HCC cases are diagnosed at advanced stages, a point when HCC is particularly difficult to treat. This trial provides evidence that regorafenib is the first systemic treatment for patients whose HCC progressed during treatment with sorafenib, the only other drug with proven clinical benefit.

This study tested regorafenib's effectiveness as a second-line therapy on 573 patients previously treated with sorafenib, 194 of whom were given a placebo. Regorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, significantly improved overall survival, from 7.8 months on placebo to 10.6 months with regorafenib. Two patients treated with regorafenib had their tumor shrink to an undetectable level, according to the study.

"This study represents a breakthrough in the management of hepatocellular carcinoma, since it provides evidence for clinical benefits in an area that was an unmet medical need," said Josep M. Llovet, MD, founder and Director of the Liver Cancer Program and Professor of Medicine and Liver Diseases at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. "Regorafenib has shown it can improve survival in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma progressing on sorafenib. Previously, no treatment was available for these patients."

Dr. Llovet was a member of the clinical trial's steering committee, and Charissa Chang, MD, Assistant Professor of Medicine and Liver Diseases at the Icahn School of Medicine, was principal investigator of the Mount Sinai testing site.

The success of this trial opens the field for testing drugs in third-line treatment of HCC and provides a rationale to test regorafenib as a first-line treatment or in combination with therapies administered directly into the tumor or diseased liver in patients in an earlier stage of HCC, according to Dr. Llovet. In this trial, regorafenib was well-tolerated with manageable adverse events, according to the paper in Lancet.

In January, Bayer announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had granted priority review status for Stivarga (regorafenib) as a second-line systemic treatment for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. This research was also presented during the European Society of Medical Oncology's World Congress on Gastrointestinal Cancer in June.

Liver cancer is the second-leading primary cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release gives a concise, accurate, overview of the study. But the study reports a lot of other issues that aren’t mentioned in the news release. It appears that 75% of the patients in both groups had cirrhosis. The effect of this is not likely to be important since the percentage was the same in both groups.  An open question on the study is that the authors used a one-sided statistical test, making it more likely that they would find statistical significance, when it would not be so if they had used the more common two-tailed test (which tests for the possibility of a relationship in both directions). How this statistical change would affect the results is not clear.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have slowed down the ageing process by implanting stem cells into the brains of animals, raising hopes for new strategies to combat age-related diseases and extend the human lifespan.

Implants of stem cells that make fresh neurons in the brain were found to put the brakes on ageing in older mice, keeping them more physically and mentally fit for months, and extending their lives by 10-15% compared to untreated animals.

The work, described as a tour de force and a breakthrough by one leading expert, suggests that ageing across the body is controlled by stem cells that are found in the hypothalamus region of the brain in youth, but which steadily die off until they are almost completely absent in middle age.

Researchers at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York hope to launch clinical trials of the procedure soon, but must first produce supplies of human neural stem cells in the lab which can be implanted into volunteers.

“Of course humans are more complex,” said Dongsheng Cai, who led the research. “However, if the mechanism is fundamental, you might expect to see effects when an intervention is based on it.”

Previous experiments had already hinted that the hypothalamus, an almond-sized part of the brain in humans, played some role in the ageing process, but what it was remained unclear. The latest investigation from the US team pinpoints which cells are important and how they might work.

In the first of a series of experiments in mice, Cai showed that neural stem cells, which are found in a handful of brain regions at birth, disappear from the hypothalamus over time. The stem cells are known to form fresh brain cells in youth, but the process slows down dramatically in adults. Though small, the hypothalamus forms a crucial connection between the body’s nervous and hormonal systems.

To test whether the decline in stem cells was causing ageing, and not itself a result of old age, the researchers injected mice with a toxin that wiped out 70% of their neural stem cells. The effect was striking. Over the next few months the mice aged more rapidly than usual, and performed much worse than control animals on a battery of tests of endurance, coordination, social behaviour and ability to recognise objects. “Behaviourally mice aged faster when these cells were removed during early ageing,” Cai told the Guardian. The animals died months earlier than healthy control animals.

Next, the scientists looked at what happened when aged mice received injections of fresh neural stem cells. This time the mice lived longer than controls, typically several months more, an increase of about 15%. If a similar extension was achieved in humans, a person with a life expectancy of 80 years could live to 92.

Having proved that it was neural stem cells that were important for ageing, the scientists ran further tests to work out what the cells were doing. They found that molecules called microRNAs, or miRNAs, that are released from neural stem cells were responsible for most of the ageing effects. When the molecules are produced in the hypothalamus, they flow into the clear fluid in the brain and spinal cord and affect how genes operate.

“The mechanism is partially due to these cells secreting certain miRNAs which help maintain youth, and the loss of these leads to ageing” said Cai, whose study is published in Nature. The next step is to create human neural stem cells in the lab for testing.

“It is a tour de force,” said David Sinclair at Harvard Medical School. “It’s a breakthrough. The brain controls how long we live. I can see a day when we are implanted with stem cells or treated with stem cell RNAs that improve our health and extend our lives. I would love to know which brain stem cell secretions extend a mouse’s lifespan and if human stem cells make them too.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job at explaining various aspects of the research and depicting the stages through which the research team drew its conclusions. It also is up front about this being animal research, so far untried in humans at even the earliest stages of clinical trials.
Of note, the original paper mentions that this study was conducted in very few mice (total of about 20) and only in male mice. That detail would have been useful to include.
One thing we wanted to point out that was problematic: The story said “if a similar extension was achieved in humans, a person with a life expectancy of 80 years could live to 92.” We have no idea how this may impact humans; the evidence doesn’t support that kind of speculation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hormone therapy is the only FDA-approved treatment for hot flashes related to menopause, but many women are reluctant to undergo hormone therapy because its long-term use has been linked to an increased risk for breast cancer and stroke .

The study was presented in Chicago at the annual meeting of the North American Menopause Society (NAMS).

In a manufacturer-funded study, the drug Serada proved to be more effective than placebo for preventing hot flashes and reducing their severity.

Oct. 6, 2010 -- An extended-release version of the seizure and pain drug gabapentin may be one step closer to becoming the first approved nonhormonal treatment for menopause -related hot flashes .

In earlier studies, immediate-release gabapentin was shown to be an effective treatment for hot flashes. But side effects, including dizziness and daytime sleepiness, were commonly reported by users.

Michael Sweeney, MD, who is vice president of research and development for Serada manufacturer Depomed Inc., says the company’s slow-release gabapentin formulation avoids many of these side effects.

About 60% of women who took the experimental drug in one study reported side effects, compared to about 50% of women taking placebo pills. About 8% and 18% of Serada users reported daytime sleepiness and dizziness, respectively, compared to about 3% and 8% of women who took a placebo.

“These side effects, when they did occur, tended to occur early in treatment and disappear within a few weeks,” Sweeney says.

Researchers presented findings from two studies of Serada at the NAMS meeting.

In one study, the number of daily hot flashes experienced by postmenopausal women taking 1,800 milligrams of the drug per day declined from around 10 to around 2. But a similar reduction in hot flashes was seen in women who took placebo pills instead of the slow-release gabapentin.

In the second study, about 65% of women taking Serada reported significant improvement in hot flash symptoms after 12 weeks of treatment, compared to 45% of women taking placebo.

NAMS founder and former executive director Wulf Utian, MD, says Serada does not appear to be as effective as hormonal therapy, but it may be a useful alternative treatment for women who can’t take hormones or don’t want to.

Utian is now an independent consultant and was a co-author of one of the studies.

“Estrogen and estrogen-progestin drugs are about 95% effective for treating hot flashes,” he tells WebMD. “This drug was about 60% to 65% effective, which is about the same efficacy that has been reported with antidepressants [for treatment of hot flashes].”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story also made it clear that these were placebo-controlled trials that used relevant clinical endpoints, thus meeting some of the key requirements for this criterion. On the other hand, the article failed to provide some basic but important details about the design of the two studies that are at the heart of the story. Examples:
We’re on the fence with this one. In general, a story needs to provide some kind of description of the size of a study to be judged satisfactory on this criterion, but the story does provide readers with enough information to meet our main requirement.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Noctiva (desmopressin acetate) nasal spray for adults who awaken at least two times per night to urinate due to a condition known as nocturnal polyuria (overproduction of urine during the night). Noctiva is the first FDA-approved treatment for this condition.

“Today’s approval provides adults who overproduce urine at night with the first FDA-approved therapeutic option to help reduce the number of times a night they wake up to urinate,” said Hylton V. Joffe, M.D., M.M.Sc., director of the Division of Bone, Reproductive, and Urologic Products in the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. “It is important to know that Noctiva is not approved for all causes of night-time urination, so patients should discuss their symptoms with their health care provider who can determine the underlying cause of the night-time urination and whether Noctiva is right for them.”

Nocturia (wakening at night to urinate) is a symptom that can be caused by a wide variety of conditions, such as congestive heart failure, poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, medications, or diseases of the bladder or prostate. Before considering Noctiva, health care providers should evaluate each patient for possible causes for the nocturia, and optimize the treatment of underlying conditions that may be contributing to the night-time urination. Because Noctiva is approved only for adults with nocturia caused by nocturnal polyuria, health care providers should confirm overproduction of urine at night with a 24-hour urine collection, if one has not been obtained previously. Health care providers should also be mindful of underlying conditions that can cause nocturia, but that make treatment with Noctiva unsafe, such as excessive drinking of fluids or symptomatic congestive heart failure.

Noctiva is taken daily, approximately 30 minutes before going to bed. It works by increasing the absorption of water through the kidneys, which leads to less urine production.

Noctiva’s efficacy was established in two 12-week, randomized, placebo-controlled trials in 1,045 patients 50 years of age and older with nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria. Although these trials showed a small reduction in the average number of night-time urinations with Noctiva compared to placebo, more patients treated with Noctiva were able to at least halve their number of night-time urinations, and patients treated with Noctiva had more nights with one or fewer night-time urinations.

Noctiva is being approved with a boxed warning and a Medication Guide because it can cause low sodium levels in the blood (hyponatremia). Severe hyponatremia can be life-threatening if it is not promptly diagnosed and treated, leading to seizures, coma, respiratory arrest or death. Health care providers should make sure the patient’s sodium level is normal before starting Noctiva, and should check sodium levels within one week and approximately one month after starting treatment and periodically thereafter. The lower Noctiva dose is recommended as the starting dose for those who may be at risk for hyponatremia, such as the elderly. Noctiva should not be used in patients at increased risk of severe hyponatremia, such as those with excessive fluid intake, those who have illnesses that can cause fluid or electrolyte imbalances, certain patients with kidney damage, and in those using certain medicines, known as loop diuretics or glucocorticoids.

Noctiva should also not be used in patients with symptomatic congestive heart failure or uncontrolled hypertension because fluid retention can worsen these underlying conditions. Use of Noctiva should be discontinued temporarily in patients with certain nasal conditions such as colds or allergies until those conditions have resolved.

Noctiva is also not recommended for the treatment of nocturia in pregnant women. Nocturia is usually related to normal changes in pregnancy that do not require treatment with Noctiva. Noctiva should not be used in children.

The most common side effects of Noctiva in clinical trials included nasal discomfort, cold symptoms (nasopharyngitis), nasal congestion, sneezing, high or increased blood pressure, back pain, nose bleeds, bronchitis and dizziness.

Although there are other FDA-approved medications that also contain desmopressin, none of those medications are approved to treat nocturia.

Noctiva is manufactured by Renaissance Lakewood, LLC for Milford, Pennsylvania-based Serenity Pharmaceuticals, LLC.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The Agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release provides information about the strength of the research with this statement: “Noctiva’s efficacy was established in two 12-week, randomized, placebo-controlled trials in 1,045 patients 50 years of age and older with nocturia due to nocturnal polyuria.”
Evidence derived from two relatively short-term studies on a daily drug that could potentially be used for years doesn’t seem particularly strong. Do we know if the benefits are durable or whether the slight benefit over placebo might dwindle to nothing after 6 months or a year of use? The drug can have serious side effects but nocturnal polyuria is not a life-threatening condition. Patients and physicians would be well-served with longer term safety data.
And as stated above, placebo was nearly as effective as the drug in reducing the number of night-time visits to the bathroom.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Developing a vaccine to stop HIV is thought to be among the most daunting challenges in medicine for one big reason: The virus is extraordinarily genetically diverse, even more so than the flu. So it’s difficult to think about how a single shot might work against all the different HIV subtypes circulating around the world.

But scientists may be inching toward a vaccine that could tackle HIV’s genetic diversity and prevent the virus from taking hold in people.

Researchers from the National Institutes of Health and Johnson & Johnson at the International AIDS Society conference in Paris Monday morning presented data on a clinical trial of what’s called the “Ad26-env mosaic vaccine.”

The mosaic vaccine was developed using a computer algorithm to analyze HIV data from around the world and select a range of HIV sequences to include in a shot. It’s called a “mosaic” because it involves taking pieces of different viruses and sticking them together to generate immune responses that can cover a broad range of HIV subtypes.

“One of the great challenges for development of HIV vaccine is viral diversity,” said Dan Barouch, a lead researcher on the vaccine and director of the Center for Virology and Vaccine Research at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. “The mosaic strategy is one way to attempt to deal with the global virus diversity.”

A word of caution, though: We’re only in the early phase of human testing, and the vaccine could ultimately fail to prevent the virus from spreading among people. But so far, the HIV community is carefully watching the Ad26 vaccine research because the approach seems quite promising.

The mosaic approach seems promising in very early clinical research

In the 35 years of the HIV epidemic, only four HIV vaccine concepts have been tested in humans. The mosaic strategy is the fifth concept, and one of only two HIV vaccines that’s currently part of clinical trials of efficacy in humans. (The other is the HVTN 702 HIV vaccine candidate, now underway in Thailand.)

In the study of the Ad26 mosaic vaccine, called the APPROACH trial, 393 volunteers in the United States, Rwanda, Uganda, South Africa, and Thailand were randomly assigned to receive one of seven experimental vaccines or a placebo. The mosaic vaccine was the best tolerated and also capable of generating anti-HIV immune responses in all the people who received the shots.

Before this, studies of the mosaic vaccine in rhesus monkeys showed a 66 percent efficacy rate, meaning 66 percent of monkeys that got the shot were protected from the virus. (With HIV, 50 to 60 percent is about the efficacy range researchers hope for.) Interestingly, in the early human study, the immune response was comparable to the rhesus monkey one, which gave the researchers hope that the vaccine might be similarly effective in people.

We need more human studies of this HIV vaccine

But we still don’t know if the vaccine will protect humans from the virus, since the studies so far have only looked at safety and immune responses, not efficacy. And many medicines that look promising in animals, and safe in humans, don’t pan out in clinical trials focused on efficacy.

“I wouldn’t use the word excited too much,” said Anthony Fauci, director of the NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. “It’s a step forward toward getting another candidate into trial that could have some promise.” It’s too soon to say if and when the mosaic vaccine might work to prevent the virus from spreading in humans, he added.

As for next steps, if the researchers continue to see promising data on the mosaic vaccine from another ongoing study, a larger human efficacy trial will move forward toward the end of the year in southern Africa, involving some 2,600 healthy, HIV-negative women.

Deaths from AIDS have halved since 2005 — but there’s still a ton of work to be done

We’ve made remarkable progress against HIV around the world. In 1996, as HIV prevalence was peaking around the world, the United Nations established UNAIDS, the first global health body focused on a single disease. In 2000, the UN Security Council convened an unprecedented meeting to address the out-of-control AIDS crisis. This led to a massive concentration of resources into HIV/AIDS research, and triggered global and coordinated efforts to stem the disease.

Researchers and doctors figured out how to get people tested and diagnosed quickly, and uncovered effective treatments that allowed those with HIV to live long, relatively healthy lives. Public health officials also waged awareness campaigns about prevention, reminding people to practice safe sex with condoms and get tested, and that early HIV treatment can save lives. Recently, researchers even discovered a pill to prevent HIV.

Deaths from AIDS have halved to 1 million since 2005, and UNAIDS estimates almost 20 million people now have access to treatment. (Some of that access is now in jeopardy, however, given that President Donald Trump has proposed cutting $800 million from a key US government AIDS program called PEPFAR in the 2018 budget.)

An HIV vaccine has long been elusive. The other HIV vaccine in human testing, the HVTN 702 candidate, is a newer version of the only other HIV vaccine to show any efficacy in humans, called RV144. In a trial on the RV144, 31 percent of people who got the vaccine did not develop HIV — too small a number to be useful. But with the new HVTN trial, researchers hope some tweaks to the vaccine might boost the efficacy rate.

“A safe and effective HIV vaccine would be a powerful tool to reduce new HIV infections worldwide and help bring about a durable end to the HIV/AIDS pandemic,” Fauci said in a statement. “By exploring multiple promising avenues of vaccine development research, we expand our opportunities to achieve these goals.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gets good marks for not exaggerating what we should conclude from the available research, i.e.:  “we still don’t know if the vaccine will protect humans from the virus, since the studies so far have only looked at safety and immune responses, not efficacy. And many medicines that look promising in animals, and safe in humans, don’t pan out in clinical trials focused on efficacy.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Sharon Samuels was a teenager when she was first diagnosed with essential tremor. Over the years her condition worsened, until a new therapy came along to help improve her brain's motor circuit.

For decades, Sharon Samuels struggled with simple everyday tasks like brushing her teeth, buttoning her shirt, putting on makeup, and eating food.

“I did not want to go out socially with other people, especially people who I did not know, because I could see them looking at me. And the feeling was horrible,” she recalled. “It would take my heart away when I was trying to eat and I’d look up and they were looking at me.”

Samuels, 72, has essential tremor, a movement disorder characterized by uncontrollable shaking mostly in the hands or legs. An estimated 10 million people in the United States suffer from the condition, according to the International Essential Tremor Foundation. The disorder isn’t fatal, but it tends to get worse with age and to affect patients’ quality of life.

Doctors usually treat essential tremor with medication, but the drugs don’t work well for all patients. Now a new trial finds that a treatment to kill off neurons in a certain region of the brain can do away with tremors in some patients who don’t respond to drugs. But the procedure brings lasting side effects in some patients, and its long-term usefulness is still being studied.

In an ongoing clinical trial at 11 medical centers globally, researchers are using ultrasound waves to treat the source of essential tremor in the brain. The therapy, called focused ultrasound thalamotomy, uses the energy generated by sound waves to burn off certain cells in the thalamus, a region of the brain where the essential tremor is thought to originate.

Patients are placed in an MRI machine with their head secured in place in a special helmet. They are awake as doctors aim over 1,000 low-energy ultrasound waves to create a lesion — an injury to the tissue — inside the thalamus.

“As we make the test lesion, we see a subtle improvement in their tremor and the patients notice it,” said Dr. Rees Cosgrove who is leading the trial at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. Brigham is one of the six centers running the trial in the US.

“As we enlarge the lesion, the tremor just stops and they’ll just look at their hand. It has been shaking for years and they look at it as though, ‘Hmm, is this really my hand?’ It’s really a remarkable moment.”

For Samuels, who underwent the procedure on June 29, the recovery has been surprising. She had been taking tremor medication for almost a decade with little improvement. After the procedure, which only focused on her left hand, her tremor there has almost disappeared.

“This has changed the quality of my life,” she said. “Now, it’s a pleasure, I can sign my name, I can write. I can eat like a normal person, doing things that I couldn’t do before.”

In July, the Food and Drug Administration approved the device being used in the trial. It has been developed by InSightec, which is funding the trial along with the Focused Ultrasound Foundation and the Binational Industrial Research and Development Foundation.

A pilot study on MRI-guided focused ultrasound treatment was published in 2013.

The randomized trial provides further data on the treatment. In the study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine on Wednesday, 76 patients were treated with focused ultrasound, and their tremor was evaluated after the first, third, sixth, and 12th month. Researchers found that the severity of essential tremor reduced significantly over that time in the patients who underwent the treatment versus those who had a sham procedure. The treated group also evaluated their quality of life as much better than before the procedure, despite a few persistent side effects like gait disturbance and paresthesia — the sensation of prickling pins and needles.

Neurologist Dr. Bryan Ho, who is not involved in the trial, noted that tremor suppression remained sustained throughout the 12 months. But he expressed concern about the side effects of the treatment.

“Over a third of patients actually experienced either gait disturbance or paresthesia. It’s a pretty high incidence of side effects,” said Dr. Ho, who is the director of the Movement Disorders Program at Tufts Medical Center.

He added that since these patients were only followed for a year, there isn’t enough data available yet to determine the long-term efficacy of the treatment.

“It’s one and done,” he said. “Patients may have some benefit for a period of time, but how do they do five years from now or 10 years from now after the treatment? That needs to be shown.”

The researchers are in the process of collecting this data; the clinical trial will run until December. The doctors at Brigham will follow up with Samuels — and others who undergo the treatment — for up to five years and run more MRI scans and neurological exams to find out for how long the lesion lasts and keeps the tremor suppressed.

For now, the treatment has had an immense impact on patients’ lives. “These people are able to go back and now use that hand like you and I use our hands, without thinking about it,” said Dr. Cosgrove.

“They can write their names again, they can feed themselves, they are not embarrassed about being in public. So it really is extraordinarily helpful for people.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story clearly spells out that there isn’t data on the long-term efficacy of this procedure, and that more study is needed, so we’ll give this a barely passing Satisfactory.
Several important study limitations were not included in the story, such as the fact that the treatment did not provide significant improvement for some types of tremors, and the treatment is not appropriate for people who are unwilling or unable to undergo an MRI.
We’re also not told that the sham group was only followed for 3 months, while the experimental group was followed for a year.  This is not usually recommended in clinical trials and both groups should be followed for the same length of time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Nov. 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new insomnia drug helped people get a bit more shut-eye in a lab study, researchers report.

The drug, known as suvorexant, is being developed by Merck Research Laboratories, which funded and conducted the study. The medication is not available yet, but the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reviewing it for possible approval, the researchers said.

In the United States, about 10 percent of people say they have chronic insomnia, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. There are sleep aids on the market, but they do not work for everyone and they can have side effects that include sleepwalking, daytime drowsiness and confusion.

Suvorexant works differently from those drugs, zeroing in on specific brain chemicals involved in the ability to sleep, explained study author Dr. William Herring, executive director of clinical research at Merck.

The study, published online Nov. 28 and in the Dec. 4 print issue of the journal Neurology, included 254 healthy adults with primary insomnia, which means it wasn't caused by an underlying physical or mental health problem.

All of the patients spent four weeks on one of four doses of suvorexant and another four weeks on placebo pills. They had their sleep monitored in a sleep lab on their first night with each treatment, and then came back again after four weeks.

Overall, Herring's team found, people slept better with the drug, although the improvement was not dramatic.

At the outset, when patients spent eight hours in bed, they were typically asleep for 66 percent of that time. One day on suvorexant boosted that by anywhere from 5 percent to 13 percent, relative to the placebo. Between 21 and 37 fewer minutes were spent awake during those sleep periods.

There was still a benefit four weeks later. One expert pointed out, however, that the benefit was small.

"The amount of additional sleep was not tremendous," said Dr. Carl Bazil, director of the division of epilepsy and sleep at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center.

The effect was essentially comparable to what has been seen with other sleep medications, said Bazil, who was not involved in the research.

But, he said, suvorexant is seen as a potentially important development in the world of sleep medicine, because the drug blocks specific brain chemicals called orexins, which help keep people awake. Standard sleep medications work more widely throughout the brain, Bazil explained, which is why they can have a host of side effects.

"The way [suvorexant] works makes a lot of sense," Bazil said. "The hope is that it will help some people who haven't responded to [other drugs], and have fewer side effects."

It's promising news, Bazil added, that there were no serious side effects in this study.

The most common side effects were sleepiness (reported by about 10 percent of patients on the two higher doses of suvorexant), headache (reported by about 5 percent), dizziness and abnormal dreams (5 percent).

There are still many questions, including whether the drug would benefit people with insomnia due to a health condition, which doctors call secondary insomnia.

The study also excluded adults aged 65 or older -- an age group commonly affected by insomnia. But, Herring said, seniors were part of a larger, 12-month trial, and Merck has submitted those results to the FDA.

Another sleep specialist said the findings show "some potential benefit" from suvorexant, but he cautioned insomnia sufferers against relying completely on any drug.

"Medication can be important," said Dr. William Kohler, who directs the Florida Sleep Institute in Spring Hill. "But in the long run, the best methods for treating insomnia are behavioral techniques."

Kohler said cognitive behavioral therapy -- where people learn to change the thoughts and habits that affect their sleep quality -- is a proven way to manage insomnia. For most people, he said, medication should be a temporary treatment; behavior change is the long-term fix.

Bazil agreed: "I look at most people with insomnia as someone who developed bad sleep habits."

A drug, ideally used for a short time, may help encourage sleep and get people on the right track, Bazil said. "But those bad sleep habits -- you've got to address them too," he added.

"The problem," Kohler noted, "is that we don't want to make behavior changes. We want to pop a pill."

Learn more about insomnia and good sleep habits from the National Sleep Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The use of independent experts saved the story on this criterion because those sources added observations such as:
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Long-term follow-up of participants in clinical trials of a generic vaccine to reverse advanced type 1 diabetes finds significant clinical benefits, including restoration of near-normal blood sugar levels. Three years after receiving two administrations of the bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine four weeks apart, all members of a group of adults with longstanding type 1 diabetes showed an improvement in HbA1c to near normal levels - improvement that persisted for the following five years. The study from a Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) research team - published in npj Vaccines - also reports that the effects of BCG vaccine on blood sugar control appear to depend on a totally novel metabolic mechanism that increases cellular consumption of glucose.

"This is clinical validation of the potential to stably lower blood sugars to near normal levels with a safe vaccine, even in patients with longstanding disease," says Denise Faustman, MD, PhD, director of the MGH Immunobiology Laboratory , principal investigator of BCG clinical trials at MGH and senior author of the npj Vaccines report. "In addition to the clinical outcomes, we now have a clear understanding of the mechanisms through which limited BCG vaccine doses can make permanent, beneficial changes to the immune system and lower blood sugars in type 1 diabetes."

Faustman will also present five-year follow-up results of a separate group of BCG clinical trial participants with longstanding type 1 diabetes on Saturday, June 23, at the 78th Scientific Sessions of the American Diabetes Association in Orlando.

Used for almost a century to prevent tuberculosis, BCG has been known for more than 30 years to boost production of a cytokine called tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which may be beneficial in autoimmune diseases both by eliminating the autoreactive T cells that attack an individual's tissues - in the case of type 1 diabetes, pancreatic islets - and by inducing production of regulatory T cells (Tregs) that could prevent an autoimmune reaction. Faustman's team first reported in 2001 that inducing TNF production could cure type 1 diabetes in mice, but since TNF dosing is toxic in humans, clinical trials have utilized BCG for its ability to elevate TNF levels safely.

Initial clinical trial results, published in a 2012 PLOS One paper, reported that two doses of BCG spaced four weeks apart led to reductions in autoreactive T cells, an increase in Tregs and what turned out to be a transient increase in insulin production. But by the end of that short, 20-week trial, there was no reduction in HbA1c, the established measure of blood sugar levels over time. An extension and expansion of that trial with long term follow-up, the current results are based on data from 282 human study participants - 52 with type 1 diabetes who participated in the BCG clinical trials and 230 who contributed blood samples for mechanistic studies.

Regular monitoring of clinical trial participants found that HbA1c levels of those receiving BCG had dropped by more than 10 percent at three years after treatment and by more than 18 percent at four years. That reduction was maintained over the next four years, with treated participants having an average HbA1c of 6.65, close to the 6.5 considered the threshold for diabetes diagnosis, and with no reports of severe hypoglycemia. Participants in the placebo group and in a comparison group of patients receiving no treatment experienced consistent HbA1c elevations over the same eight-year time period.

In investigating how BCG administration produces its beneficial effects, the research team identified a mechanism never previously seen in humans in response to treatment with any drug - a shifting of the process of glucose metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation, the most common pathway by which cells convert glucose into energy, to aerobic glycolysis, a process that involves significantly greater glucose consumption by cells. The researchers also found that BCG could reduce blood sugar elevations in mice that were caused by means other than autoimmune attack, raising the possibility that BCG vaccines could also be beneficial against type 2 diabetes.

Mihai G. Netea, PhD, professor in the Department of Internal Medicine at Radboud University Medical Center in the Netherlands, says of this study, "The clinical effects and the proposed mechanism demonstrated are exciting and add to the emerging consensus that the BCG vaccine can have a lasting and valuable impact on the immune system. We know, and this study shows, that BCG vaccination induces epigenetic reprogramming at the chromatin architecture level and functional alterations indicative of a permanent change in immunity. The MGH trials and other, larger prevention and intervention trials underway around the globe may lead to a major shift in the prevention and treatment of infections and autoimmunity." Netea was not involved in the current study.

The MGH team's findings set the stage for further testing of BCG administration, including the FDA-approved phase 2 study currently underway, testing multiple BCG doses in a large group of participants with longstanding type 1 diabetes. That trial is fully enrolled, and there are seven additional BCG clinical trial groups currently recruiting or enrolling at MGH, with a pediatric trial in the planning stages. The MGH BCG clinical trial program is entirely funded by private philanthropy from individuals and family foundations, including the Iacocca Foundation. Additional information about clinical trials, including information for potential participants and financial supporters, is available at http://www. or by emailing DiabetesTrial@partners.org.

The lead author of the npj Vaccines paper is Willem M. Kühtreiber, PhD, MGH Immunobiology Laboratories. Additional co-authors are Lisa Tran, Taesoo Kim, Michael Dybala, Brian Nguyen, Sara Plager, Daniel Huang, Sophie Janes, Audrey Defusco, and Danielle Baum, MGH Immunobiology; and Hui Zheng, PhD, MGH Biostatistics.

Massachusetts General Hospital, founded in 1811, is the original and largest teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. The MGH Research Institute conducts the largest hospital-based research program in the nation, with an annual research budget of more than $900 million and major research centers in HIV/AIDS, cardiovascular research, cancer, computational and integrative biology, cutaneous biology, genomic medicine, medical imaging, neurodegenerative disorders, regenerative medicine, reproductive biology, systems biology, photomedicine and transplantation biology. The MGH topped the 2015 Nature Index list of health care organizations publishing in leading scientific journals and earned the prestigious 2015 Foster G. McGaw Prize for Excellence in Community Service. In August 2017 the MGH was once again named to the Honor Roll in the U.S. News & World Report list of "America's Best Hospitals."
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This trial was an extension of a short-term (20 week trial) published in 2012 that showed only a modest, temporary increase in insulin production. This much longer term trial analyzed data from 282 study volunteers (52 with type 1 diabetes) and 230 who contributed blood samples.
The adults with type 1 were treated with BCG and had their HbA1c levels followed for 8 years, presumably while still on insulin (although the news release does not make this clear).
We’re given the percent change in their HbA1c levels between years 3 and 8 — a reduction of nearly 20% —  a moderate improvement over a long-term.
A second arm of this study was a laboratory analysis looking for what might account for the effect of BCG on blood sugar. The authors speculate that their data suggest a metabolic shift in glucose metabolism from oxidative (the most common pathway by which cells convert glucose into energy) to an aerobic metabolism characterized by greater glucose utilization by cells called aerobic glycolysis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
More intensive treatment for patients with acute kidney injury did not bring better results in a large randomized, controlled clinical trial sponsored by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and the National Institutes of Health.

The findings will be published Thursday in the New England Journal of Medicine; they were released early online.

The trial was conducted from 2003 to 2007 and included 1,124 critically ill adult patients at 17 VA hospitals and 10 university hospitals.

The study's lead author, Dr. Paul M. Palevsky, said the results may lead to a large savings in U.S. health care costs, estimated at $100 million to $250 million a year for this type of patient. He is chief of the renal section at the VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System and a professor of medicine at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

In acute kidney injury, the kidneys shut down, causing fluids and waste products to build up in the body. The VA reports the condition has a 50 percent to 80 percent death rate.

In the study, patients who did not need drugs to maintain blood pressure were assigned to either a six-day or three-day dialysis to filter toxins and extra fluid from the blood.

Those patients who needed drugs to increase blood pressure were assigned to two other forms of blood cleaning, both divided into intensive or less intensive groups.

Throughout the study, patients remained in intensive or less intensive therapy, although as their clinical conditions changed, they could change forms of therapy, Dr. Palevsky said.

There was no difference in death rates in both groups, and both also had similar rates of recovering kidney function and other organ failure.

In an accompanying editorial, Dr. Joseph V. Bonventre of Harvard Medical School wrote that he had concerns about the change of therapy offered to patients in the study.

"When a patient transitions from one therapy to another, the dialysis dose is unlikely to be equivalent," he said, adding that results could be affected by different methods in the high-intensity and low-intensity groups. "For example, there was a small over-representation of sustained low-efficiency dialysis in the intensive-therapy group."

Dr. Bonventre wrote that the study had "a predominance of male patients," so there is a question of whether its results can be applied to female patients. And, he said, the results cannot be simply applied to patients with chronic kidney disease, who then have acute kidney injury, since the study excluded any patients with advanced chronic kidney disease.

He concluded, "Given the results of the [Acute Renal Failure Trial Network] study, the renal and intensive care communities must now focus on other strategies to help this population of patients. ... We still have a long way to go in treating acute kidney injury."

First published on July 1, 2008 at 12:00 am
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story explained explicitly that the results discussed came from a large, multicenter, randomized clinical trial. It mentioned where the results of the study discussed were going to be published.
The story would have been more helpful if it had included a few words indicating the strength of the study design. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Aug. 10, 2011 -- Two of three patients dying of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) appear cured and a third is in partial remission after infusions of genetically engineered T cells.

The treatment success came in a pilot study that was only meant to find out whether the treatment was safe, and to determine the right dose to use in later studies. But the therapy worked vastly better than University of Pennsylvania researchers David L. Porter, MD, Carl H. June, MD, and colleagues had dared to hope.

"Our results were absolutely dramatic. It is tremendously exciting," Porter tells WebMD. "These kinds of outcomes don't come around very often. We are really hopeful that we can now translate this into treatment for much larger numbers of patients and apply this technique to other diseases and to many more patients."

Excitement is spreading as oncologists learn about the findings. "I think it is a big deal," says Jacque Galipeau, MD, professor of hematology and medical oncology at Emory University Winship Cancer Center. Galipeau was not involved in the Porter study.

"Here's this guy, the handwriting is on the wall, any hematologist will tell you he is a goner -- this guy was essentially cured," Galipeau tells WebMD. "These genetically engineered cells did what everyone in the field has tried to do for 20 years. The man probably had kilograms of disease in his body, and the cells mopped it up completely."

The treatment uses a form of white blood cells called T cells harvested from each patient. A manmade virus-like vector is used to transfer special molecules to the T cells. One of the molecules, CD19, makes the T cells attack B lymphocytes -- the cells that become cancerous in CLL.

All this has been done before. These genetically engineered cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. They kill cancer in the test tube. But in humans, they die away before they do much damage to tumors.

What's new about the current treatment is the addition of a special signaling molecule called 4-1BB. This signal does several things: it gives CAR T cells more potent anti-tumor activity, and it somehow allows the cells to persist and multiply in patients' bodies. Moreover, the signal does not call down the deadly all-out immune attack -- the feared "cytokine storm" -- that can do more harm than good.

This may be why relatively small infusions of the CAR T cells had such a profound effect. Each of the cells killed thousands of cancer cells and destroyed more than 2 pounds of tumor in each patient.

"Within three weeks, the tumors had been blown away, in a way that was much more violent than we ever expected,"June says in a news release. 'It worked much better than we thought it would."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story was superior to the Reuters story in evaluating the quality of the evidence. For example, it said right in lead that the study was only on three patients. It also provided more qualifiers for the findings than the Reuters story. It said, for example, “Although the CAR T cells in the study were designed to fight CLL, there’s good reason to hope they can be effective in other forms of cancer. The catch is that it can work only on tumor cells that carry markers flagging them for destruction. Normal cells that carry the same markers will also be destroyed.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - First results from a human trial of an Ebola vaccine from GlaxoSmithKline show it is safe and generates an immune response, scientists said on Wednesday, but larger trials are needed to see if it protects and if a booster is needed.

The vaccine is being developed by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) and GSK against the Zaire strain of Ebola — the one circulating in West Africa — and the first doses for a larger trial arrived in Liberia last week.

That trial is the first of several mid-stage studies planned for West Africa and aims to test GSK’s vaccine and one from Merck and NewLink. Johnson & Johnson and Bavarian Nordic have a vaccine in early-stage clinical tests.

The early-stage Phase I trial of GSK’s vaccine was primarily designed to test safety, but Adrian Hill, who led the work at Oxford’s Jenner Institute, said it was “encouraging” that the shot also prompted responses from the immune system.

“The safety profile is pretty much as we’d hoped and the immune responses are okay, but not great,” he told Reuters.

The data, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, were from 60 healthy volunteers given the vaccine in Britain between Sept. 17 and Nov. 18 last year.

The volunteers got one of three doses - low, medium, or high - and data from 28 days after vaccination showed the shot was safe at these doses, with only mild side effects.

“People typically experienced mild symptoms that lasted for one or maybe two days, such as pain or reddening at the injection site, and occasionally people felt feverish,” Hill said.

However, the antibody response was weaker than was found in a trial of the same Ebola vaccine in macaque monkeys, in which the animals were also found to be protected.

Hill said the lower antibody levels, together with a lower response detected in the immune system’s T-cells, suggested to him that a booster may well be needed.

Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust charity which helped fund the trial, said it provided “good initial evidence that the GSK vaccine will be safe to use in people”.

“However, we still don’t know whether it will provide protection against Ebola infection in a real-world situation,” he said. “That’s why trials in West Africa of this, and the other vaccines in development, must begin as soon possible.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The quality of the evidence is well described.  The reader clearly knows that the study was a Phase 1 trial, the number of subjects, the three doses used and the results both in terms of potential harms and possible benefits.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Over the past few decades, as breast cancer has increasingly been treated as a systemic disease, the number of surgeries performed on the most serious cases has plummeted. With better drugs and radiation techniques available, the proportion of women with Stage 4 breast cancer who had surgery dropped from 67.8 percent in 1988 to 25.1 percent in 2011, according to a study published Wednesday in the journal JAMA Surgery.

But the study raises an intriguing question about that approach. It shows that women who had surgery survived longer than those who didn't: a median of 28 months vs. 19 months. When the researchers examined a small subset of the group — those who survived 10 years — they found that 9.6 percent had chosen to have surgery while 2.9 percent had not.

"Maybe we need to revisit this question of surgery," said Mary C. Schroeder, an assistant professor in the College of Pharmacy at the University of Iowa and one of the authors of the study. "It may not be right for all women, but it may be better for some women than it was in 1995."

[He had a 3.5-pound tumor and months to live. Here's how he survived]

Previous research has reached the same conclusion, but a significant problem with this study and others like it is that they rely on retrospective data, looking back over any number of years, said Michael S. Sabel, the chief of surgical oncology at the University of Michigan, who was not involved in the newly published study. In retrospective research, it's impossible to filter out the countless reasons that a woman and her doctor might have made the decision to treat the cancer with or without surgery, leaving the conclusions unreliable for clinical decision-making, he said.

"It's premature to suggest, and it’s a difficult conversation to have with patients, that removing the breast will help them live longer in the face of Stage 4 disease," Sabel said.

Two small prospective studies have suggested no survival difference among women with Stage 4 breast cancer who have surgery and those who don't, he said. A large, randomized, prospective study currently being conducted by the Eastern Clinical Oncology Group should produce the most reliable data on the subject to date, he said.

In a Stage 4 case, cancer cells have left the breast, metastizing to bones or other organs, which presents a more dire and immediate threat to a woman's survival than the presence of the original tumor. Still there may be reasons to remove the cancer in the breast. Some evidence suggests that it may be influencing the woman's immunological response to her cancer. Or it could be continuously "seeding" the spread of cancer to other parts of the body.

In their study, Schroeder; Alexandra Thomas, a professor at Iowa's Carver College of Medicine, and others looked at 21,372 women from 1988 to 2011 who had Stage 4 breast cancer at the time of their original diagnosis and did not receive radiation as part of their first course of therapy. Their median age was 63.

[Cancer trials are changing. That could mean faster access to better drugs]

The researchers found that median survival for all of the women improved from 20 to 26 months as more sophisticated treatments and better imaging techniques developed over that time. As other research has shown, African American women were over-represented among women who have Stage 4 breast cancer at the time they are first diagnosed.

In interviews, Schroeder and Thomas stressed that each decision about whether to have surgery is based on many factors that only a woman and her doctors can assess, in particular how far the cancer has spread and how sick she is.

But with better therapies to control the cancer systemically and improved imaging that finds ever-smaller deposits of cancer in other parts of the body, it may be time to see whether surgery also can help increase the length of survival times, they said.

"Aggressive local therapy may benefit select women, such as those with an already established potential for durable remission," they wrote in their paper. That would include younger women whose cancers have not spread in great volume to other organs and who have certain kinds of cancers that respond better to drugs, Lisa Newman, medical director of the Henry Ford Health System's International Center for the Study of Breast Cancer Subtypes, said in an e-mail. Newman was not involved in the study.

"Theoretically...patients with metastatic breast cancer might benefit from surgery to remove the cancerous breast tumor in combination with medical therapies as a more complete reduction of their total body cancer burden," she added.

With $45 billion pledge to charity, Mark Zuckerberg and wife imagine ‘a world without suffering from disease’

The myth of sugar-free drinks, candy: Study shows they can wreak havoc on teeth, too

Modern men tend to overeat like cavemen as a way of showing off to women

For more health news, you can sign up for our weekly newsletter here.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The evaluation of evidence was excellent in this Washington Post story, as it pointed out the limitations to the study and described other studies that had not reported the same results. For example, the story explains the limitations of retrospective data, which look back on patients’ treatments. Since the motivations behind therapy decisions are unknown, the conclusions could be rendered unreliable for clinical decision-making, the article says. Another limitation was the over-representation of Africa-American women in the study. It also details two prospective studies that found no survival difference among women with stage 4 breast cancer.
One limitation that was overlooked, however, was that usually younger women underwent surgery, which may have also confounded the results. And according to the original research report, age (younger than 45 years) was an independent predictor of prolonged survival.
The story also describes and quantifies the research, mentioning the study looked at 21,372 women with stage 4 breast cancer from 1988 to 2011.
Lastly, we applaud the story’s use of cautionary language. The report doesn’t jump to premature conclusions or make recommendations based on this one JAMA Surgery study, One of the sources says, “It’s premature to suggest… that removing the breast will help them live longer in the face of stage 4 disease.”
For all these reasons, we rate it Satisfactory here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The number of Americans undergoing CT scans has increased dramatically in recent years, driving a significant increase in the amount of radiation that many people are being exposed to from medical procedures.

That trend is raising concern that the high-tech exams could cause a small but significant excess of cancers in coming decades and spurring debate about whether the increasingly ubiquitous tests are being overused, exposing millions of Americans to needless risk. "The radiation doses from CT have been pretty clearly demonstrated to increase cancer risk," said David J. Brenner, a professor of radiation oncology at Columbia University who co-authored the most recent of a series of reports in the past year warning about the potential risks of CT scans. "On an individual basis there's probably not a big risk, but a small cancer risk applied to an increasingly large population spells trouble down the road. That's the concern."

Although some prominent medical groups have issued warnings against overusing the exams -- especially for children -- some experts worry about frightening patients away from the invaluable tests.

"You don't want people to avoid getting a potentially lifesaving diagnosis or therapy because they are afraid to get a CT scan," said Arl Van Moore Jr., a Charlotte radiologist who chairs the American College of Radiology's board of chancellors. "When a scan is done the right way for the right reasons, the benefits clearly outweigh the risks of doing it."

CT (computed tomography), sometimes called CAT (computed axial tomography), is performed by computerized machines that scan patients with X-rays to create three-dimensional cross-sectional images of organs and other parts of the body, providing far greater detail than standard single X-rays.

The number of scans performed each year in the United States has increased sharply, rising from about 3 million in 1980 to at least 67 million in 2006. There are many reasons for the increase, including improvements in the technology that have speeded the procedure, a growing list of uses and a proliferation of the machines.

"CT has become ubiquitous," said Jason Launders, a senior project officer at the ECRI Institute, an independent nonprofit health-care research organization outside Philadelphia that released a report last year warning about the potential risks. "Now if you go into an emergency room you can be scanned in a few minutes. You can't get that kind of information any other way. So physicians tend to use CT as sort of a first line in working out a diagnosis."

The use of CT scans is expected to continue to rise as possible new applications, such as for lung and colon cancer screening, become more widespread.

While the value of CT scans for screening remains the focus of debate, no one questions the value of the tests for allowing doctors to quickly diagnose a wide variety of health problems, including head injuries, heart problems, cancer, appendicitis, fractures and gallstones.

"CT is probably the biggest advance in diagnostic radiology that has ever occurred," said Thomas Ohlhaber, deputy director of the Division of Mammography Quality and Radiation Programs at the Food and Drug Administration. "Exploratory surgery that was common 10 or 15 years ago has virtually disappeared and all the risks associated with that have gone away because of CT. But nothing comes free of risks."

The concern comes from the fact that CT scans expose patients to much more radiation than standard X-rays. A CT chest scan, for example, exposes a patient to more than 150 times more radiation than a standard chest X-ray. That's more than twice as much as a typical person receives from the environment in an entire year. (See graphic.)

The upsurge in CT use has fueled a big jump in the annual amount of radiation that each American is receiving from medical procedures of all kinds. The average level of that exposure has increased about 600-fold since 1980, according to a federal report being published this year.

"At the moment, about half of medical radiation exposure is from CT scans," said Fred A. Mettler Jr., a radiation health expert at the University of New Mexico who helped prepare the report. CT scans represented just a few percent of the average American's exposure to radiation from medical tests in 1980, he noted.

Because it would take decades to follow a large number of patients who have undergone CT scans to determine the exact risks posed by the exams, there are no direct data demonstrating the danger. But researchers have estimated the risk based on what is considered the best information available about the health effects of radiation -- data collected from survivors of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, as well as exposure of nuclear plant and medical workers.

Using that information, experts have estimated that every 1,000 to 2,000 CT scans may produce one fatal cancer that would not have occurred otherwise.

Although that overall risk is relatively small, the large number of scans being performed could translate into a significant number of cancers. Brenner and his colleagues estimate that CT scans may be responsible for perhaps 2 percent of all cancers in the United States. The ECRI Institute estimated the scans may be causing 6,000 extra cancers each year, half of them fatal.

"Twenty years from now we could see a huge bonus of cancer coming through because of indiscriminate use of CT today," Launders said. "That's the real issue people are worried about."

The individual risk varies depending on the age of the patient and the type of scan. Younger people face more risk than older people because they have more time for a cancer to develop. Children are especially vulnerable because their rapidly developing bodies are at least four times as sensitive to the damaging effects of radiation. A child's risk may run as high as one case of cancer for every 500 scans, experts say.

Among adults, "young women have the highest risk," said Andrew Einstein of Columbia University, who evaluated the risks from cardiac CT scans in a paper published in July in the Journal of the American Medical Association. A 20-year-old woman faced the greatest risk -- one additional cancer for every 143 scans, he reported.

Some question the estimates, saying the risk of exposure from radiation from multiple CT scans may not be the same as from radiation from an atomic bomb.

"It's very difficult, in our opinion to equate the data from Hiroshima, where you had an instantaneous entire-body dose of radiation, compared to a cumulative dose for multiple CT scans," said Moore, the radiologist. "It's apples and oranges. It's not really the same."

Einstein, Mettler and others, however, disagree. "Radiation is radiation. Those are X-rays that the folks at Hiroshima and Nagasaki got. These are X-rays from a CT scan. They're really the same thing," said Brenner, whose report was published in November in the New England Journal of Medicine. "If the dose is the same, then the risk is going to be the same."

Although the companies that make the CT machines have been developing new protocols designed to minimize radiation exposure, particularly for children, everyone agrees that the most prudent thing to do is to eliminate unnecessary use.

While there are scant hard data about how often CT scans are done needlessly, several experts estimated that perhaps one-third could be eliminated. There are many reasons CTs may be overused. Some CTs are full-body "virtual physicals" performed on people who appear perfectly healthy -- a practice widely opposed by medical authorities.

Some say part of the blame lies with physicians who have financial interests in imaging facilities. "There is statistical evidence that indicates that more scans are ordered when a physician has a financial interest than when he doesn't," said Moore.

Defensive medicine also plays a role, with some doctors ordering the tests to stave off accusations that they withheld the most cutting-edge technology from their patients.

In other cases, overuse results from worried patients and from parents demanding CT scans that may not be needed. Other times doctors may not realize how many tests involving radiation patients have already undergone -- information that could influence a doctor's decision -- or may order a CT scan when other tests that do not involve radiation, such as a blood test, an MRI or an ultrasound, would suffice. "There are alternatives that are arguably just as good," Brenner said.

And patients also can take more responsibility for reducing the number of unnecessary scans.

"If a patient walks in and says, 'Tell me what the dose is from this and tell me what the risk is,' they are going to make the doctor start thinking about it," Mettler said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the available evidence that CT scans are harmful. The story details that the risk associated from CT scans is extrapolated from radiation exposures at Hiroshima and Nagasaki and from industrial situations.  One study cited in the story used a simulation (dummies receiving radiation in CT scanners.) The critics and proponents of the methodology are both given voice.  The story mentions that studies using more definitive methods are ongoing.  This is excellent detail and balanced analysis.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Complementary and alternative medicine options may help men manage premature ejaculation, according to a new review of existing research.

The improvements were small, and the studies were of varying quality, but preliminary evidence suggests that acupuncture, Chinese herbal medicine, Ayurvedic herbal medicine and a Korean topical cream may all have desirable effects, researchers conclude in the journal Sexual Medicine.

“There are a range of treatments available for premature ejaculation, including drug treatments, behavioral techniques and counseling, however, some men may not want to visit the doctor, take drugs long-term or be on a long wait list for counseling,” said lead author Katy Cooper of the University of Sheffield in the UK.

“It’s important to evaluate the evidence for other therapies,” she told Reuters Health by email. “To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to assess complementary and alternative medicine for premature ejaculation.”

According to the International Society for Sexual Medicine, premature ejaculation can be a lifelong problem, and this primary form of the problem is usually defined as ejaculation happening within one minute of initiating vaginal intercourse every time a man has ever had sex. A man’s “latency time” can also become reduced later in his sexual life, and this secondary form is usually defined as ejaculation within three minutes or less.

In the current study, researchers evaluated 10 randomized controlled trials that included comparisons either to another type of treatment or to a placebo, or dummy, treatment. Two studies were of acupuncture, five were of Chinese herbal medicine, one of Ayurvedic herbal medicine and two of Korean topical “severance secret” cream.

Together, the two acupuncture studies found that the treatment slightly increased intravaginal ejaculatory latency time (IELT) by about half a minute compared to placebo.

Chinese herbal medicine increased IELT by about two minutes, Ayurvedic herbal medicine increased IELT by nearly a minute and topical cream increased IELT by more than eight minutes.

In some instances, a combination of traditional and alternative options was the most effective. For example, Chinese medicine paired with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) increased IELT by two minutes longer than SSRIs alone and nearly three minutes longer than the Chinese medicine alone.

“There are no approved treatments for premature ejaculation,” said Donald Patrick, vice chair for research at the University of Washington in Seattle. “This is a common condition that has serious psychological effects on relationships,” said Patrick, who wasn’t involved in the study. “We need treatments to address it, and it should be treated with equal seriousness as erectile dysfunction.”

The prevalence of premature ejaculation is difficult to measure because of the differing definitions of the problem and some men’s reluctance to report it. Some studies suggest that between 20 and 30 percent of men report early ejaculation concerns, but the International Society for Sexual Medicine estimates that about 4 percent of men have a lifelong condition.

“Although it is not openly discussed in the media - at least not as much as erectile problems have been discussed in the post-Viagra era - numerous studies report men feel frustrated, depressed and anxious because of this problem,” said Ege Can Serefoglu of the Bagcilar Training and Research Hospital in Istanbul, Turkey.

The main limitation of the study is the underlying weakness of the studies evaluated. Bias was unclear in most of the studies, and only five used stopwatches to measure IELT, which is the “gold standard” for premature ejaculation studies, Patrick said.

In addition, the authors write, the studies are so different, it’s tough to draw conclusions about the different options. For example, the five Chinese medicine studies tested different substances, including Qilin pills, Yimusake and Uighur.

Some studies, but not all, discussed side effects such as gastrointestinal discomfort, dizziness, mild pain and decreased libido. When they were reported, the adverse effects were generally mild, the study team writes.

“Nowadays, I am encountering alternative medicine-obsessed patients more than I used to, and it doesn’t make sense to argue with them about the treatment they want,” Serefoglu told Reuters Health by email. “After all, the placebo is a well-known clinical phenomenon, and some of my patients report surprisingly favorable outcomes.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The report explained this was a systematic review looking at a group of studies. The story noted that there were limitations, such as the “underlying weakness of the studies evaluated,” adding “Bias was unclear in most of the studies, and only five used stopwatches to measure IELT, which is the ‘gold standard’ for premature ejaculation studies.”
We’re also told that “the studies are so different, it’s tough to draw conclusions about the different options. For example, the five Chinese medicine studies tested different substances, including Qilin pills, Yimusake and Uighur.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There was a time when the optimal exercise speed was however fast you had to run to get away from a saber-tooth tiger. Even today, in much of the developing world, people exercise through activities such as farming and fetching water that are necessary for survival.

However, in the developed Western world, where exercise tends to be an extracurricular activity, there is apparently tremendous interest in just how fast you should move in order to improve your health. Consider, for example, the many posts on The New York Times’ Well blog on the topic (walking versus running, the “right dose of exercise,” “walk hard, walk easy”), all of which focus on the relative benefits of walking versus jogging versus running.

So is it better to walk? To walk fast? To run slow? To run fast? On its face, this question is poorly posed, since it says nothing about our goals or our constraints. Am I aiming to lose weight? To live longer? To win road races? Am I willing to exercise for three hours a day? Twenty minutes? Almost never? Clearly, these considerations matter when trying to determine the optimal speed. Here is how I would think about asking the question instead: What is the easiest way to reduce my chance of death?

To analyze the impact of walking or running, researchers need a way to describe the effort exerted. The ideal measure would combine the length of time spent exercising with the amount of energy expended — basically, we want to figure out a way to credit people who walk at half the speed for twice as long the same amount as those who walk faster for less time.

The way researchers do this is with a measurement known as MET — metabolic equivalent of task — which gives a numeric value to various activities depending on their energy intensity. By multiplying an activity’s METs by the time you engage in it, you can get an overall measure of how much energy you expend.

The goal here is to use these METs and their relationship to health to analyze the value of walking compared with jogging or running. At least in this article, I won’t say anything about other kinds of exercise — no yoga or SoulCycle — though these have their own MET measures.

Let’s first look at the results from two papers — here and here — that relate energy expenditures from walking (in MET hours per day) to the risk of death.

Doing this analysis is a little complicated. You can’t look at the relationship between exercise and the chance of ever dying, because ultimately everyone dies. Instead, these studies look at whether exercise changes the risk of death at a given time. But since the people in the studies are of different ages, researchers can’t just look to see whether they have, say, a 2 percentage point lower risk of death in a given year, since that lower risk would mean a lot more for someone who is 30 than for someone who is 90. Results in these two papers — and basically all the others we’ll look at here — therefore report their results in “hazard ratios.” A hazard rate of 0.90, for example, means a 10 percent reduction in the risk of death. If there is a 10 in 1,000 chance you’ll die in the next year without exercise, this means by exercising you’d reduce that chance to 9 in 1,000.

This research shows that those who walk have a lower risk of mortality relative to people in the comparison group, who don’t walk for exercise at all (they probably do still walk some, just not for exercise). This risk of death is lower even with a very minimal energy expenditure. The lowest-energy-expenditure group in each study is walking at about 3 mph for 20 to 40 minutes per day. In other words, a mile or two of walking. In exchange, their risk of death goes down by 10 percent.

Walking a bit farther — say, 2 to 3 miles at 3 mph — gets you an additional death reduction of about 30 percent. But walking more than that, or more than an hour a day at this speed, is no better.

Other studies of walking find similar magnitudes. A large meta-analysis found that, on average, walking 1 to 3 miles at about a 20-minute-mile pace results in a reduction in death risk of about 10 percent.

Many of these studies do not separate out speed and duration, but to the extent they do, it seems like walking faster may be better than walking slower. Here is one study that shows large mortality reductions for fast walking even for short periods, and here is another showing that very slow walking has fewer benefits than faster walking.

At first glance, it may seem obvious that the harder you exercise, the better. If walking faster is more energy-intensive than walking slower, and running is more energy-intensive than walking, it seems like the health benefits of running would be even greater. In some sense, you’d hope so, since most of us find running more difficult than walking.

Broadly, over some range, this seems to be right. The chart below shows results for two studies of runners that, again, relate METs to hazard rates of death. Running — even slowly, like 5 mph — is far more energy-intensive than walking. An energy expenditure of 1.19 METs per day (the lowest-energy-expenditure group in the second study here) means about 20 minutes of running a 12-minute mile, three times a week.

Slow running like this appears to have a much larger impact on mortality than walking. A hazard rate of 0.48 — compared with a sedentary group — suggests a much larger reduction in the risk of death than a hazard rate of 0.90. What is a bit surprising about this chart is that running faster or farther doesn’t seem to reduce death rates any more than running slowly and, in fact, in both cases is slightly worse.

In one of these studies it looks like running very intensely (faster than an eight-minute mile, more than four hours a week) increases your risk of death relative to not running at all. But a closer look at the data suggests that this is probably just a statistical artifact: This intense running group contains only 36 people and two deaths, versus hundreds of people in the more casual running groups.

Even if we dismiss the possibility that running harder is worse, it is probably useful to note that running harder or farther doesn’t seem to be better. I have occasionally felt guilty about my thrice-weekly 25-minute runs, especially in comparison to my brother, who runs a 2:45 marathon and once attempted the Leadville Trail 100. It is comforting to know that I can still outlive him.

One general problem with all of this research is that none of these studies is randomized. People who exercise are different from those who do not, and those who exercise more are different from those who exercise less. This should, as usual, give us some pause in trumpeting the virtues of exercise. However, I’d argue that the comparisons the studies make among runners are still valid.

To be more concrete: In most of these studies, the more intense runners are healthier (for example: less likely to smoke and thinner) than the less-intense runners. We may tend to attribute the health of this group to their running habits. The fact that even with this bias we see no large benefit — indeed, seemingly no benefit at all — to running more rather than running less reinforces the value of moderate running.

If we take this research at face value, we learn a few things. First, some exercise reduces your risk of death. Second, the optimal walking/jogging exercise is light to moderate jogging. The optimal speed is between 5 and 7 mph, and if you do 25 minutes about three times a week, you’re all set. Nothing in the data suggests that running more — farther, or faster — will do more to lower your risk of death.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story refers to five different journal articles, making it difficult or impossible to discuss the pros and cons of each paper in a meaningful way (assuming the news story doesn’t want to be exponentially longer than it already is). But the story does a good job hitting the high points. For one thing, the story includes hyperlinks to all of the relevant articles (why don’t all news stories do this?). And the story also highlights the complicated nature of these papers, and ways the researchers tried to address those complications. For example, the story explains the concept of “hazard ratios,” which allows researchers to make comparisons between people of different ages and who, therefore, have very different mortality risks (a 90-year-old is more likely to die this year than a 30-year-old, for example). Similarly, the story also addresses potential confounding variables. For example, that “more intense runners” are less likely to use tobacco than “less intense” runners.
Our only suggestion regarding this criterion relates to the language used in certain places. The story says, for example, that “some exercise reduces your risk of death.” This type of active language suggests that running is causing the reduction in risk, but the studies referred to in the piece are observational in nature and are incapable of proving cause and effect. It would be more accurate to state that running is “linked to” lower risk, “associated with” lower risk, and so on, rather than that it “reduces” or “lowers” the risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, April 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A vaccine to prevent breast cancer's return in women with a history of the disease has triggered the desired immune response in early research.

The vaccine under development is aimed at preventing recurrence in women who have a form of tumor known as HER2-positive, according to researcher Dr. Diane Hale, a research resident in general surgery at Brooke Army Medical Center at Fort Sam Houston, in San Antonio.

She is set to present results of the study on Monday at the annual meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research in Chicago.

The vaccine, known as the "HER2-based peptide vaccine AE37," is designed to harness the power of the patient's immune system, based on its reaction to a cancer-linked peptide (protein).

"The theory is that once you form that [immune] response to the specific peptide, if the body has a recurrence, it will recognize that cancer as a bad thing, a foreign thing," Hale explained in an association news release.

The study is a phase 2 study, meant to evaluate the vaccine's effectiveness and any side effects. Phase 3 studies are needed before the vaccine could be approved.

The science is early, Hale stressed, and it will take at least five years before the vaccine could conceivably be available if ongoing studies bear out.

HER2-positive breast cancer tests positive for a protein known as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, or HER2, which promotes the tumor cell growth. About one of every five breast cancers involves cancer cells that churn out an excess of HER2 due to a genetic mutation. HER2-positive breast cancers are often more aggressive than other types, according to the American Cancer Society.

The goal of the vaccine, Hale said, is to educate the body to respond to that HER2-based peptide, so it will recognize the cancer when it recurs and attack it.

"If your immune system has been educated by the vaccine to recognize the tumor cells, we think it will allow the immune system to take care of any individual [cancer] cells trying to set up shop," explained Dr. Elizabeth Mittendorf, a surgical oncologist at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. She is the principal investigator on the trial.

The study involved 217 breast cancer survivors who had gone through their treatment and were free of disease at the start of the trial. The women were randomly assigned to receive either the vaccine paired with an immune stimulant, or the immune stimulant alone.

The women received monthly injections for six months. The researchers then conducted a variety of tests to gauge each woman's immune system response.

The investigators found that in the vaccinated group, 86 percent of patients showed a significant response, compared with 27 percent of those in the "control" group who did not get the injection.

How to explain the 27 percent who responded without the vaccine? "For the controls, even without having their immune systems 'educated' towards HER2 specifically, they may still mount a response because they have previously seen HER2 within their own cancer," Hale said.

Those who were vaccinated also displayed a decrease in certain cells that suppress the immune system. That is a good thing, Hale said, because "an increase in these cells has been found to be associated with [cancer] recurrence."

Don Diamond, director of translational vaccine research and a professor of virology at the City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center in Duarte, Calif., reviewed the findings and said, "Their approach is well thought out and makes sense."

Still, the study remains very preliminary, he cautioned. "Whether it actually has an increase in survival remains to be seen," he said.

That study will be done, Hale said, and they plan to follow the women for three years and look at survival differences.

But until the vaccine is linked to an actual survival benefit or improvement in tumor status, Diamond said, no one can say if it helps the patients in a meaningful way.

Numerous vaccines to prevent breast cancer recurrence are currently under study, he noted.

Findings presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

To learn more about immune-based cancer therapies, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The saving grace in the article was the quote from a researcher at City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center who cautioned about drawing conclusions from the preliminary results:
“But until the vaccine is linked to an actual survival benefit or improvement in tumor status, Diamond said, no one can say if it helps the patients in a meaningful way.”
This is an important point since, according to the article, the significant finding is that those who received the vaccine had a “response” and a decrease in cells that suppress the immune system.  Neither of these points really shows that the vaccine may actually work.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Welcome to Dear Julia, a weekly column where readers can submit everyday health questions on anything from the science of hangovers to the mysteries of back pain. Julia Belluz will sift through the research and consult with experts in the field to figure out how science can help us live happier and healthier lives.

Have a question? Use our submission form or ask @juliaoftoronto on Twitter.

What's the difference between Tylenol, Advil, and aspirin? Which is the best to take for pain?

I used to take acetaminophen (usually referred to by its brand name, Tylenol) for the occasional headache or sore muscle, mostly because that's what we used in my house growing up. I didn't think much about whether it was more or less effective than any other type of over-the-counter pain reliever, and I suspect the same is true for many folks. Acetaminophen, after all, is the most popular over-the-counter painkiller worldwide.

So I was surprised when I found out there's a huge gap between how pain researchers think about this drug and how the public does. More specifically, every researcher I contacted for this piece said some variation of what Andrew Moore, a pain researcher at Oxford University, told me: Tylenol doesn't actually work that well for pain. To be more exact, he said, "I can't imagine why anybody would take acetaminophen."

Moore has done a number of systematic reviews on over-the-counter pain medications, looking at all the available evidence to figure out which ones work best for various problems. I asked him to describe the overall success rates for the most common three: acetaminophen (like Tylenol), ibuprofen (like Advil), and aspirin.

Like all good evidence-based medicine thinkers, he was able to provide a very practical answer: "If you’re talking about aspirin in doses of 500 to 1,000 mg or two tablets, 30 percent of people get relief from acute pain. For acetaminophen at doses of 500 to 1,000 mg, about 40 percent have a success. For ibuprofen, in its normal formulation at something around 400 mg or two tablets, about 50 percent have success."

Now, Moore was referring here to acute pain that strikes after a specific event, like a surgery, a cut, or a burn, but his message was simple: Ibuprofen seems to work best, followed by acetaminophen, and then aspirin.

For ongoing (or chronic) pain — a sore lower back, say, or the kind of degenerative arthritis that typically develops with age — ibuprofen still outperforms acetaminophen.

"WE FOUND THAT [TYLENOL] IS INEFFECTIVE ON BOTH PAIN AND DISABILITY OUTCOMES FOR LOW BACK PAIN" A 2015 systematic review of high-quality evidence, published in the BMJ, found that acetaminophen didn't seem to help most sufferers of chronic low back pain, and that it barely alleviates pain in people with osteoarthritis. As the researchers wrote, "We found that [acetaminophen] is ineffective on both pain and disability outcomes for low back pain in the immediate and short term and is not clinically superior to placebo on both pain and disability outcomes for osteoarthritis."

A limitation of the study is that the evidence on acetaminophen was mainly for acute low back pain, but as the University of Leeds's Philip Conaghan explained, "There is very little long-term data [on chronic back pain], and if a drug doesn't work in the acute problem, it seems unlikely to work in the chronic phase — though back pain may be even more complex than osteoarthritis pain."

The study also noted that patients on acetaminophen "are nearly four times more likely to have abnormal results on liver function tests compared with those taking oral placebo."

Other studies, like this well-designed randomized control trial of people with knee pain, have similar conclusions: Acetaminophen doesn't perform as well as ibuprofen, and it's linked to higher rates of liver problems. (Ibuprofen also has potential side effects; more on that below.)

So what about the occasional headache? What works best for that?

It turns out this is another fascinating problem area for pain researchers. Moore has looked at all the evidence for what he calls "infrequent tension headaches" and found "it is surprising how poor [the research] is and how little it tells us." Either the outcomes in studies are badly defined, the studies have too few participants to say anything concrete, or many people in the studies actually seem to have chronic headaches as opposed to the ordinary ones the researchers are allegedly studying.

"Most people would say, if you look at the data, take an ibuprofen tablet," Moore said. "Acetaminophen is just not a very good analgesic [pain reliever], yet it’s the go-to drug because it’s thought to be safe."

And that's where things get even more interesting: Acetaminophen isn't actually that safe.

"We always thought [acetaminophen] was safe, but there are increasing signals of accidental overdose in people who are regularly using it for chronic pain, and some liver toxicity," explained Conaghan, who has studied adverse events data related to this popular drug.

Between 1998 and 2003, acetaminophen was the leading cause of acute liver failure in the US. There are also hundreds of related deaths every year — though keep in mind that millions of people take drugs with acetaminophen, so these more extreme side effects are rare (especially if you're only taking them in small doses occasionally). Still, for the drug's minimal pain-killing benefits, the risks may not be worth it. 



"Don't believe that just because something is over-the-counter, it’s safe," Conaghan added. (He advised people to see their doctor if they're taking any of these painkillers for more than a few days — particularly if they're on other drugs already.)

"[Tylenol] is an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether"

Kay Brune, a professor of pharmacology and toxicology at Germany's Friedrich-Alexander University who has also studied the toxicity of painkillers, was even more direct in his thoughts on acetaminophen: "It's an old drug, obsolete, and should be avoided altogether."

Aspirin is safer than acetaminophen, he said, though to be used as a pain reliever it requires much higher doses — which can have side effects like stomach upset. Aspirin also interferes with blood coagulation for days after taking it. "If you take one gram of aspirin," Brune explained, "you're at risk of bleeding for another four days." This is why aspirin has its place as a protective agent against strokes and heart attacks for people at a higher risk.

Ibuprofen doesn't have these two problems — it's less toxic than the others in the doses that give people pain relief. But it has other side effects. "Ibuprofen puts people at risk of bleeds in the gastrointestinal tract and kidney damage — so it's not free of risk," said Brune. Using it in high doses also seems to raise blood pressure and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke — one reason the Food and Drug Administration recently warned people should only use ibuprofen (and other "nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs," or NSAIDS, like naproxen) for short periods of time and in small amounts.



I asked Brune about what he'd suggest for the occasional headache or sore muscle. "Taking 400 mg of ibuprofen won't cause measurable harm," he answered. "Of all drugs we have available, for most indications, it's also the most effective one."

Is acetaminophen good for anything?

If the research community seems to have sided with ibuprofen for pain, is acetaminophen good for anything?



Yes. There are some groups of people with health complications who shouldn't take ibuprofen. For example, patients with kidney, gastric, cardiovascular, or bleeding problems may need to avoid NSAIDS like ibuprofen, so doctors might suggest Tylenol in these cases. 



There's also some evidence that NSAIDS may increase the risk of psychosis and cognitive impairment in the elderly, so doctors may avoid prescribing these drugs for older patients. And Tylenol is generally considered safer than Advil or aspirin for pregnant women.



Fever is another area where acetaminophen can help, said Moore. According to one systematic review, acetaminophen seems to be safe for treating very young kids with fever, and you can give children as young as 3 months old acetaminophen, whereas you need to wait until kids are at least 6 months old to safely treat them with ibuprofen. This may help to explain the popularity of drugs like Tylenol for kids.

But a final caveat here: If your child is older than 6 months, it's not all that clear that acetaminophen outperforms ibuprofen for reducing fevers, and the same is true for adults. So keep that in mind the next time you confront your medicine cabinet.

Send your questions to Julia via the submission form or @juliaoftoronto on Twitter. Read more about Dear Julia here.

Watch: How Americans got stuck with endless drug ads
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story cites and links to reliable evidence sources, including a systematic review of randomized controlled trials on back pain published in the BMJ.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
While smoking is a public health scourge, the nicotine in cigarettes may have some promise in treating another growing problem, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), which can be a precursor to Alzheimer’s disease or other forms of dementia. A new study on nonsmokers found that six months of treatment with nicotine patches restored long-term memory performance to 46% of normal— while placebo patients experienced a 26% decline in recall during the same treatment period.

The randomized controlled trial included 74 people, mainly in their late 70’s, with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). MCI falls somewhere between the normal senior moments that occur with aging, and the more serious lapses in recall and orientation that are typical of dementia. People with MCI are aware of their deficits, but are still able to function and complete their daily activities. Prior research has shown repeatedly that nicotine enhances memory and reaction time, which is one reason smokers cite for sticking with their habit. About half the participants were former smokers.

Attention, memory and reaction time all improved in those given nicotine treatment on several objective tests— and patients’ own ratings of their cognitive abilities and those of family members or other people close to them also showed improvement. Moreover, nicotine’s positive effects did not seem to wane over time. However, when clinical experts rated overall general change in the patients, they did not see a significant difference between the two groups.

MORE: A Cheaper Way to Quit Smoking?

Was the nicotine actually having an effect on memory? Possibly. Intriguingly, it appeared to be more effective among people with two copies of the APOE4 gene, a genetic combination that increases risk for Alzheimer’s by a factor of 20 or higher. People with Alzheimer’s disease have reduced numbers of nicotine receptors in their brains— and while the research is conflicting, some evidence suggests that the drug could protect these neurons. Other research, however, suggests that nicotine might enhance the cancer-causing properties of other substances.

The authors conclude, “This initial study provides evidence for nicotine-induced cognitive improvement in subjects with MCI; however, whether these effects are clinically important will require larger studies.”

The study found no problematic side effects associated with the nicotine patch and none of the patients had withdrawal symptoms when it was stopped. However, patients on nicotine did lose a few pounds, which is a known side effect.

The research was funded by the National Institute on Aging, but some of the authors also receive pharmaceutical industry funding and one reported funding from Philip Morris. Patches were provided by the manufacturer, Pfizer.

The study was led by Dr. Paul Newhouse of Vanderbilt University and published in Neurology.

MORE: Is Nicotine a ‘Gateway’ to Cocaine Addiction (and Cancer)?

Maia Szalavitz is a health writer at TIME.com. Find her on Twitter at @maiasz. You can also continue the discussion on TIME Healthland’s Facebook page and on Twitter at @TIMEHealthland.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The study design, number of subjects and other information is provided.
Both this story and the one by MSNBC used information that we could not find in the journal article, but which did appear in news releases by the American Academy of Neurology and by Vanderbilt – the “46% of normal” and “26% decline in recall” statistics.
We liked that this story, unlike the MSNBC piece, stated that “when clinical experts rated overall change in the patients, they did not see a significant difference between the two groups.” That’s an important finding and, possibly, could have led to a different lead and headline for both stories.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - More research is suggesting that heavy smokers may benefit from screening for lung cancer, to detect tumors in their earliest stages.

A new study finds that regular smokers who received three-dimensional X-rays to look for the presence of early tumors had a significantly lower risk of dying over a 10-year period.

The results are in keeping with those of a much larger study published last month, which showed that these 3-D X-rays, or CT scans, reduced the death rate among 53,000 current and former heavy smokers by 20 percent compared with screening using regular chest X-rays. That previous finding was “very good news in the field,” said Dr. Bruce Johnson of the Dana Farber Cancer Institute, who treats lung cancer patients and reviewed the results for Reuters Health.

This latest study, published in the journal Lung Cancer, looked at death rates in a different, smaller population of heavy smokers, and estimated that those who received up to two CT scans would have between a 36 and 64 percent lower risk of dying, compared to those who went unscreened.

The data are “consistent” with earlier studies but there are still many issues to resolve regarding lung cancer screening, Johnson said.

For one, scientists haven’t yet worked out how often to screen people, and when to start. It is not clear when or how guidelines for lung cancer screening could be drawn up, and until they are, insurers including government programs such as Medicare are unlikely to pay the average $300 cost of a scan.

Furthermore, an April study showed that 21 percent of a patient’s initial lung CT scans show suspicious lesions that turn out not to be cancer, but lead to needless invasive follow-up procedures and radiation exposure, as well as stress and anxiety for patients and their families.

The high so-called “false positive” rate is an issue, said Dr. James Hanley of McGill University, who also reviewed the findings for Reuters Health, but many mammograms also find lesions that turn out to be benign. And for lung cancer, doctors know there is a high false-positive rate and have a set protocol to follow in order to determine which lesions are dangerous, added Johnson.

Lung cancer kills 1.2 million people a year globally and it will kill 157,000 people in the United States alone this year, according to the American Cancer Society.

Tobacco use accounts for some 85 percent of lung cancer cases in the U.S., and one estimate puts a smoker’s lifetime absolute risk of developing lung cancer between 12 percent and 17 percent. Five-year survival rates for lung cancer are low.

In recent years, CT scans, in particular, have been promoted by some hospitals and advocacy groups for lung cancer screening, even though studies had not yet shown definitively whether such screening saves lives.

In 2006, Dr. Claudia Henschke, currently based at Mount Sinai School of Medicine and Arizona State University, caused a stir when she published a study concluding that 80 percent of lung-cancer deaths could be prevented through widespread use of spiral CT.

Her ideas were controversial to start with, especially when other researchers found her work had been paid for by a tobacco company.

In the current study, funded in part by manufacturers of CT scanners (along with government and other sources), Henschke and her colleagues compared outcomes for nearly 8,000 smokers and former smokers who volunteered to undergo CT scans to outcomes in two sets of people with smoking histories who were not scanned.

The three groups of people had some important differences, such as in average age and how long and heavily they had smoked, so the researchers had to use mathematical tools to try to eliminate the influence of those differences, said Hanley. For instance, to compare death rates, the researchers tracked how many people died among those who were screened, then pulled out all the people with similar underlying characteristics in the other two groups and looked at their death rates, Hanley explained.

A total of 64 people died in the screened population, the authors report — but applying the death rate among people with the same underlying characteristics in one of the unscreened populations, they estimated that the number of deaths would have been 100. This translates into a 36 percent lower risk of dying among the screened population.

Applying the same methods to the other unscreened population, the authors estimated that screening was associated with a 64 percent lower risk of dying.

Overall, research is suggesting that CT scans of people at risk of lung cancer might make a dent in cancer mortality, and it’s possible that more frequent screening might make an even bigger dent, Hanley noted. “If screening is going to work, you’ve got to keep at it.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 




This criterion is of critical importance given the controversies over lead researcher Claudia Henscke’s long-standing advocacy of CT screening of smokers and criticism of some of her earlier publications on this topic. This latest study raises a number of questions about the methods used to compare lung cancer deaths in three different groups of people. The screened group was made up of heavy smokers living in New York who were recruited by Henschke and her team specifically for a study of CT screening. There was no control group, so in this study statistics from two other unrelated studies are used. One group (CPS-II) was made up of people who reported being smokers as part of a large nationwide study of cancer in general. The second group (CARET) was a subset of smokers who took part in the control group of a trial of drugs to prevent lung cancer.
The story takes note of earlier controversies involving Henschke and points out that this study attempts to compare groups of people with important differences and then calculate estimates of the number of lung cancer deaths would have been expected in the first group if they had not been screened. 
Although the headline, lead and concluding lines of this story don’t incorporate these and other concerns, we give the story credit for attempting to address challenging questions of scientific and statistical methods.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new cold and flu test can precisely diagnose a dozen winter ailments and reduce unneeded use of antibiotics, says the company that sells it. Physicians say the test is accurate and the most comprehensive available, but some say its long processing time limits usefulness in emergency rooms.

Doctors currently diagnose colds and flus through a patchwork of testing, observation and process of elimination. But many of the current tests available are not very sensitive, and most test for only one or two viruses at a time. According to a 2006 study in the New England Journal of Medicine of some 3,000 children under 5 years old, only 17% who had the flu were properly diagnosed in doctors' offices, clinics and emergency rooms. Poor diagnosis can result in a missed opportunity to prescribe a flu medicine, and also sometimes results in an unneeded antibiotic if doctors wrongly think the illness is caused by bacteria.

The new test, called the xTAG respiratory panel, approved earlier this year by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, is the most comprehensive FDA-approved virus-panel to date. It tests for a dozen viruses, including several types of influenza, two types of respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, three types of parainfluenza, adenovirus and even rhinovirus, which causes the common cold. According to manufacturer Luminex Corp. , Austin, Texas, the viruses in the panel are expected to account for about 85% of the viral illnesses in the U.S. this year.

The test is expected to be used mainly in hospitals and emergency rooms, but doctors can send the swab to a local lab.

To use it, doctors take a swab from the nose or throat. In the lab, genetic material from the swab is magnified millions of times and then bound to fluorescent markers, which are then read by a machine. According to data submitted to the FDA, the test detects each virus 78% to 100% of the time, depending on the type, and has few false positives. For example, the FDA-submitted data say it detects RSV, a common cause of infant pneumonia, 100% of the time, while giving false positives 2% of the time.

"This is really the gold standard. It is very sensitive," says Kathryn M. Edwards, a Nashville pediatric infectious-disease specialist and co-author of the New England Journal study.

The downside is that the test is expensive, about $300 to $400, but is covered by most insurers. It also needs extensive processing in the lab. And patients will have to wait at least six to seven hours -- maybe a day or two depending on staffing at the hospital laboratory. "Emergency departments are going to have to think twice about a test like that," says Michael Shannon, senior physician in emergency medicine at Children's Hospital Boston. Currently available tests can yield results in a half hour, though accuracy varies and they typically screen for only one or two viruses.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This article provides comprehensive information in an easily understandable way.  For example, it provides the context/relevance of the xTag test by summarizing results published in a prestigious medical journal, describing how the test is administered to a patient and the laboratory process used to analyze the sample.  It also explains the key pieces of a diagnostic test, sensitivity and specificity.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — CHAPEL HILL, NC – UNC researchers say the results from the multi-site phase 2 and 3 trials of brexanolone injection are not only promising, but could change the way postpartum depression (PPD) is treated.

Brexanolone injection works differently than existing anti-depressant medications, and if approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) later this year, will be the first new class of anti-depressants in decades, and the first drug specifically indicated for PPD.

“With current anti-depressant SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) it could take four to six weeks to get a treatment response. In the brexanolone trials, we saw patients starting to feel better within days,” said the trial’s academic principal investigator, Samantha Meltzer-Brody, MD, MPH, director of Perinatal Psychiatry Program at the UNC School of Medicine.

David Rubinow, MD, chair of the Department of Psychiatry at the UNC School of Medicine and a coauthor of the paper, says time is especially crucial for new mothers experiencing postpartum depression because the weeks and months following birth are a critical period for mother-infant bonding. Common symptoms of PPD – a mood disorder in women that can be triggered by fluctuations in reproductive hormones – include low mood, feeling overwhelmed, anxious and ruminating thoughts, potential withdrawal from the baby and her family, and suicidal thoughts in the most severe cases. PPD is one of the most common complications of pregnancy, with between 10 and 20 percent of mothers worldwide experiencing it.

“Having a drug developed specifically for postpartum depression is a game-changer for women’s health,” said Meltzer-Brody. “With our latest results, we believe that brexanolone, if approved, could provide relief for women with a range of postpartum severity.”

The paper, published in The Lancet, includes a new integrated analysis of results from three double-blind, placebo-controlled trials that took place at 30 sites in the U.S., including UNC’s Perinatal Psychiatry Unit. Eligible women were aged 18-45 years old and were six months postpartum or less at screening. They also had to be experiencing moderate to severe postpartum depression, which was assessed by the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D).

The integrated analysis looked at results of the trials which randomized 209 women to receive a double-blinded 60-hour infusion of either brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr or placebo. A unique dose group of brexanolone 60 µg/kg/hr in one of the studies was not included in the integrated efficacy analysis, but was included in integrated analyses of safety. Brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr was administered to 102 women with moderate or severe PPD who also were evaluated throughout the infusion, after the infusion stopped and then periodically for up to 30 days. Another 107 women were administered a placebo and evaluated during the same timeframe. The first statistically significant reduction in depression severity with brexanolone injection relative to placebo was observed as early as 24 hours after dosing. At the end of the 60-hour infusion, the average reduction in patients’ Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D or depression severity score) was 17.0 points for women in the brexanolone injection 90 µg/kg/hr group, versus 12.8 in the placebo group (p<0.0001). The reduction of symptoms in the patients receiving brexanolone injection was maintained throughout the last study visit at Day 30. The most common (≥10% of subjects) adverse events following during brexanolone injection administration were headache, dizziness and somnolence.

“This is a very different model for how we treat depression. Having a drug approved to treat PPD that works quickly and effectively, yet is also durable, would be a huge step forward for psychiatry in general,” Meltzer-Brody said.

Brexanolone injection is an allosteric modulator of both synaptic and extra-synaptic GABAᴀ receptors. In postpartum depression, the GABA pathway may play a key role in regulating hormones that researchers believe can lead to PPD.

Sage Therapeutics is the developer of brexanolone injection and sponsor of the trials. A New Drug Application is currently under review by the FDA and brexanolone injection has been granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation. The FDA has assigned a Prescription Drug User Fee Act target date of December 19, 2018.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The double-blinded randomized trials are described in detail and readers are able to judge the quality of the evidence. The published study includes an important limitation of the research that’s not mentioned in the release: The trials assessed women for only 30 days; the effects of the treatment beyond 30 days are “unknown.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
While use of the products in such operations has since fallen, one expert said the new report should convince doctors to stop using them in anterior cervical fusions, as the procedure is known. The use of a bioengineered protein should be “discontinued either permanently or until further information becomes available regarding how to use it safely,” said Dr. Thomas A. Einhorn, chairman of orthopedic surgery at Boston University.

One form of the bioengineered protein is marketed by Medtronic under the brand name Infuse, and another form is sold by Stryker as OP-1 Putty.

Infuse is also at the center of a controversy in which Army officials have accused a Medtronic consultant who was a former military doctor of falsifying data in a study about the product. Medtronic recently suspended its relationship with that doctor, Timothy R. Kuklo.

Federal and state investigators are conducting separate investigations to determine whether either company illegally promoted off-label use of their products for procedures including cervical fusions. Both companies deny the accusations. Although doctors are free to use any product on the market for whatever purposes they choose, companies may promote them only for their federally approved uses.

The products’ use in cervical fusion procedures is a small component of their total sales, which reached an estimated $760.3 million in 2008, with Medtronic’s share the larger one, according to Millennium Research Group, a consulting firm in Toronto.

Marybeth Thorsgaard, a Medtronic spokeswoman, said the company was close to completing a clinical trial involving the use of Infuse in anterior cervical fusion. In a statement, she said the trial would help address how the procedure, if approved by federal regulators, “should be appropriately managed to minimize complications.”

Some experts have speculated that the adverse effects were dose-related. Medtronic has also noted such effects in Infuse’s warning label.

The study published Tuesday found that patients who had received the bioengineered proteins during spinal fusions for lower or middle back pain did not have increased complications when compared with those who did not get the product. But complications rates while patients were still in the hospital were 50 percent higher for cervical fusions procedures, researchers reported.

Dr. Kevin S. Cahill, a neurosurgeon at Brigham and Women’s, who led the study released Tuesday, said he believed the complication rates for the cervical fusion procedures were actually higher than those reported in the study because complications often occurred after a patient left the hospital.

“Ours is probably a bottom estimate,” Dr. Cahill said.

He added that the study also confirmed how quickly physicians had adopted the proteins both for approved and unapproved uses. By 2006, just four years after such products were first sold, the proteins were used in about 25 percent of all spinal fusions, the review found.

Dr. Richard A. Deyo, a spine expert who is a professor at Oregon Health and Science University in Portland, said the new study also suggested that the F.D.A could do a better job monitoring problems by analyzing hospitals records, just as Dr. Cahill and his colleagues had done.

The research team based its report on records collected through a database known as the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, which gathers information from 20 percent of the nation’s hospitals. The high complication rate was seen in 2006 data..

“I would have hoped that this sort of surveillance would be a routine part of F.D.A practice,” Dr. Deyo said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


 
The story notes that the study used a database with information from 20 percent of the nation’s hospitals to compare in-hospital complication rates for spinal fusion procedures with or without bone-growth proteins. It also noted that this study was prompted by earlier case reports of complications, and it compared the results of this analysis to some of those earlier clinical reports.
The story also noted that a manufacturer of bone-growth proteins is doing a clinical trial on their use in fusion procedures in the upper spine in order to learn more about how to manage complications.
 The story does state that the study appeared in the current Journal of the American Medical Association.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Doctors can use a patient’s abdominal CT scans to also check for signs of the bone-weakening disease osteoporosis, according to a new study.

The researchers, who published their findings in the Annals of Internal Medicine on Monday, compared patients’ CT scans to their dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), which is traditionally used to diagnose osteoporosis.

“What we found is that there is pretty good correlation,” said the study’s lead author Dr. Perry Pickhardt, professor of radiology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The idea, say the researchers, is doctors can use patients’ CT scans that are ordered for another reason - such as looking for tumors - to also check for signs of osteoporosis. That may spare the patients from additional testing and additional costs.

In an editorial accompanying the study, however, experts wrote that using CT scans to gauge bone density could lead to some people being incorrectly diagnosed, particularly if people at low risk are tested.

In this study, the average age was about 59 years old - six years younger than the age at which the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a government-backed panel, recommends all women begin being screened for osteoporosis. The disease affects over 12 million Americans over 50.

The panel also suggests younger women at an increased risk for bone fractures should be screened, but there’s no recommendation for men of any age.

Despite DXA scans being safe and cost effective, Pickhardt and his colleagues say the test is underused. CT scans, however, are considered overused - with more than 80 million performed in the U.S. during 2011.

For the new study, the researchers analyzed test results from 1,867 patients, who had both types of scans performed within six months of each other over a 10-year period, to see if their CT scans showed osteoporosis as well as the DXAs.

Overall, about 23 percent of the people were diagnosed with osteoporosis, about 45 percent were diagnosed with some bone-weakening and about 32 percent were healthy based on their DXAs.

The researchers then found that their ability to accurately diagnose those same patients with osteoporosis from a CT scan depended on what threshold for bone density they used.

Dr. Sumit Majumdar, who wrote an editorial accompanying the new study, said a lower threshold for bone density would catch most cases of osteoporosis and limit “incidentaloporosis” - incorrect osteoporosis diagnoses “discovered” while doctors were looking for something else.

At the lower threshold, the researchers found 9 percent of those diagnosed with osteoporosis were misdiagnosed.

Pickhardt said the screenings would have to target the right groups of people to prevent overdiagnosis.

“Obviously it’s something we need to worry about, but if you apply it to a population that’s suitable for diagnosis you wouldn’t run that risk,” he said.

Majumdar, a professor of medicine at the University of Alberta in Canada, said CT scans are better tests, but stomach scans don’t include the hip - like a DXA would.

A DXA can cost a couple hundred dollars, while a CT scan can cost about $500. Both involve radiation.

Dr. Beatrice Hull, from the Center for Osteoporosis and Bone Health at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, told Reuters Health that she’d want her patients to have a DXA scan even with a diagnosis from a CT scan.

“I don’t think at this point this one test is going to prevent further testing. I think it will identify patients who are at a higher risk and need more testing,” said Hull, who wasn’t involved with the new research.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Adequate job describing the size and methodology of the study.
We appreciate the moderation in the quote from the lead author, “What we found is that there is pretty good correlation.”  Not a home run.  Not a breakthrough.  Just a pretty good correlation.
And we appreciate that the story placed a caveat from the editorial up high in the 6th sentence of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
HOUSTON - For patients with advanced, inoperable stage 3 lung cancer, concurrent chemotherapy and the specialized radiation treatment, proton therapy, offers improved survival compared to historical data for standard of care, according to a new study from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

The research, published in JAMA Oncology, reported an overall survival (OS) of 26.5 months. In contrast, the historical OS rate with standard of care concurrent chemotherapy and traditional radiation was 16 months at the time when the study was designed.

The findings are the final results of the single institution, Phase II study and represent the longest follow-up to date of stage 3 lung cancer patients who have received proton therapy, said Joe Y. Chang, M.D., professor, Radiation Oncology and the study's corresponding author.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the U.S. According to the American Cancer Society, more than 222,500 people will be diagnosed and 155,870 will die from the disease in 2017, with the majority of patients still being diagnosed when the disease is in an advanced stage.

"Advanced lung cancer patients with inoperable disease traditionally have been treated with concurrent chemotherapy and conventional photon radiation therapy. However, the therapy can be very difficult for patients due to associated toxicities and because many patients are also dealing with comorbidities," explained Chang.

Proton therapy is an advanced type of radiation treatment that uses a beam of protons to deliver radiation directly to the tumor, destroying cancer cells while sparing healthy tissues. Protons enter the body with a low radiation dose and stop at the tumor, matching its shape and volume or depth. They deposit the bulk of their cancer-fighting energy right at the tumor, thereby reducing the dose to cardiopulmonary structures, which impacts the toxicity, functional status, quality of life and even survival for patients, explained Chang.

"With our study, we hypothesized that proton therapy would offer a survival benefit to patients and reduce treatment-associated toxicities, which can be very serious," he said.

The study opened at MD Anderson in 2006; in this research, Chang and his colleague report on the study's five-year results.

For the prospective Phase II trial, 64 patients with inoperable, Stage III non-small-cell lung cancer were enrolled. The study's primary endpoint was OS. The researchers hypothesized that the median OS would increase from historical data of 16 months on standard therapy to 24 months. Secondary endpoints included distant metastasis and local and regional recurrence rates. Toxic effects of treatment in both the acute and late settings also were analyzed.

Median follow up was 27.3 months for all patients, and 79.6 months for alive patients. At five years, the median OS was 26.5 months, and the corresponding five-year OS was 29 percent. Median progression-free survival was 12.9 months, with a five-year progression-free survival of 22 percent.

In sum, 39 patients experienced a relapse, with distant sites representing 62 percent of all recurrences. Local and regional recurrence rates were low, 16 percent and 14 percent, respectively.

Among the acute and late toxic effects diagnosed in patients were: esophagitis, pneumonitis and cardiac arrhythmia. Of note, said Chang, no patients developed the most severe, or grade five, toxicities, as seen in patients who receive standard of care.

Chang noted his study is not without limitations. Of greatest significance: the study was designed more than a decade ago. While the study's survival, recurrence rates and toxic effects are still favorable when compared to rates associated with the most advanced traditional photon radiation therapy, intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), technology to diagnose and stage the disease, as well all treatment modalities have significantly improved.

"When the study opened, PET imaging had just been approved for lung cancer staging. The image quality was poor and didn't include a CT component in most facilities across the country," said Chang. "Obviously, the technology has improved dramatically over the last decade and has made a significant impact on diagnosis and staging. Also, delivery of both the conventional intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and proton therapy (IMPT), have improved, thereby reducing side effects for both treatment modalities."

For example, MD Anderson proton therapy patients with advanced lung cancer now can receive IMPT. The technique uses an intricate network of magnets to aim a narrow proton beam at a tumor and "paint" the radiation dose onto it layer by layer. Healthy tissue surrounding the tumor is spared, and side effects are even more reduced than earlier proton delivery, said Chang.

Chang also noted the advancements in cancer biology and immunotherapy and that both are important areas of research focus in combination with proton therapy.

In addition to Chang, other authors on the all-MD Anderson study include: Stephen Hahn, M.D., Ritsuko Komaki, M.D., Pamela K. Allen, Ph.D., Zhongxing Liao, M.D., Steven H. Lin, M.D., Ph.D., Daniel Gomez, M.D., James Welsh, M.D., Melenda Jeter M.D., James Cox, M.D., Michael O'Reilly, M.D., Ming Li, M.D. and Wencheng Zhang, M.D., all of Radiation Oncology; John V. Heymach, M.D., Ph.D. and Charles Lu, M.D., both of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology; Ronald X. Zhu, Ph.D., Xiaodong Zhang, Ph.D., Heng Li, Ph.D., Radhe Mohan, Ph.D., all of Radiation Physics; and Ara A. Vaporciyan, M.D., Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. Vivek Verma, M.D., now at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, also contributed to the study.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We like how the release provided good explanations of the study’s limitations. The release says, for example:
“Chang noted his study is not without limitations. Of greatest significance: the study was designed more than a decade ago. While the study’s survival, recurrence rates and toxic effects are still favorable when compared to rates associated with the most advanced traditional photon radiation therapy, intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), technology to diagnose and stage the disease, as well all treatment modalities have significantly improved.”
At the same time, this is also a lead-in for MD Anderson to advertise therapies that have little evidence behind them. The release goes on to say,
“For example, MD Anderson proton therapy patients with advanced lung cancer now can receive IMPT. The technique uses an intricate network of magnets to aim a narrow proton beam at a tumor and “paint” the radiation dose onto it layer by layer. Healthy tissue surrounding the tumor is spared, and side effects are even more reduced than earlier proton delivery, said Chang.”
OK, but that was not part of the study. So, in effect, the release is saying that there was a marginal benefit shown in a very small study but, hey, come try this new therapy instead!
This is also key info:
“The study opened at MD Anderson in 2006; in this research, Chang and his colleague report on the study’s five-year results. For the prospective Phase II trial, 64 patients with inoperable, Stage III non-small-cell lung cancer were enrolled. The study’s primary endpoint was OS.”
It explains that this was a single site study, in a small number of individuals with a particular type and stage of lung cancer, with overall survival as the primary outcome. But it could have been more clear that there was no direct comparison group and the study was not experimental (randomized design).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 7, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Using an artificial breath-sensor system dubbed the "electronic nose," Italian researchers were able to spot more cases of asthma than with traditional diagnostic tools.

The electronic nose detected nearly 90 percent of people with asthma compared to about 70 percent who were accurately diagnosed in the traditional way with lung function tests, according to new research published in the April issue of the journal Chest.

When combined with another test, called the fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) test, the electronic nose did an even better job at detecting asthma, the study found.

"The electronic nose discriminates between patients with asthma and healthy subjects and its performance is increased when combined with FENO," wrote the Italian team led by Dr. Paolo Montuschi of the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Rome.

The device works by identifying volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in exhaled breath. These VOCs produce a unique smell print for each individual and specific patterns are seen in people with asthma.

The new study included 27 people with intermittent or mild persistent asthma and 24 healthy people. None of the study volunteers had a history of smoking. Those with asthma had a history of allergies, and none had been treated with corticosteroids for at least four weeks prior to the start of the study.

Currently, asthma is diagnosed "based on your medical history and symptoms, and with spirometry (lung function testing) and exhaled nitric oxide," said Dr. Thomas Leath, director of allergy and immunology at Scott & White Healthcare in Round Rock, Texas.

The Italian researchers wanted to compare the electronic nose to the other commonly used tests -- spirometry and FENO -- to see which test was best at confirming a diagnosis of asthma.

To do this, all of the study volunteers were given all three tests. Each test is non-invasive, requiring only the use of exhaled air.

The electronic nose was able to correctly differentiate healthy people from those with physician-diagnosed asthma in 87.5 percent of the cases. FENO was able to correctly identify asthma in 79.2 percent of the study volunteers and lung function testing (spirometry) discerned just 70.8 percent of the people with asthma.

When the electronic nose and FENO were combined, the two tests together correctly identified almost 96 percent of the asthma cases.

"This is potentially a great tool. It could be used for screening if it's affordable or for seeing the effect of anti-inflammatory medicines. But, it definitely needs more research," said Leath.

"This device is interesting and warrants a further look, but it still needs to be perfected and the researchers need to figure out its niche," said Dr. Jennifer Appleyard, chief of allergy and immunology at St. John Hospital and Medical Center in Detroit. "We need to know if it's good for diagnostics or for measuring improvements after treatment. In some diseases, you use blood markers to monitor treatment response. Could you use this to see if patients are responding? We also need to know if it's good for diagnosing all types of asthma."

Dr. David Rosenstreich, director of the division of allergy and immunology at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, added: "An objective and fast test for diagnosing asthma would be helpful, and this test seems to be a non-invasive way of sampling for the underlying problem. This test seems relatively easy for patients and it does have potential, but they've only looked at a very narrow collection of people who have allergic asthma."

Both Appleyard and Leath noted that cost might initially limit the use of an electronic nose.

Learn more about how asthma is currently diagnosed from the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job of describing what happened in the study being discussed. It notes that the "electronic nose" device was pitted against other diagnostic techniques to compare their accuracy for confirming physician-diagnosed asthma. Importantly, independent sources emphasized that this was a small study looking at patients with one particular type of asthma. They noted that much more research would be needed to prove that the device is effective in a broad range of patients. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ATS 2016, SAN FRANCISCO - A new skin test for tuberculosis infection has proven safe, easy to administer and accurate in two Phase III clinical trials, according to research presented at the ATS 2016 International Conference.

The test, known as C-Tb, combines the "field friendliness of the PPD-based tuberculin skin test with the high specificity of interferon gamma release assays, or IGRAs," said lead researcher Morten Ruhwald, MD, PhD, head of human immunology at Statens Serum Institut in Denmark, which developed the test.

The new test measures the body's immune response to two TB antigens, EAST-6 and CFP10. The test is administered like a tuberculin skin test (TST), and results are interpreted by measuring the size of the skin induration two or three days later.

The TST is the most commonly used test to detect TB infection, with about 50 million tests worldwide each year, according to the World Health Organization. The test is easy to administer but produces too many false positives to achieve the WHO's goal of reducing TB deaths by 95 percent and new cases by 90 percent by 2035, Dr. Ruhwald said.

Introduced a decade ago, IGRAs have high specificity, producing few false positives, but require blood samples and complicated lab work, which has limited their widespread use. There is also a dramatic price difference between the two diagnostic tests. According to Dr. Ruhwald, a TST costs about $2; an IGRA is 20 to 40 times more expensive depending on setting.

In the first clinical trial, Dr. Ruhwald and colleagues conducted a double-blinded study of C-Tb in 979 participants enrolled at 13 clinical trial sites in Spain. Participants, all adults, ranged in TB status from presumed uninfected through intermediate and high risk of latent TB to active disease.
• Both C-Tb and the IGRA had a specificity of 97 percent.
• C-Tb was highly concordant to IGRA in 95 percent of study participants.
• The specificity of C-Tb, unlike the TST, was not impacted by the BCG vaccine, the partially effective vaccine that many residents in the developing world receive. TST specificity in this group was only 62 percent.
• The sensitivity of C-Tb was comparable to the IGRA in confirmed TB cases (77 percent vs. 81 percent), indicating similar abilities to detect infection.

In the second double-blinded trial, researchers were primarily concerned with testing how accurate C-Tb was in HIV-positive patients and in young children--populations in which the accuracy of the TST and the IGRA is known to be compromised. The study, conducted in South Africa, enrolled 1,090 participants, including 299 patients with HIV and 402 children as young as 28 days.
• Among participants with HIV, the ability of all three tests to detect TB infection was diminished, though the C-Tb appeared more robust in HIV-infected participants with low CD4 T cell counts.
• Among children under 5, C-Tb was comparable with the other two tests in identifying those infected.

Dr. Ruhwald said another advantage of C-Tb is that the measurement of infection, a 5mm or larger induration, is universal across patients with different risk factors, including HIV infection. With TST, the size of the induration is often adjusted to increase its accuracy in measuring infection in different patient populations.

Regulatory approval for C-Tb is currently being sought and Statens Serum Institute is actively seeking a commercial partner for marketing of C-Tb. The cost of a C-Tb test is to be determined; however, it is expected to be significantly less than an IGRA.

Diagnostic Accuracy of the Novel C-Tb Skin Test for Latent M.tuberculosis Infection; Results from Two Phase III Clinical Trials 

M. Ruhwald1, J.A. Cayla2, H. Aggerbaek1, K. Dheda3, P. Andersen1 

1Statens Serum Institut - Copenhagen/DK, 2Public Health Agency of Barcelona - Barcelona/ES, 3UCT Lung Institute, Lung Infection & Immunity Unit - Cape Town/ZA

Renewed emphasis on the detection and preventive treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected individuals at risk is required to reach the goals of the WHO post-2015 global tuberculosis strategy.

Statens Serum Institut has developed a novel specific skin test, C-Tb, based on the antigens ESAT-6 and CFP10. C-Tb combines the field friendliness of the PPD-based Tuberculin Skin Test (TST), with the high specificity of the interferon gamma release assays (IGRA).

This presentation outlines the results from two recently completed phase III trials (TESEC-05 and -06). The results have not previously been published or presented.

The TESEC-06 trial included 979 participants from 13 clinical trial sites in Catalonia, Galicia and Basque Country (Spain) with various risk profiles of M.tuberculosis infection. The TESEC-05 trial included 1090 participants with symptoms of TB and 100 endemic controls from Cape Town (South Africa).

In both trials C-Tb and TST were administered in a double-blinded fashion to one or the other forearm. Skin indurations were read 2 to 3 days later. A reading ?5mm was considered positive for the TST and C-Tb (cut off preset in phase II). Blood for IGRA testing (Quantiferon, QFT-GIT) was drawn prior to skin testing.

The safety profile of C-Tb was acceptable and not different from TST. Test specificity was assessed in 212 presumed unexposed Spanish controls. Here, C-Tb had comparable specificity to QFT-GIT (both 97%, p=1.0, and there was no impact of BCG vaccination). By contrast, previous BCG vaccination subverted TST specificity [62% (67/108) in BCG vaccinated compared to 95% (99/104) in BCG unvaccinated persons; (p<0.001)]. Sensitivity of C-Tb and QFT-GIT was comparable in patients with confirmed TB [77% (235/307) vs 81% (250/307); p=0.08]. In contacts, mirroring the findings with QFT-GIT, there was a strong trend in increasing C-Tb test positivity with M. tuberculosis exposure (figure 1). The impact of age and HIV infection on C-Tb, TST and QFT reactivity was assessed in 1090 individuals with symptoms suspect of TB disease, analysis is ongoing and will be included in the presentation.

These phase III trial results demonstrate that C-Tb is safe, has comparable diagnostic performance to QFT-GIT and addresses the problem of false positive TST results in BCG vaccinated persons.

The field-friendliness and high specificity offered by the C-Tb test could allow for improved targeted treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected persons in also in resource-constrained settings, where IGRAs are too complicated to implement.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release discusses the results of two phase-3 clinical trials comparing the new C-Tb test against existing tests for tuberculosis. It provides specific numerical data comparing the new and existing tests in several categories, and identifies both the number of sites where the trials were held and the number of participants in each trial — information that might give readers more confidence in the reported findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 2, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A new treatment might open the door for more patients with advanced kidney disease to get a transplant, a preliminary study suggests.

Of the 100,000-plus Americans waiting for a donor kidney, about one-third are "sensitized," said Dr. Robert Montgomery, director of the Transplant Institute at NYU Langone in New York City.

Those patients face a tough situation: They harbor immune system antibodies that are primed to attack a donor organ.

The antibodies can form when a person is exposed to foreign tissue, Montgomery explained. So a patient who's had a prior kidney transplant may be highly sensitized -- meaning they have a large number of the offending antibodies.

It can also happen to patients who've had blood transfusion or ever been pregnant, Montgomery said.

It's almost impossible to find a compatible donor for those patients. But they might be able to receive a kidney from an incompatible donor if they first undergo an extensive "desensitization" process.

That involves various treatments -- including IV drugs called immune globulin and rituximab -- that try to quash the antibodies that would attack the donor organ.

Now the new research suggests a simple approach -- an infusion of a particular enzyme hours before the transplant -- could offer a better alternative.

Researchers found that the treatment -- dubbed IdeS -- quickly wiped out the dangerous antibodies, allowing all but one of 25 patients to have a successful transplant.

The findings were published in the Aug. 2 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine. Funding for the study came from the company developing IdeS -- Hansa Medical.

Montgomery, who was not involved in the study, said he's "never seen anything like it."

"When you give this, all of the antibodies are gone," Montgomery said. "I'm hopeful that this will turn out to be a game-changer."

However, he stressed, many questions remain.

Critically, the enzyme does not banish the antibodies forever. They come back, Montgomery said -- and the results of that comeback vary from patient to patient.

In the study, 10 patients had an episode of antibody-mediated rejection anywhere from two weeks to five months after their transplant. That means antibodies started to attack the new kidney.

Those patients were all successfully treated with standard anti-rejection drugs, according to the researchers.

Still, it's not yet clear how the patients will fare in the long term, said Dr. Julie Ingelfinger, a professor at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

Ingelfinger, who wrote an editorial published with the study, echoed Montgomery's cautious optimism.

If larger, longer studies bolster the current findings, she said, "this could potentially be practice-changing."

"But," Ingelfinger stressed, "only time will tell."

Lead researcher Dr. Stanley Jordan agreed that more work is necessary.

But the findings mark another step forward for patients like these, according to Jordan, who is medical director of the kidney transplant program at Cedars-Sinai, in Los Angeles.

Traditionally, highly sensitized patients in need of a kidney have languished on waiting lists because it's so hard to find a compatible donor.

But in the past 15 years or so, desensitization has emerged as an alternative.

Last year, a landmark study proved that patients who receive transplants after desensitization live significantly longer than those who stay on dialysis.

"The outcomes have been good," Jordan said.

But, he added, there's clearly room for improvement.

Ingelfinger agreed. "The desensitization protocols now in use are time-consuming, and they don't always work," she said, noting that they can leave dangerous antibodies behind.

Desensitization adds about $20,000 to $30,000 to the cost of the transplant, according to the University of Wisconsin's transplant center.

The new approach is quite different, Ingelfinger said.

Patients receive one infusion of an enzyme called IdeS four to six hours before the transplant.

The enzyme is derived from a strain of Streptococcus bacteria, and it essentially chops up the antibodies that would attack the organ.

Jordan acknowledged that the source "sounds scary," but stressed that patients do not receive the bacteria itself -- but an engineered version of the enzyme.

In all, 25 U.S. and Swedish patients received an infusion of IdeS before their kidney transplant. All but one had a successful transplant, and none had detectable antibodies immediately afterward.

IdeS patients still received additional treatment -- including a week of immune globulin and rituximab infusions.

And as with all transplants, they needed standard anti-rejection drugs.

Because IdeS so readily banishes the offending antibodies, it might make transplants feasible for even the most highly sensitized patients, Montgomery said.

But the "$65,000 question" remains, he said: Can it extend the survival of the donor kidney and, ultimately, patients' lives?

IdeS is still experimental, and the only way patients could receive it is through a clinical trial. It will be "a few years" before it could be more widely available, Montgomery said.

The National Kidney Foundation has more on kidney transplantation.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: To its credit, the article does emphasize that the long-term value of the new therapy is open to question and that far more work needs to be done to answer questions about quality, safety, efficacy and cost.
The article tells us little about the people who participated in the clinical trial, such as type and duration of previous disease treatment, age, gender, race, co-morbidities, insurance status and so on. Nor will the reader get a really clear idea of how healthy–or ill–patients have done on other desensitization protocols overall and in the long term.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The effect was so marked that the trial was stopped early for ethical reasons, so that patients in the control group could be offered the new drug. Because of that, researchers do not yet know the median survival.

“You don’t need to wait for 50 percent of 675 patients to die to conclude that one drug is much better than the other,” said Dr. Antoni Ribas of the University of California, Los Angeles, who was an investigator in the trial and has been a consultant to the developer of the drug.

The other new drug, ipilimumab (pronounced ip-ee-LIM-yoo-mab), when combined with dacarbazine, extended median survival to 11.2 months compared with 9.1 months for those who received dacarbazine alone. After three years, 20.8 percent of those who got that new drug were alive, compared with 12.2 percent of those in the control group.

The results of both trials were published online by The New England Journal of Medicine in addition to being presented here.

To be sure, more than half of patients with metastatic melanoma would not be helped all that much by either drug. Experts say more needs to be done, especially since melanoma affects more young adults than many other types of cancer.

Even if the new drugs allow patients with metastatic melanoma to live two years, “Two years is nothing when you’re 30,” said Dr. Anna C. Pavlick, head of the melanoma program at New York University.

Still, doctors and patient groups welcomed the progress because until now treatment of melanoma that had spread beyond the skin to distant organs “was terrible even by routine cancer standards,” said Dr. Vernon K. Sondak, chairman of cutaneous oncology at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Fla.

Also, the number of melanoma cases has been rising, unlike for many other types of cancer. Doctors say that is because of unprotected sun exposure years ago, the proliferation of tanning salons and perhaps more attention to detecting the disease.

There were about 68,000 new cases of melanoma and about 8,700 deaths last year in the United States, up from 48,000 cases and 7,700 deaths in 2000, according to the American Cancer Society. Particularly fast increases have occurred among people older than 65 and among women 15 to 39 years old.

Vemurafenib is the latest so-called targeted therapy, which inhibits the effects of genetic mutations that spur tumor growth and spread. In particular, the drug counters the effect of a mutation in a gene called B-RAF that was discovered in 2002 to be common in melanomas. (The drug’s name comes from V600E mutation in RAF.)

The drug, which is taken orally twice a day, would be used only by the roughly half of melanoma patients whose tumors have this mutation. The drug significantly shrinks tumors in about half of these patients — or about a quarter of all melanoma patients.

It was developed by Roche and Plexxikon, a biotechnology company in Berkeley, Calif., that was recently acquired by Daiichi Sankyo of Japan. The drug is expected to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration within a few months.

Ipilimumab, the other new drug, releases a brake on the body’s immune system, allowing it to more effectively attack the tumor. Developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb, it was approved in March and is sold under the name Yervoy.

A series of articles in The New York Times last year followed the development of vemurafenib, then known as PLX4032, and recounted how some patients close to death seemed to make miraculous recoveries.

The effect, however, typically lasts only about seven months before the cancer starts to grow again, though some patients benefit for more than two years.

S. Taylor Chance, a 67-year-old real estate agent in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., has been taking vemurafenib in a clinical trial since March 2010. “If it weren’t for the trial I wouldn’t be here,” she said.

It has not been all good. Ms. Chance said the drug caused such extreme pain at one point that “I called in the children and said, ‘I’m done, I can’t do this any more.’ ” But she had her dose reduced and took other medications for the pain.

In the trial, sponsored by Roche and led by Dr. Paul B. Chapman of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, 38 percent of participants had to stop taking the drug or lower the dose because of side effects, including rash and joint pain. Many patients get minor skin cancers that can be removed by dermatologists.

The trial of ipilimumab, paid for by Bristol-Myers, involved 502 patients with late-stage melanoma.

Last year at this conference, researchers presented results of a trial showing a survival advantage for patients who had undergone a previous treatment. The new trial of this drug, by contrast, involved patients who were getting treated for the first time.

While the extension of median survival of two months, from about 9 months to about 11 months, was less than some experts expected, researchers said the real benefit was that a small number of patients, perhaps 10 to 20 percent, could live a long time.

Because it unleashes the immune system, ipilimumab can have serious side effects. In the latest trial, a big one was liver damage.

A course of treatment of ipilimumab costs $120,000. The price of vemurafenib has not been announced, but is expected to be at least tens of thousands of dollars per year.

Doctors are eager to try the two drugs together. Roche and Bristol-Myers said Thursday that they would conduct such tests.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Nice job, including linking (in the online version) to the papers in the New England Journal of Medicine.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MARSHFIELD - A drug already used safely to treat Parkinson's disease, restless leg syndrome and other movement disorders also could delay or prevent the most common cause of blindness affecting more than 9 million older Americans - age-related macular degeneration (AMD).

Researchers have discovered that patients who take the drug L-DOPA are significantly less likely to develop AMD, and if they do get AMD it's at a significantly older age, according to the study published online Nov. 4 in the American Journal of Medicine. The retrospective study was led by researchers at Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, University of Arizona, Medical College of Wisconsin, University of Miami, Essentia Health, Stanford University and University of Southern California.

"Research points to this as a pathway to regulate and prevent this most common cause of blindness in adults," said Murray Brilliant, Ph.D., director, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation Center for Human Genetics, Marshfield, Wisconsin. "Imagine telling patients we potentially have medication that will allow them to see and continue enjoying life, their family and perform every day activities as they age. That is very powerful."

AMD, the No. 1 cause of legal blindness in adults over 60, is a progressive eye condition affecting as many as one in three adults. The disease attacks the macula of the eye, where the sharpest central vision occurs, causing central blindness. This vision is used to drive, read, recognize faces and perform daily tasks. AMD spares the peripheral vision, leaving dim images or black holes at the center of vision.

L-DOPA is a natural by-product of pigmentation and is made in a layer of cells in the back of the eye that functions to promote health and survival of retinal tissues. Researchers asked the question if people taking L-DOPA as a medicine are protected from AMD.

"The obvious question was if the L-DOPA no longer produced was supplemented via pill form, does it have the potential to serve as a preventive medicine against AMD," Brilliant said. "We need more research, but this first step is promising."

This work grew out of research using albino mouse models. Mice, as well as humans who have albinism or lack of pigmentation, have profound vision loss and changes in the eye structure , especially the macula, the oval-shaped area near the center of the retina associated with a person's ability to see clearly.

Race and ocular pigmentation are known risk factors for developing AMD, indicating darker pigmentation may protect from the disease as it occurs much, much more frequently in the white population than black or Hispanic populations. This led to the hypothesis that those with darker pigmentation may have greater L-DOPA signaling in the RPE.

To test this, researchers examined health records of 37,000 Marshfield Clinic patients looking for those with AMD, those taking L-DOPA and those with both L-DOPA and AMD. They then determined the age patients developed AMD.

According to national statistics, the average age at which individuals are given L-DOPA is 67; the average age of AMD diagnosis is 71. In those people who got L-DOPA before being diagnosed with AMD, their AMD diagnosis occurred eight years later than those without L-DOPA.

These provocative results were then confirmed in a much larger data set of 87 million patients where similar results were observed and the study expanded to include prevention and delay of "wet" AMD, the most devastating form of the disease.

In all the groups examined, data suggests L-DOPA may prevent or delay AMD.

"This study suggests an intriguing link between patients taking L-DOPA and a lower incidence and delayed onset of AMD," said Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D., director of the National Eye Institute. "Showing that L-DOPA causes this protective effect will require further investigation, but if confirmed, could lead to new drugs or combination therapies for AMD that target DOPA-responsive cells in the retina."

The next step in this research is to perform a clinical trial to determine the ability of this drug to prevent AMD.

"Results suggest a new path forward in our fight against AMD that may even include a strategy to prevent those at risk of the disease from ever developing it," said Brian McKay, Ph.D., associate professor, Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of Arizona. "In the end, L-DOPA may not be the drug that ends the disease but the pathway identified is likely to be a key observation as the search for a cure continues."

This research, titled "Mining Retrospective Data for Virtual Prospective Drug Repurposing: L-DOPA and Age-related Macular Degeneration," was supported by National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Human Genome Research Institute, Research to Prevent Blindness, Bright Focus Foundation, The Edward N. & Della L. Thome Memorial Foundation, Wisconsin Genomics Initiative, National Eye Institute, Marshfield Clinic and University of Arizona.

Marshfield Clinic provides patient care, research and education with more than 50 locations in northern, central and western Wisconsin, making it one of the largest comprehensive medical systems in the United States.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: To its credit, the release explains early — in the second paragraph — that the research is a retrospective study of patient records. This informs knowledgeable readers of the inherent limitations of retrospective studies but readers not familiar with research may not understand that retrospective studies cannot show causality, that one thing leads to another. We’ll give them a grudging satisfactory in this category but with a caution about the overall message of the release — that L-DOPA can delay or prevent AMD. It may very well do so, but this kind of study cannot prove that. But again, transparency is offered when the authors of the study are quoted saying that this research justifies the performance of future randomized clinical trials specifically looking at the benefits and any additional risks of long term L-Dopa for prevention or delay of AMD.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“We were hoping for a very different story,” said Dr. Gregory N. Connolly, director of Harvard’s Center for Global Tobacco Control and a co-author of the study. “I ran a treatment program for years, and we invested” millions in treatment services.

Doctors who treat smokers said that the study findings were not unexpected, given the haphazard way many smokers used the products. “Patient compliance is a very big issue,” said Dr. Richard Hurt, director of the Nicotine Dependence Center at the , who was not involved in the study.

Dr. Hurt said products like nicotine gum and patches “are absolutely essential, but we use them in combinations and doses that match treatment to what the individual patient needs,” unlike smokers who are self-treating.

The products have been controversial since at least 2002, when researchers at the , reported from a large survey that they appeared to offer no benefit. The study did not follow people over time. A government-appointed panel that included nicotine replacement as part of federal guidelines for treatment also came under fire, because panel members had gotten payments from the product manufacturers.

“Some studies have questioned these treatments, but the bulk of clinical trials have unequivocally endorsed them,” said Dr. Michael Fiore, director of the ’s Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention and the chairman of the panel that wrote the guidelines. Dr. Fiore, who has reported receiving payments from drug makers, said that “there are millions of smokers out there desperate to quit, and it would be a tragedy if they felt, because of one study, that this option is ineffective.”

In the new study, conducted in , the researchers followed a representative sample of 1,916 adults, including 787 people who said at the start of the study that they had recently quit smoking. They interviewed the participants three times, about once every two years during the 2000s, asking the smokers and quitters about their use of gum, patches and other such products, their periods of not and their relapses.

At each stage, about one-third of the people trying to quit had relapsed, the study found. The use of replacement products made no difference, whether they were taken for the recommended two-month period (they usually were not), or with the guidance of a cessation counselor.

One subgroup, heavy smokers (defined as those who had their first cigarette within a half-hour of waking up) who used replacement products without counseling, was twice as likely to relapse as heavy smokers who did not use them.

“Our study essentially shows that what happens in the real world is very different” from what happens in clinical trials, said Hillel R. Alpert of Harvard, a co-author with Dr. Connolly and Lois Biener of the , .

The researchers argue that while nicotine replacement appears to help people quit, it is not enough to prevent relapse in the longer run. Motivation matters a lot; so does a person’s social environment, the amount of support from friends and family, and the rules enforced at the workplace. Media campaigns, increased tobacco and tightening of smoking laws have all had an effect as well.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: As with the other two stories, this one provided the basic outlines of the study protocol, but, unlike the other two, it did not provide more than make a vague mention of a potential flaw in the study’s design. None of the stories, either, made any attempt to discuss whether the previous evidence in favor of nicotine products could have been unduly influenced by the makers of the products.
We did appreciate, though, that this story noted that earlier studies had shown “the products have proved effective, making it easier for people to quit, at least in the short term.”  This places the current study into perspective since it looked at long term outcomes at 5 years.
We could go either way with this score, but we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Health officials say influenza is circulating unusually early this year with cases in every state – and nearly all the infections are swine flu.

The highest concentrations of flu cases are in the Southeast and a few other states. The report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Friday also came with good news: Testing of vaccines for swine flu show that they work with a single dose and take effect rapidly.

Supplies of swine flu vaccine are expected to be available in mid-October. But the seasonal flu vaccine is available now, and officials are encouraging people to get it.

Dr. Anne Schuchat of the CDC says the swine flu broke out in the spring and "never went away." Currently 98 percent of the flu viruses circulating are swine flu. Schuchat says cases are mainly in children and young adults.

THIS IS A BREAKING NEWS UPDATE. Check back soon for further information. AP's earlier story is below.

WASHINGTON (AP) – Fighting the swine flu may have gotten more manageable.

Australian and U.S. researchers said Thursday that one dose of the new swine flu vaccine looks strong enough to protect adults – and can begin protection within 10 days of the shot.

Australian drug maker CSL Ltd. published results of a study that found 75 percent to 96 percent of vaccinated people should be protected with a single dose – the same degree of effectiveness as the regular winter flu shot. That's remarkable considering scientists thought it would take two doses.

U.S. data to be released Friday confirm those findings and show the protection starts rapidly, Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institutes of Health told The Associated Press.

"This is quite good news," Fauci said.

The dose question has an important ramification: It means people will have to line up for influenza vaccinations twice this year instead of three times – once for the regular winter flu shot and a second time to be inoculated against swine flu, what doctors call the 2009 H1N1 strain.

Thursday's swine flu vaccine reports center on adults; studies in children aren't finished yet.

But scientists had feared that people of all ages would need two shots about a month apart because the new H1N1 strain is so genetically different from normally circulating flu strains that most of the population has little if any immunity.

Chinese manufacturers gave the first hint a week ago that one dose could be enough. But different manufacturers make different formulations of the vaccine, so more evidence was needed.

Thus the CSL study, rushed out by the New England Journal of Medicine late Thursday, is welcome news. In a study of 240 adults, half younger than 50 and half over, one shot prompted the same kind of immune response indicating protection that is seen with regular flu vaccine. And a standard 15-microgram dose – not the double dose that also was tested – was enough.

CSL, which is one U.S. vaccine supplier, found the same side effects in its study that people experience with regular flu vaccine, which is no surprise since this shot is merely a recipe change from the annual standby. About 45 percent of recipients had mild reactions such as a headache, sore arm or redness at the shot site.

On Friday, the NIH is set to release results of its own studies of hundreds of adults that confirm that one shot works, Fauci said. Plus, the U.S. work shows that people are protected eight to 10 days after that inoculation, he said.

One dose means tight supplies of H1N1 vaccine won't be stretched so thin after all. The U.S. has ordered 195 million doses, based on the hope that 15 micrograms was indeed the right dose. Had it taken twice that dosage, or two shots apiece, half as many people could have received the vaccine.

The winter flu vaccine is widely available now, and U.S. health authorities urged people to get it out of the way now before swine flu shots start arriving in mid-October.

Despite all the headlines about swine flu, which has become the main influenza strain circulating in the world, doctors do expect some garden-variety flu to hit this fall too – the kind that every year kills 36,000 Americans and hospitalizes 200,000.

"Take some individual responsibility to stay healthy during the flu season," said Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who scheduled her own seasonal shot for Friday. Waiting to get the first inoculation out of the way "is not in anybody's best interest," added Dr. Nancy Nielsen, past president of the American Medical Association. She said busy doctors need to have completed regular vaccinations by the time they have to deal with H1N1 shots.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story explains that the trials involved just a few hundred people and were rushed through so that health officials could get a preliminary sense of the best way to use limited H1N1 vaccine supplies and that more and longer trials are underway to develop better evidence. However, caveats about the trials are buried deep in the story, so readers skimming the lead paragraphs would get the impression that the results are more conclusive than they actually are.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
By Amy Norton NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - People with multiple sclerosis have long said that smoking marijuana helps ease their painful muscle cramping. And a new clinical trial suggests they are not just blowing smoke.

The study, published Monday, found that for 30 MS patients with muscle “spasticity,” a few days of marijuana smoking brought some relief.

But the big caveat, researchers say, is that it’s not clear that the downsides of pot smoking are worth it.

Some people with MS are already using medical marijuana to treat certain symptoms, including spasticity — when the muscles in the legs or arms contract painfully, in something akin to a “charley horse.”

There is some science behind the idea: The body naturally produces cannabinoids, the group of chemicals found in marijuana. And studies have suggested the cannabinoid receptors on our cells help regulate muscle spasticity.

But the evidence that pot smoking actually helps with spasticity has been anecdotal.

“We’ve heard from patients that marijuana helps their spasticity, but I think a lot us thought, ‘Well, it’s probably just making you feel good,’” said Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, the lead researcher on the new study.

“I think this study shows that yes, (marijuana) may help with spasticity, but at a cost,” said Corey-Bloom, of the University of California, San Diego.

The cost, her team found, is that smoking caused fatigue and dizziness in some users, and generally slowed down people’s mental skills soon after they used marijuana.

But it’s not clear if that would have any long-term consequences, Corey-Bloom said.

About 400,000 people in the United States have MS, a chronic disease in which the protective coating around nerve fibers starts breaking down.

The new study, reported in the Canadian Medical Association Journal, included 30 MS patients with muscle spasticity that had failed to get better with standard medication.

Corey-Bloom’s team had each patient smoke marijuana or “placebo” joints — which looked, smelled and tasted like the real thing, but lacked the active ingredient in marijuana, known as THC.

Each patient smoked marijuana once a day for three days and used the placebo cigarette once a day on three separate days. Before and after each treatment, an independent rater assessed the patients’ muscle spasticity.

Overall, the study found, measures of spasticity dropped an average of three points —about 30 percent — on a 24-point scale when patients smoked marijuana, but didn’t change after they smoked the placebo.

The issue of treating spasticity is “certainly an important one,” said Nicholas LaRocca, vice president of healthcare delivery and policy research at the National MS Society.

“Spasticity is a big problem for many people with MS, and the current medications don’t necessarily work for everyone,” said LaRocca, who was not involved in the new study.

“But smoking marijuana does not appear to be a long-term solution, because of the cognitive effects,” he told Reuters Health.

People with MS are already at some risk of “cognitive changes,” LaRocca pointed out, so the potential for lasting effects from long-term marijuana smoking is a concern.

However, LaRocca said, researchers are developing cannabinoid-based medications for MS. That includes a cannabinoid mouth spray called Sativex that has been approved in the UK, Canada, Spain and New Zealand to treat MS-related spasticity.

Research into cannabinoids and spasticity should continue, LaRocca said, because medications may be able to harness the benefits of specific cannabis compounds, without the side effects linked to smoking pot.

Both LaRocca and Corey-Bloom said there were limitations to the current study.

“Blinding” people as to whether they are on marijuana or a placebo is tough since the drug creates a “high” feeling.

In this study, 17 of 30 patients were able to correctly guess whether they were using marijuana or a placebo at each of their six visits with the researchers. And the rest often guessed correctly.

“It’s pretty clear that the patients were not really blinded,” LaRocca said. “What effects that might have had on the results is unclear.”

Corey-Bloom said that should not have influenced the spasticity findings, since an independent researcher (who didn’t know whether patients were smoking marijuana or the placebo) rated spasticity using a standard scale.

But another limitation, she pointed out, is that the study looked at the effects, and side effects, of marijuana over only a few days. “We can’t say anything about long-term effects,” Corey-Bloom told Reuters Health.

For now, LaRocca recommended that people with spasticity see a doctor experienced in treating MS. And if you’re on an anti-spasticity medication and it’s not working well enough, or the side effects are too much, tell your doctor, he said.

For some people, a change in the medication dose might help.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story carefully itemized several limitations of the research:
The story could have commented more strongly about the small sample size as well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Johns Hopkins Medicine specialists report they have developed a urine test for the likely emergence of cervical cancer that is highly accurate compared to other tests based on genetic markers derived directly from cervical tissue.

The new urine test, they say, is different because it analyzes not only multiple sources of human cellular DNA altered by precancerous changes, but also DNA from HPV that is sexually transmitted and causes virtually all cases of the disease.

In a proof-of-concept study, described online in Cancer Prevention Research on November 8, the investigators say their genetic markers test showed a "sensitivity" or accuracy rate of 90.9 percent in identifying so-called CIN2 lesions -- cervical lesions with abnormal cells likely to not only develop into cancer, but also to develop into cancers likely to spread. Additionally, they demonstrated that the DNA for all three human genes and one viral gene could be successfully extracted from urine, and they could identify such lesions with 75 percent sensitivity.

Two commercial tests based on markers of DNA chemical changes called methylation, released in Europe last summer, require Pap smears or swabs of cervical tissue, and show 64 percent sensitivity in identifying similar lesions, according to senior investigator Rafael Guerrero-Preston, Dr.P.H., M.P.H., assistant professor of otolaryngology-head and neck surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and member of the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center.

"If further studies confirm these findings, we see a significant use of urine screening as a way to quickly and inexpensively determine if a biopsy is warranted, or if physicians can use a 'watch and wait' approach before intervening," says Guerrero-Preston. Typically, he says, a woman who tests positive for HPV and has an abnormal Pap smear undergoes a biopsy to rule out cervical cancer using cells taken directly from cervical tissue. But previous studies suggest more than 50 percent of these biopsies are unnecessary and can result in pain, worry, infertility and higher health care costs.

"Our urine test would serve as a molecular triage," he says, "at times supplementing Pap test information. In developing countries that don't have the money, medical infrastructure or cultural approval for Pap test, our test could be used instead."

The new study builds on the Johns Hopkins team's previously published work, in which investigators identified three genes associated with cervical cancer or abnormal-looking cells known to become cancerous: FKBP6, INTS1 and ZNF516. As abnormalities progress, these genes were more likely to have a chemical methyl group attached to their DNA in certain spots.

The researchers tested the value of these genes as markers using 214 cervical cell samples collected from women undergoing Pap smears at Hospital Dr. Hernan Henriquez Aravena in Chile. The women ranged in age from 18 to 86. Among the test samples, 34 showed no abnormalities in their cervix; 87 showed one of three types of precancerous, abnormal tissue; and 90 showed clear evidence of cervical cancer.

Next, Guerrero-Preston's team isolated DNA from each cervical tissue sample and used advanced genetic sequencing methods to spell out the DNA makeup of cells in the cervical tissue samples. The researchers then compared the number of methyl groups attached to each gene in samples from the 34 healthy women to 53 samples with a specific subset of precancerous markers.

Using methylation as a value to diagnose malignancy, the three genes together showed a 90 percent sensitivity, meaning that their presence was able to predict a true positive cancer sample this percentage of the time. The test had an 88.9 percent specificity, meaning the percent of time the test correctly identified someone without the disease.

To further improve the accuracy of the test, the investigators added a new gene marker to the test. This time, rather than using a human gene, they used one from the virus, HPV16-L1, which also becomes methylated in human cells as cancer develops. They did the test again with the four-gene combination on a new population of women from the University of Puerto Rico. The 115 women ranged in age from 21 to 49; 41 participants had healthy cervical tissue, and 74 had one of three types of precancerous cells. Using all four genes, the test now had a sensitivity of 90.9 percent and a specificity of 60.9 percent.

"When developing a new cancer screening test, we want something in the range of 90 to 95 percent sensitivity, which is competitive with the effectiveness of tests developed and now marketed in Europe," says Guerrero-Preston.

The next step, the researchers report, was to verify that the four-gene test worked using freely circulating DNA from blood and urine, rather than DNA taken directly from cervical tissue.

For this experiment, they tested 40 samples of paired cervical tissue, blood and urine from a subset of the patients from Puerto Rico. Using the DNA from blood, they found the test had an 85.7 percent sensitivity and a 60.9 percent specificity. Using urine, they found a 75 percent sensitivity and an 83.3 percent specificity.

During the course of the study, the time to process cervical samples, blood or urine and get a test result took four days. They plan to continue modifying the test to improve the urine sensitivity to that of the cervical tissue samples.

According to World Cancer Research Fund International, 84 percent of cervical cancers occur in less developed countries, with the highest rates in Africa, Latin American and the Caribbean. In the United States, cervical cancer used to be the highest cause of cancer deaths among women, but that soon changed when the yearly Pap smear was introduced over 40 years ago. Countries without the infrastructure or cultural acceptance for regular Pap tests have not seen declining cancer rates.

Guerrero-Preston and his colleagues have a research agreement with Cepheid to develop a way to reduce the waiting time for a test result from a maximum of four days in the lab to under three hours in a Cepheid instrument using sealed cartridges to minimize sample handling and contamination.

Additional authors on the study include Blanca Valle, Anne Jedlicka, Nitesh Turaga, Oluwasina Folawiyo, Francesca Pirini, Fahcina Lawson, Angelo Vergura, Maartje Noorhuis, Amanda Dziedzic, Gabriela Perez, Marisa Renehan, Carolina Guerrero-Diaz, Bruce Trock Liliana Florea and David Sidransky of The Johns Hopkins University; Edgar De Jesus Rodriguez, Jose Rodriguez Orengo, Keimari Mendez and Josefina Romaguera of the University of Puerto Rico; and Teresa Diaz-Montes of the Institute for Cancer Care at Mercy.

The research was funded by National Cancer Institute grants (U01 CA084986, K01 CA164092 and U01 CA084986).
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release offers a good bit of detail about the researchers’ path to the urine test, a process that involved isolating relevant genes and testing blood samples before turning to urine sample tests. This description gets specific about the size of the various samples used and, if read carefully, yields a reasonable understanding of the studies conducted.  Left unsaid is that a “proof-of-concept” study is an early stage in the process of developing a diagnostic test.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 5, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Taking fish oil supplements during pregnancy might translate into healthier growth in children during their first six years of life, a new study suggests.

"This study highlights the fact that in utero exposure can have a profound effect on the fetus that lasts through childhood," said Dr. Jennifer Wu, an obstetrician-gynecologist from Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"For the past decade, the importance of fish oil and the omega-3 fatty acids have been stressed to patients," explained Wu, who was not involved in the study.

"The use of fish oil in the latter part of the pregnancy has an impact on bone and muscle mass. Though these children are larger, they do not have increased rates of obesity," Wu added.

In the study, the researchers followed 736 pregnant women in Denmark who took either fish oil or olive oil supplements daily from week 24 of their pregnancy until one week after they gave birth.

The children were assessed 11 times between birth and the age of 6 years. Those whose mothers took the fish oil supplements during pregnancy sustained a higher body mass index (BMI) from the age of 1 to 6 years.

However, the higher BMI was not due to a higher percentage of fat, but rather to higher percentages of lean muscle and bone mass, the researchers found.

At age 6, children whose mothers took fish oil supplements while pregnant had a 395 grams higher total mass, 281 grams higher lean mass and 10 grams higher bone mineral content than children whose mothers who took olive oil during pregnancy, the findings showed.

"The body composition at age 6 years in children given fish oil supplementation was characterized by a proportional increase in lean, bone and fat mass, suggesting a general growth-stimulating effect," the researchers, who were led by Hans Bisgaard, from the University of Copenhagen, wrote in the report.

However, the findings only showed an association and did not prove that fish oil pills caused healthier growth in children.

According to Dr. Jill Rabin, co-chief of the division of ambulatory care, Women's Health Programs-PCAP Services at Northwell Health, in New Hyde Park, N.Y., "In pregnancy and beyond, adequate intake of fish is important for normal human development, and this paper certainly adds to the literature."

But Rabin, who was not involved in the study, did add a few caveats about the findings.

The population studied was relatively homogenous, and "the [body mass] findings were not the object of the study (wheezing or asthma in children was the primary objective), growth was a secondary finding," Rabin explained. "Certainly, however, this solid paper adds to the literature and paves the way for additional research on this interesting topic."

The report by Bisgaard and colleagues was published online Sept. 4 in the BMJ.

The American Academy of Pediatrics has more on healthy growth.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story points out that this study used both an experimental and control group to test their hypothesis about fish oil supplements, and mentioned the large number of participants who took part — 736 pregnant women. It also included some of the study’s limitations and explained that growth wasn’t the primary measurement researchers were following, it was actually development of asthma.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A form of ‘mind-body’ therapy that focuses on the role of emotions in physical pain may offer some relief to people with fibromyalgia, a small clinical trial suggests.

The study, of 45 women with fibromyalgia, found that those who learned a technique called “affective self-awareness” were more likely to show a significant reduction in their pain over six months.

Overall, 46 percent of the women had a 30-percent or greater reduction in their pain severity, as measured by a standard pain-rating scale. In contrast, of study participants who were assigned to a wait-list for therapy, none showed a similar decline in pain.

Fibromyalgia is a syndrome marked by widespread pain — including discomfort at specific “tender points” in the body — along with symptoms such as fatigue, irritable bowel and sleep problems. It is estimated to affect up to 5 million U.S. adults, most commonly middle-aged women.

The precise cause of fibromyalgia is unknown — there are no physical signs, such as inflammation and tissue damage in the painful area — but some researchers believe the disorder involves problems in how the brain processes pain signals.

Standard treatments include painkillers, antidepressants, cognitive- behavioral therapy and exercise therapy. However, many people with fibromyalgia find that their symptoms — pain, in particular — persist despite treatment.

Part of that, according to the researchers on the new study, may be because standard treatments do not specifically address the role psychological stress and emotions can play in triggering people’s pain.

That is not to say that the pain people with fibromyalgia feel is “all in their head,” stressed Dr. Howard Schubiner, of St. John Health/ Providence Hospital and Medical Centers in Southfield, Michigan.

“The pain is very real,” Schubiner said in an interview. But, he explained, pain and emotions are “connected in the brain,” and emotional factors may act to trigger “learned nerve pathways” that give rise to pain.

Past studies have found that compared with people without fibromyalgia, those with the disorder have higher rates of stressful life events, such as childhood abuse, marital problems and high levels of job stress. There is also evidence that they are relatively less aware of their own emotions and more reluctant to express their feelings, particularly anger.

For the new study, published in the Journal of General Internal Medicine, Schubiner and his colleagues tested the effects of affective self-awareness — a technique Schubiner developed and uses in treating certain chronic-pain conditions — on fibromyalgia.

They randomly assigned 45 women with the condition to either undergo the therapy or go on a wait-list for treatment, serving as a control group. Women in the treatment group each had a one-on-one consultation, then attended three group meetings to learn the affective self-awareness techniques so that they could carry them out on their own.

The therapy involves an educational component where patients learn about the emotion-pain connection. They learn specific techniques — including mindfulness meditation and “expressive” writing — for recognizing and dealing with the emotions that may be contributing to their pain. Patients are also encouraged to get back to any exercise or other activities that they have been avoiding due to pain.

Schubiner’s team found that six months later, 46 percent of the treatment group had at least a 30-percent reduction in their pain ratings compared with scores at the outset. And 21 percent had a 50-percent or greater reduction.

None of the women in the control group had a comparable improvement.

The study is only the first clinical trial to test affective self-awareness for fibromyalgia, and it had a number of limitations, including its small size. In addition, the control group received no active therapy to serve as a comparison.

That is important because it is possible for patients to benefit from simply receiving attention from a healthcare provider, or being part of small-group sessions with other people suffering from the same condition, for example.

Schubiner also acknowledged that this general “model” for understanding and addressing fibromyalgia pain is controversial.

He said that he and his colleagues have applied for funding to conduct a larger clinical trial comparing affective self-awareness with standard cognitive-behavioral therapy.

Affective self-awareness and cognitive-behavioral therapy have similarities, according to Schubiner. Both, for example, try to show patients that they have the power to improve their own health.

A key difference, Schubiner said, is that affective self-awareness asks people to “directly engage” the emotions that may be helping to drive their symptoms.

Another difference is that, right now, only a small number of healthcare providers practice affective self-awareness, according to Schubiner.

Some components of the technique, such as teachings in mindfulness meditation, are more widely available. But whether those practices in isolation would help fibromyalgia patients’ pain is not clear.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a relatively thorough job of explaining the study and included key information such as the number of patients, a description of the intervention, and the length of follow-up. It could have done a better job of pointing out strengths of the research, including the fact that the evaluators were blinded to the treatment status of the subjects. Moreover, the story didn’t comment on the the fact that the therapy was provided only in the first month of the study (and was limited to the initial evaluation followed by three two hour group sessions), and yet the positive effect on pain was noted at 6 months–evidence of a durable effect of the treatment.
Importantly, the story drew attention to several limitations such as the small sample size and the fact that the control group was on a wait list and didn’t receive as much attention as the intervention group. The latter point is important, the story points outs, because patients tend to get better when they are seen by health care professionals, regardless of whether any effective treatment is provided. Accordingly, the improvements seen with affective self-awareness therapy might be due in part to the increased number of office visits these patients made rather than any specific effect of the treatment. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The investigators found that the less salt people ate, the more likely they were to die of heart disease — 50 people in the lowest third of salt consumption (2.5 grams of sodium per day) died during the study as compared with 24 in the medium group (3.9 grams of sodium per day) and 10 in the highest salt consumption group (6.0 grams of sodium per day). And while those eating the most salt had, on average, a slight increase in systolic blood pressure — a 1.71-millimeter increase in pressure for each 2.5-gram increase in sodium per day — they were no more likely to develop hypertension.

“If the goal is to prevent hypertension” with lower sodium consumption, said the lead author, Dr. Jan A. Staessen, a professor of medicine at the University of Leuven, in Belgium, “this study shows it does not work.”

But among the study’s other problems, Dr. Briss said, its subjects who seemed to consume the smallest amount of sodium also provided less urine than those consuming more, an indication that they might not have collected all of their urine in an 24-hour period.

Dr. Frank Sacks of the Harvard School of Public Health agreed and also said the study was flawed.

“It’s a problematic study,” Dr. Sacks said. “We shouldn’t be guiding any kind of public health decisions on it.”

Dr. Michael Alderman, a blood pressure researcher at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and editor of the American Journal of Hypertension, said medical literature on salt and health effects was inconsistent. But, Dr. Alderman said, the new study is not the only one to find adverse effects of low-sodium diets. His own study, with people who had high blood pressure, found that those who ate the least salt were most likely to die.

Dr. Alderman said that he once was an unpaid consultant for the Salt Institute but that he now did no consulting for it or for the food industry and did not receive any support or take any money from industry groups.

Lowering salt consumption, Dr. Alderman said, has consequences beyond blood pressure. It also, for example, increases insulin resistance, which can increase the risk of heart disease.

“Diet is a complicated business,” he said. “There are going to be unintended consequences.”

One problem with the salt debates, Dr. Alderman said, is that all the studies are inadequate. Either they are short-term intervention studies in which people are given huge amounts of salt and then deprived of salt to see effects on blood pressure or they are studies, like this one, that observe populations and ask if those who happen to consume less salt are healthier.

“Observational studies tell you what people will experience if they select a diet,” Dr. Alderman said. “They do not tell you what will happen if you change peoples’ sodium intake.”

What is needed, Dr. Alderman said, is a large study in which people are randomly assigned to follow a low-sodium diet or not and followed for years to see if eating less salt improves health and reduces the death rate from cardiovascular disease.

But that study, others say, will never happen.

“This is one of those really interesting situations,” said Dr. Lawrence Appel, a professor of medicine, epidemiology and international health at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. “You can say, ‘O.K., let’s dismiss the observational studies because they have all these problems.’ ” But, he said, despite the virtues of a randomized controlled clinical trial, such a study “will never ever be done.” It would be impossible to keep people on a low-sodium diet for years with so much sodium added to prepared foods.

Dr. Briss adds that it would not be prudent to defer public health actions while researchers wait for results of a clinical trial that might not even be feasible.

“The low-salt advocates suggest that all 300 million Americans be subjected to a low-salt diet. But if they can’t get people on a low-salt diet for a clinical trial, what are they talking about?”

He added: “It will cost money, but that’s why we do science. It will also cost money to change the composition of food.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story did readers a great service by showing in the lead that this study had problems. It said at the top, “A new study found that low-salt diets increase the risk of death from heart attacks and strokes and do not prevent high blood pressure, but the research’s limitations mean the debate over the effects of salt in the diet is far from over. In fact, officials at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention felt so strongly that the study was flawed that they criticized it in an interview, something they normally do not do.” The story then went on to discuss many of the study’s positives and negatives. The study, for example, only tested people’s sodium intake twice, over a period as long as 7.9 years. As the story says, “The researchers assessed the participants’ sodium consumption at the study’s start and at its conclusion by measuring the amount of sodium excreted in urine over a 24-hour period.” The conclusions drawn by the study are fairly significant given that they are based on only two tests taken over nearly 8 years in a total of 74 people who died over the course of the study. The USA Today story, by contrast, presented the evidence as worthy of equal consideration with the much larger body of evidence showing that salt does have harmful health effects in high quantities.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eylea outperforms Avastin for diabetic macular edema with moderate or worse vision loss

NIH-funded clinical trial shows Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis perform similarly when vision loss is mild.

A two-year clinical trial that compared three drugs for diabetic macular edema (DME) found that gains in vision were greater for participants receiving the drug Eylea (aflibercept) than for those receiving Avastin (bevacizumab), but only among participants starting treatment with 20/50 or worse vision. Gains after two years were about the same for Eylea and Lucentis (ranibizumab), contrary to year-one results from the study, which showed Eylea with a clear advantage. The three drugs yielded similar gains in vision for patients with 20/32 or 20/40 vision at the start of treatment. The clinical trial was conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), which is funded by the National Eye Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health.

“This rigorous trial confirms that Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all effective treatments for diabetic macular edema,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D. “Eye care providers and patients can have confidence in all three drugs.”

Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis are all widely used to treat DME, a consequence of diabetes that can cause blurring of central vision due to the leakage of fluid from abnormal blood vessels in the retina. The macula is the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The drugs are injected into the eye and work by inhibiting vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a substance that can promote abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage. Although the drugs have a similar mode of action, they differ significantly in cost. Based on Medicare allowable charges, the per-injection costs of each drug at the doses used in this study were about $1850 for Eylea, about $60 for Avastin, and about $1200 for Lucentis.

DRCR.net investigators enrolled 660 people with DME at 89 clinical trial sites across the United States. When the study began, participants on average were 61 years old with 17 years of type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Only people with a visual acuity of 20/32 or worse were eligible to participate (to see clearly, a person with 20/32 vision would have to be 20 feet away from an object that a person with normal vision could see clearly at 32 feet). At enrollment, about half the participants had 20/32 to 20/40 vision. The other half had 20/50 or worse vision. In many states, a corrected visual acuity of 20/40 or better in at least one eye is required for a driver’s license that allows both day- and nighttime driving.

Each participant was assigned randomly to receive Eylea (2.0 milligrams/0.05 milliliter), Avastin (1.25 mg/0.05 mL), or Lucentis (0.3 mg/0.05 mL). Participants were evaluated monthly during the first year and every 4-16 weeks during the second year. Most participants received monthly injections during the first six months. Thereafter, participants received additional injections of assigned study drug until DME resolved or stabilized with no further vision improvement. Subsequently, injections were resumed if DME worsened. Additionally, laser treatment was given if DME persisted without continual improvement after six months of injections. Laser treatment alone was the standard treatment for DME until widespread adoption of anti-VEGF drugs a few years ago.

Among participants with 20/40 or better vision at the trial’s start, all three drugs improved vision similarly on an eye chart. On average, participants’ vision improved from 20/40 vision to 20/25.

Among participants with 20/50 or worse vision at the trial’s start, visual acuity on average improved substantially in all three groups. At two years, Eylea participants were able to read about 3.5 additional lines on an eye chart; Lucentis participants were able to read about three additional lines, and Avastin participants improved about 2.5 lines, compared with visual acuity before treatment. Eylea outperformed Avastin at the one- and two-year time points. While Eylea outperformed Lucentis at the one-year time point, by the two-year time point gains in visual acuity were statistically no different. At the end of the trial, average visual acuity was 20/32 to 20/40 among participants in all three groups.

“The results of the DRCR Network’s comparison of Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis will help doctors and their patients with diabetic macular edema choose the most appropriate therapy,” said John A. Wells, M.D., the lead author of the study and a retinal specialist at the Palmetto Retina Center, Columbia, South Carolina. “The study suggests there is little advantage of choosing Eylea or Lucentis over Avastin when a patient’s loss of visual acuity from macular edema is mild, meaning a visual acuity of 20/40 or better. However, patients with 20/50 or worse vision loss may benefit from Eylea, which over the course of the two-year study outperformed Lucentis and Avastin.”

The number of injections participants needed was about the same for all three treatment groups. Eylea, Avastin, and Lucentis participants on average required nine injections in the first year of the study and five in the second year.

The need for laser treatment varied among the three treatment groups. By two years, 41 percent of participants in the Eylea group received laser treatment to treat their macular edema, compared with 64 percent of participants in the Avastin group and 52 percent in the Lucentis group.

The risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from a cardiovascular condition or an unknown cause by end of the trial was higher among participants in the Lucentis group. Twelve percent of Lucentis participants had at least one event, compared with five percent of participants in the Eylea group and eight percent of participants in the Avastin group. This difference in cardiovascular rates has not been seen across all other studies, and therefore may be due to chance. Continued assessment of these serious cardiovascular events and their association with these drugs is important in future studies. Cardiovascular events such as heart attack and stroke are common complications of diabetes. The occurrence of eye complications, such as eye infections and inflammation, was similar for all three drugs.

Results of the study were published online today in Ophthalmology, the journal of the American Academy of Ophthalmology. Eylea and Lucentis were provided by drug manufacturers Regeneron and Genentech, respectively. Additional research funding for this study was provided by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, also a part of NIH.

“This important study would not have happened without funding from the National Institutes of Health and the cooperation of two competing companies,” said Adam R. Glassman, M.S., principal investigator of the DRCR.Net Coordinating Center at the Jaeb Center for Health Research.

The DRCR.net is dedicated to facilitating multicenter clinical research of diabetic eye disease. The Network formed in 2002 and comprises more than 350 physicians practicing at more than 140 clinical sites across the country. For more information, visit the DRCR.net website at http://drcrnet.jaeb.org/.

The study was funded by grants EY14231, EY14229, and EY18817.

The study is registered as NCT01627249 at ClinicalTrials.gov.

Macular edema can arise during any stage of diabetic retinopathy and is the most common cause of diabetes-related vision loss. About 7.7 million Americans have diabetic retinopathy. Of these, about 750,000 have DME. The NEI provides information about diabetic eye disease at http://www.nei.nih.gov/health/diabetic. View an NEI video about how diabetic retinopathy can be detected through a comprehensive dilated eye exam at http://youtu.be/sQ-0RkPu35o.

NEI leads the federal government's research on the visual system and eye diseases. NEI supports basic and clinical science programs that result in the development of sight-saving treatments. For more information, visit http://www.nei.nih.gov.

The NIDDK, a component of the NIH, conducts and supports research on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, nutrition and obesity; and kidney, urologic and hematologic diseases. Spanning the full spectrum of medicine and afflicting people of all ages and ethnic groups, these diseases encompass some of the most common, severe and disabling conditions affecting Americans. For more information about the NIDDK and its programs, visit http://www.niddk.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release is very thorough in describing the format of the trial, the volunteer population and how they were selected, how long the trial lasted, and the different drug formulations. One significant concern is that the trial was not blinded, and this could introduce bias as there are some strong opinions among ophthalmologists on this issue. The release did not comment on this. In addition, the time trends could have been discussed more, as the differences narrowed over time and might have continued to decrease with additional follow-up. But the discussion of evidence overall is Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have discovered a new class of drug that has the potential to help cancer patients who no longer respond to existing therapies.

The drug may not become available to patients for a number of years yet, but researchers believe that if clinical trials are successful, it could be used to tackle a variety of treatment-resistant cancers.

Patients with breast cancer for example frequently become resistant to existing hormone-based treatments, leading to the disease becoming fatal.

In a bid to come up with new forms of treatment that work in a distinct way from established ones, chemists, biologists and clinicians at Imperial College London collaborated on creating a new drug, the properties of which are reported in the journal Molecular Cancer Therapeutics.

The team of scientists at Imperial was funded by Cancer Research UK. The drug was then developed by Imperial, in collaboration with Emory University in the USA.

Early lab-based tests of ICEC0942 were successful in targeting resistant breast cancers and indicated minimal side effects. ICEC0942 was then licenced to Carrick Therapeutics, who developed it into a molecule named CT7001, which they have taken to early-stage clinical trials in less than two years.

The first patient was given the drug in November 2017 as part of Carrick's a Phase I clinical trial to assess its safety and how well it can be tolerated. The trial is still ongoing, so results are not available yet.

Professor Charles Coombes, from the Department of Surgery & Cancer, said: "Treatment-resistant tumours represent a significant threat for patients, as once a cancer stops responding to treatments there is increasingly little clinicians can do.

"Drugs such as these could help to shift the balance back in favour of the patients, potentially providing a new option to patients for who existing treatments no longer work."

Professor Tony Barrett, from the Department of Chemistry, said: "This work is the result of extensive collaboration between chemists, biologists and clinicians, which has helped to bring a new treatment from discovery to clinical testing in record time, streamlining the process."

The drug targets an enzyme called CDK7, involved in directing cells through their lifecycle, which consists of growth, DNA replication and cell division. CDK7 is also involved in the process of transcription, a vital step in gene expression - the creation of proteins to carry out cell functions. Particular cancers, such as treatment-resistant breast cancers, have a unique dependence on transcription, meaning targeting CDK7 may be particularly effective.

By inhibiting transcription, ICEC0942 shuts down the ability of the cancer to spread. As well as breast cancers, cancers such as acute myeloid leukaemia and small-cell lung cancer are particularly transcription-dependent, so ICEC0942 may work well for these too, especially where they have become resistant to other treatments.

The discovery of the drug was spurred by an initial meeting between Professor Anthony Barrett, from the Department of Chemistry, and oncologist Professor Charles Coombes from the Department of Surgery & Cancer.

Professor Simak Ali, also from the Department of Surgery & Cancer, was working on understanding the action of CDK7 in treatment-resistant breast cancer. Professors Coombes and Ali suggested CDK7 as a drug target, leading the collaboration to attempt to design a molecule that would inhibit its action.

From early attempts, a large collaborative team was eventually founded for drug discovery from 'bench to bedside', directed by Dr Matthew Fuchter in the Department of Chemistry. Possible compounds for CDK7 inhibition were modelled using computational drug design, aided by collaboration with Emory University.

Ultimately, a candidate molecule called ICEC0942 suppressed tumour growth in a wide range of cancer types in lab tests. In addition, laboratory studies showed ICEC0942 worked better in combination with traditional hormone therapies for estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cells, which have not yet become resistant. It is this molecule, in oral pill form, that was taken forward by Carrick as CT7001 and is currently in Phase I clinical trials. If the Phase I trial proves successful, the compound must pass further stages of trial over the next few years before it becomes available to patients.

Early funding for the study came from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), and a major contribution of whole-project funding was from Cancer Research UK. Licensing of the technology to Carrick Therapeutics was led by Cancer Research UK's Commercial Partnerships Team and Imperial Innovations, the Technology Transfer Office of Imperial, with support from Emory University.

Dr Iain Foulkes, Cancer Research UK's executive director of research and innovation, said: "It's exciting to see how Cancer Research UK's partnerships with both academia and industry are bringing urgently needed new tests and treatments to patients.

"Drug resistance continues to be a major challenge across many cancer types so it's vital that we explore new ways to tackle tumours that have stopped responding to standard therapies. We hope that this promising new class of drug will offer more options to patients who have few left available to them, and help more people survive their cancer."
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release is upfront about the early nature of this research:
The first patient was given the drug in November 2017 as part of Carrick’s a Phase I clinical trial to assess its safety and how well it can be tolerated. The trial is still ongoing, so results are not available yet.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The idea that alcohol might be good for our hearts and blood vessels is a popular one, right up there with the notion that chocolate is a health food.

But before you pour your next cocktail, beer or glass of wine, you should know this: the science suggesting a benefit has never been conclusive. And some experts believe the evidence is getting thinner all the time.

"In health as elsewhere, if something looks too good to be true, it should be treated with great caution," says an editorial published this week in the medical journal BMJ. Mike Daube, professor of health policy at Curtin University in Australia, writes that the once-touted benefits of moderate drinking "are now evaporating."

His editorial accompanies a British study that finds death rates among moderate drinkers and non-drinkers are not different enough to suggest any real health benefits for drinkers. The only possible exception: women over age 65.

Also, a recent Swedish study found that middle-aged people having more than two drinks a day – just above the moderate level for men — had a markedly increased stroke risk.

Studies will continue, and not everyone has given up the idea that moderate drinking — up to two drinks a day for men and one day for women — might have some cardiovascular benefits.

Here's what U.S. experts say you need to know for now:
• Any benefits are unclear. "I cannot prove and I don't think anyone can prove that alcohol consumption can prevent anyone from dying or prevent heart attacks," says Kenneth Mukamal, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, Boston. But he says some studies show moderate drinking can boost levels of "good" HDL cholesterol and a hormone key to blood sugar control. Some studies following moderate drinkers and non-drinkers for decades find lower death rates and fewer heart attacks and strokes in the drinkers, he says. But those studies do not prove alcohol is the reason for the differences. One theory, backed by the new British study: the results are skewed by the fact that some non-drinkers are former drinkers with health problems.
• The risks are real. For some people, even moderate drinking is clearly risky. Those include people taking blood-thinning medicines and those with uncontrolled high blood pressure, says Curtis Rimmerman, a cardiologist at Cleveland Clinic. Alcohol raises blood pressure and thins blood, he say. It's also a source of "non-essential liquid calories," a big concern in an overweight nation, he says. And heavy drinking is not good for anyone: It has long been linked with stroke, heart failure and many non-cardiovascular hazards, including car crashes.
• Gender matters. Women are advised to drink less than men, partly because they tend to be smaller. But that's not the only reason, says Lori Mosca, a professor of medicine at Columbia University Medical Center and a spokesperson for the American Heart Association. "Our blood vessels have a different hormonal milieu," she says and women are more vulnerable to the anti-clotting effects of alcohol – something that could raise the risk of bleeding strokes. Another consideration: even light drinking is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, according the National Cancer Institute.
• Age matters too. There's no evidence drinking in your 20s or 30s has any health benefits. "At those ages, any benefit we get from moderate drinking is only to the extent that someone who is moderately drinking is not heavily drinking," Mukamal says.
• There's probably nothing special about wine. "About a decade ago, there was this myth that red wine was better than white wine and wine was better than beer and spirits," Mosca says. Studies have failed to prove any difference.

"I don't want to be a killjoy," Mosca says. "But I would never recommend alcohol as a preventative intervention."

"There may be some evidence that perhaps one glass with a meal is OK," says Demetrius Lopes, a neurological surgeon at Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, and another spokesperson the heart association. "But it's a slippery slope to saying 'OK, maybe two is better.' I do think people don't know the dangers."

No health agency or major medical group recommends drinking for health. But, if you do drink, groups including the American Heart Association and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend:
• No more than two drinks a day for men.
• No more than one drink a day for women (and none for pregnant women).
• 1.5 ounces of 80-proof spirits or 1 ounce of 100-proof spirits.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This rating was a close call. On the one hand, there was no discussion of how the studies that are the focus of the article were conducted, and there wasn’t any mention of their specific limitations. For example, the investigators acknowledged that the study’s self-reported data may be inaccurate because it depends on participants’ memories, which are proven to be hazy. According to data from the US National Alcohol Survey, 52.9 percent of participants who claimed they never drank in 1992 had reported drinking in a previous survey.
But on the other hand, the story did include expert comments that speak to the main limitation of most research on the health benefits of alcohol consumption — namely, that they are observational studies that can’t prove cause and effect. As the quoted expert puts it, “I cannot prove and I don’t think anyone can prove that alcohol consumption can prevent anyone from dying or prevent heart attacks.” He adds: “Some studies following moderate drinkers and non-drinkers for decades find lower death rates and fewer heart attacks and strokes in the drinkers. But those studies do not prove alcohol is the reason for the differences.”  The story further notes that results of previous studies could be skewed by the fact that some non-drinkers are former drinkers with health problems.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - People struggling with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) might feel better with antidepressants or psychotherapy, a recent study suggests.

People with IBS typically suffer from chronic abdominal pain, gas, diarrhea and constipation. While some people improve with customized diets that avoid certain foods that trigger symptoms, this approach doesn’t help everyone and some emerging research suggests that the condition may also be influenced by processes in the brain.

For the current analysis, researchers examined data from 53 trials that compared the effects of antidepressants or psychotherapy, either alone or in combination, versus placebo treatments or “usual management” in people with IBS.

Rates of “no relief” were highest with placebo treatments. People were 34 percent less likely to have no relief from antidepressants and 31 percent less likely to get no relief from psychotherapy, the study found.

“One component of IBS is increased sensitivity to the functions of the bowels; simply summarized, this means either the nerves taking messages from the bowel to the brain are more sensitive or that the brain is more attentive or reacts in a more emotional manner to the normal messages arising in the bowel, or both,” said Dr. Michael Camilleri, a researcher at the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science in Rochester, Minnesota, who wasn’t involved in the current study.

“Since there are really no medications to reduce the nerve sensitivity, some doctors give medications that modulate the function of the brain in the hope that this approach will reduce the ability to sense or emotionally react to the signals or messages arriving from the bowels,” Camilleri said by email.

Psychiatric conditions including depression, anxiety, and somatisation - physical symptoms thought to have psychological origins - are common among people with IBS, researchers note in the American Journal of Gastroenterology.

Although the use of antidepressants is common among IBS patients, psychotherapy is not, the study authors note.

One limitation of the current study is that the smaller studies used in the analysis had a wide variety of designs and methods for testing the success of treatment, researchers note. Another drawback is that these studies weren’t designed to prove how antidepressants or psychotherapy might directly improve IBS symptoms.

Still, a psychological evaluation may make sense for IBS patients because it’s possible their symptoms might be a byproduct of untreated depression, said Dr. Agnieszka Kulak-Bejda, a psychiatry researcher at the Medical University of Białystok in Poland who wasn’t involved in the study.

Antidepressants may work better for certain types of IBS, and the study findings also suggest that the type of medication may matter, Kulak-Bejda said by email.

A family of medicines known as tricyclic antidepressants were more effective at relieving global symptoms of IBS, the analysis found. But another family of medicines known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) was better than a placebo for easing symptoms like pain and bloating and improving quality of life.

“The decision to use antidepressants as a form of therapy should be taken individually,” Kulak-Bejda said. “The decision should be made after considering all the pros and cons.”

Lead author Dr. Alexander Ford of the University of Leeds in the U.K. didn’t respond to requests for comment.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a pretty good job of describing the study, which evaluated evidence from 53 trials — including language that highlights the limitations of those studies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A British study offers compelling -- though not clinching -- evidence that the humble aspirin tablet can prevent death from a variety of cancers, if you take the medicine long enough in middle age. Even a baby aspirin might be enough.

Don't start popping aspirin every morning to fight tumors without talking to your doctor, though.

Yes, scientists have already published strong evidence suggesting aspirin can cut bowel cancer and deaths. The painkiller's anti-inflammatory properties and effects in damping down precancerous polyps may be involved.

And the latest study, published in The Lancet, suggests aspirin could provide protection against a wide variety of tumors. They range from pancreatic cancer to the type of lung cancer that strikes nonsmokers.

For some of these cancers, the reduction in death was remarkable. Twenty years after people had started taking aspirin regularly (and kept it up for at least five years), their deaths from esophageal cancer were reduced by 60 percent compared to study subjects who got a placebo.

Deaths from adenomatous lung cancer were cut 30 percent, those from colorectal cancer 40 percent, and those from prostate cancer 10 percent.

Still, none of the big guns in cancer and prevention -- the National Cancer Institute, the American Cancer Society, or the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force -- are ready to advise healthy people to start taking aspirin to prevent cancer.

But the latest batch of evidence deserves a closer look. It encompasses eight earlier studies that compared cancer deaths among more than 25,000 people randomly assigned to get aspirin (of different doses) or placebo. And the researchers were able to gather more information about cancer deaths for up to 20 years after those studies ended about nearly 13,000 people.

For cancer prevention experts, the British study is provocative and significant. "This is definitely the first time that research has shown that long-term aspirin use can reduce the risk of deaths due to cancer," Dr. Asad Umar of the National Cancer Institute's division of cancer prevention tells Shots.

In fact, Umar says, no drug has been shown before now to prevent cancer deaths. "This is definitely hypothesis-generating for future studies," Umar says.

Massachusetts General Hospital's Dr. Andrew Chan, who studies the effect of aspirin on gastrointestinal cancers, says the new study will feed a growing sense among experts "that there is likely some potential anticancer effect of aspirin."

Dr. Peter Rothwell, an Oxford University neurologist who led the study, tells Shots that aspirin's effect on cancer is "quite a lot bigger" than its benefit in preventing heart attacks and strokes -- the reason millions of Americans already swallow a baby aspirin every day.

"So I think in the fullness of time, preventing cancer will be seen to be the main reason for taking aspirin in healthy individuals," Rothwell says.

He started taking a daily dose of aspirin a couple of years ago as the results of his study emerged. "It was looking as though there was something going on, and I thought it was a sufficiently large benefit to be worth doing something about," says the 46-year-old researcher.

Rothwell says the "sensible time" to start taking aspirin "would be before the risk of cancer starts to rise, at about 45." He says prophylactic aspirin is "worth thinking about" for people with a family history of early cancers.

But aspirin carries risks. The biggest is stomach bleeding, although it also raises the risk of brain hemorrhage. Daily aspirin doubles a person's gastrointestinal bleeding risk to about 2 in every 1,000 people a year. But Rothwell says this bleeding hazard is "drowned out" by the cancer benefit.

Prof. Peter Elwood of the University of Cardiff, who wasn't involved in the new study, agrees. "There's a small risk of any of us having a gastric bleed," Ellwood said at a Lancet press conference Monday. "But when you inspect the data…you find that the mortality from the bleed is not increased. In other words, aspirin seems to be increasing the less-serious bleeds," he said.

To be sure, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force's currently recommends against taking aspirin to prevent colorectal cancer, the type of cancer for which there is the largest body of scientific work. The benefits of daily low-dose aspirin can exceed the risks for many middle-aged and older people when it comes to preventing heart attacks and strokes, the task force says.

So for those already taking prophylactic aspirin for this reason, the possible anticancer effects are just icing on the cake. Other healthy people interested in taking aspirin to prevent cancer should consult their doctors, experts say, and possibly await further evidence.

A final word about dose: The new study didn't find any additional anticancer benefit for aspirin doses above 75 milligrams a day -- the British dose for a "baby" aspirin. In the United States, a baby aspirin weighs in at 81 milligrams. However, experts say more information is needed on the optimum dose for cancer prevention.

"There's a little controversy about whether a baby aspirin dose is enough," says Harvard's Chan. "We think that probably a standard adult aspirin dose of 325 milligrams is more likely to be effective."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story performs better than some others in presenting the quality of the evidence. First, it takes a cautious tone from the top. The second sentence says, “A British study offers compelling — though not clinching — evidence that the humble aspirin tablet can prevent death from a variety of cancers, if you take the medicine long enough in middle age. Don’t start popping aspirin every morning to fight tumors without talking to your doctor, though.” Secondly, it provides more details about the study, although we would have liked to have seen more. For example, the story says, “The new study didn’t find any anticancer benefit for aspirin doses above 75 milligrams a day — the British dose for a “baby” aspirin. In the United States, a baby aspirin weighs in at 81 milligrams. However, experts say more information is needed on the optimum dose for cancer prevention.” But then it allows a researcher with an unsubstantiated claim to get in the last word. “There’s a little controversy about whether a baby aspirin dose is enough,” says Harvard’s Chan. “We think that probably a standard adult aspirin dose of 325 milligrams is more likely to be effective.” One important point that is neglected here is the limited data in women in this study. Also, the story says the study “encompasses eight earlier studies that compared cancer deaths among more than 25,000 people randomly assigned to get aspirin (of different doses) or placebo.” What readers aren’t told is that those earlier trials were looking at heart disease, not cancer. Readers should have been alerted that the data is being analyzed in ways that were not part of the original study designs. There may be gaps or other issues in the original data that raise dome questions about how solid the study results really are. Nevertheless, the overall tone is appropriate to the quality of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) Stem cell research can run the gamut from Nobel Prize-winning scientists to hucksters in lab coats making a buck off desperate, seriously ill people. The results of one new study may be less than hoped for, but the science is sound: The study concluded that injecting stem cells into the spinal cords of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is safe in most, though not all, cases. Unfortunately, the procedure provided no benefit to patients, though it caused substantial pain to two of the study participants.

Dr. Jonathan D. Glass, a professor of neurology and pathology at the Emory University School of Medicine and the director of the Emory ALS Center, specifically focused on human spinal cord-derived neural stem cells.

"We put them into the spinal cord, and they came from a human spinal cord. The idea was that they would find a familiar and supportive environment," explained Glass.

In previous studies , Glass and his colleagues had transplanted such stem cells into the spinal cords of rodents with ALS and discovered that the treatment delayed the disease and improved survival.

Next, in a study of 12 patients , Glass tested the safety of injecting the stem cells into the spinal cords of humans. What he discovered during that experiment was that none of the patients suffered long-term effects (from either the surgical procedure or the implantation of stem cells), and no unusual acceleration of disease occurred. Importantly, one patient showed some improvement, though he and his colleagues noted that this outcome "must be interpreted with caution" since the study wasn't designed to measure effectiveness of the treatment.

For the new study, funded by the National Institutes of Health, Glass and his colleagues tested increasing amounts of stem cells injected into 15 patients who were not enrolled in his previous study.

What ALS does to the body

When someone gets ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, their motor network rapidly disintegrates. Nerve cells that communicate and control the voluntary muscles of the body (such as those in the arms, legs and face) degenerate or die. When communication between the brain and muscles ceases, the result is a gradual weakening and wasting away of muscles.

"My father was actually 69 when he was diagnosed. Someone can go for two years without being diagnosed properly, and that was the case with my father," Pharr said.

Neither his primary care physician nor his neurologist could identify the cause of his deterioration. In fact, they first believed he had suffered a stroke. After all, ALS is rare, and in up to 90% of all cases, there is no family history and no known risk factors, as was the case with Pharr's father.

ALS affects men more often than women, usually between the ages of 40 and 70. Though more common between the ages of 60 and 69, this neurodegenerative disease can develop at any age, progressing rapidly. Most people with ALS die within three to five years after their symptoms begin, though about 10% survive for 10 years or longer. In Pharr's father's case, the progress of disease was rapid.

"He did not want to go on the ventilator," she said, adding that many people prefer a "natural death." ALS often ends with respiratory failure since muscles in the diaphragm and chest walls eventually stop functioning. "There's no cure, and we don't even have a treatment," she said.

According to Goldstein, this isn't entirely a negative. "One of the things ALS has going for it is, since it has no effective treatment or cure, you throw anything you can at it," he said. While for many other diseases, the researchers are focused on just one modality, ongoing ALS research uses each of the four key modes of medical treatment: small molecules, proteins and biologics, gene therapy and stem cells.

Was this research necessary -- and ethical?

The ethics of human experimentation were thoroughly examined before the study began.

"Ethical review happens at several levels: at the NIH, at the Food and Drug Administration and most importantly at University Institutional Review Boards at each institution where a faculty member is participating in a trial," Glass explained.

In Pharr's opinion, this and other stem cell studies are certainly fair from a participant's perspective, since beforehand, "patients are presented with all the risk factors involved so they can make an informed decision." Besides, she added, "you automatically assume anyone with ALS can participate, but not everyone meets the criteria for a particular study."

The results of the study: Most participants fared well. However, severe complications occurred in two of the patients as a result of the surgery involved. One developed partial paralysis, and another experienced "incapacitating pain."

"People who do these studies should be considered medical heroes," Goldstein said, adding, "The selflessness of these people when they're told they're gonna die."

Sadly, disappointment is part of it, according to Pharr, who typically hears the frustration of people who go through a study that worked for another person but not for them. "It may have had a different effect on someone else," she said. "But that's why we don't have a treatment yet: because it doesn't work for everyone."

These early stages may be painful for some of the "medical heroes" involved, but the goal is clear: providing an effective and safe treatment for future patients who suffer from a devastating condition.

"Importantly, people should understand that, at least for neurological diseases like ALS, we are just now getting started with testing our hypotheses about using stem cells as therapeutics," Glass said. "We do not know if these treatments will work, and it will take time to test these therapies in a systematic and safe way."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story doesn’t explain much about how the study was performed nor its specific findings. But there are other details that help readers assess the status of the evidence.
For example, the story says “no unusual acceleration of disease occurred” and “the study wasn’t designed to measure effectiveness of the treatment.” And it ends with this quote: “Importantly, people should understand that, at least for neurological diseases like ALS, we are just now getting started with testing our hypotheses about using stem cells as therapeutics,” Glass said. “We do not know if these treatments will work, and it will take time to test these therapies in a systematic and safe way.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Coffee, tea, or decaf-no matter what your choice, drinking any of these beverages may reduce your risk of diabetes, according to a new analysis of 18 studies including hundreds of thousands of people.

A 2005 research review concluded that people who drank the most coffee were one-third less likely to develop diabetes than those who drank the least, Dr. Rachel Huxley of The University of Sydney, Australia, and colleagues note. In the years since then, they add, the amount of research on coffee and diabetes risk “has more than doubled,” while other studies have suggested that tea and decaf coffee may also be preventive.

To update the evidence, Huxley and her team analyzed 18 studies on coffee, decaf, and tea and the risk of type 2 diabetes published between 1966 and 2009, including just shy of 458,000 people in all.

Type 2 diabetes, which is often tied to obesity, affects about 8 percent of the U.S. population, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

For every additional cup of coffee a person consumed each day, the study’s authors found, a person’s risk of diabetes was reduced by 7 percent. In the six studies that looked at decaf coffee, the researchers found, people who consumed more than three or four cups a day were at 36 percent lower risk of diabetes. And in seven studies that examined tea drinking and diabetes risk, people who drank more than three or four cups daily were at 18 percent lower diabetes risk.

The current analysis could have overestimated the effect of these beverages on diabetes risk due to statistical issues with the smaller studies, Huxley and her colleagues note. It’s also not possible to say from the current evidence that heavy coffee drinkers (and tea and decaf drinkers) don’t have other characteristics that might protect them against developing diabetes, they add, such as eating a healthier diet.

The fact that the effects were seen with decaf as well as coffee and tea suggest that if the effects are real, they aren’t just due to caffeine, but may be related to other substances found in these beverages, the researchers say, for example magnesium, lignans (estrogen-like chemicals found in plants), or chlorogenic acids, which are antioxidants that slow the release of sugar into the blood after a meal.

Clinical trials are needed to investigate whether these beverages do indeed help prevent diabetes, the researchers say. If the benefits turn out to be real, they add, health care providers might begin advising patients at risk for diabetes not only to exercise and lose weight, but to drink more tea and coffee, too.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:  The story did mention that the information presented was extracted from a review of the published studies; it went on to explain that a clinical trial would be needed to determine whether the impact of these beverages on diabetes was real.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a few months time, those suffering from skin cancer may find an unlikely hero in their treatment regimen: herpes. A modified version of the Herpes Simplex 1 virus (known for causing cold sores and some cases of genital herpes) called T-Vec has successfully been used to treat melanoma in a phase III clinical trial. That means it's just waiting for a final okay from the FDA before the Amgen product can hit the market. The results of the trial were published Tuesday in Journal of Clinical Oncology.

[Personalized cancer vaccines have already helped treat three patients]

In a study of 436 patients with inoperable melanoma, Talimogene Laherparepvec had 16.3 percent of patients showing results at the six-month mark, compared to 2.1 percent taking the control therapy. Some patients were continuing to respond to T-VEC three years later.

Patients with stage III and early stage IV melanoma treated with T-VEC (163 people in all) lived an average of 41 months. This compared with an average survival of 21.5 months in the 66 earlier-stage patients who received the control immunotherapy. Immunotherapy, where agents are used to boost a body's natural defense against a tumor, are already the best treatments against melanoma. But this is the first time a modified virus has been successful in carrying out that treatment.

[One day, doctors might prescribe viruses instead of antibiotics]

Using a virus as a drug isn't a new idea. Phage therapy, where viruses that attack certain bacteria are used in place of antibiotics, is commonly used in Europe and on the rise in the United States. But cancer therapies like the one described in the new paper take things a step further, manipulating existing viruses to turn them into cancer-fighting tools.

Kevin Harrington, Professor of Biological Cancer Therapies at The Institute of Cancer Research and head of the trial, has been working on this particular virus for about a decade. Before he signed onto the project, it was primarily being investigated as a breast cancer treatment. But Harrington brought head, neck, and skin cancer patients into the mix, and melanoma seemed to have the best responses of all.

Here's how T-VEC works: It starts with the herpes virus, which is magnificent at proliferating itself within cells and then causing them to burst (that's where the cold sores come from). But T-VEC has had two key genes removed. These keep it from replicating within healthy cells, which can quickly spot it because of the missing genes.

But cancer cells aren't as savvy, and T-VEC has its run of them. Meanwhile, T-VEC has also been modified to produce a molecule called GM-CSF, which serves as a red flag waved at the immune system.

So in addition to the destructive power of the T-VEC cells themselves, the therapy summons the immune system right to where it's needed -- the tumor.

[Watch how the body’s ‘serial killers’ stalk and attack cancer cells]

"This is a first in class agent, a brand new therapy," Harrington said. "But it's just the farthest along of what we hope will be many more."

Harrington expects the FDA to clear T-VEC within the year, and it could potentially be available to patients right away.

But there's more work to be done to determine just how T-VEC can fit into the cancer-treatment landscape. When the latest trial was started, Harrington explained, there was no standard of treatment for melanoma -- so it's compared to a treatment that no one expected to outpace T-VEC. Now that other therapies -- ones that target specific mutations in patients' cancer cells -- are showing more success than what was available when the trial was formed, researchers will have to see how T-VEC compares.

"The next steps are exciting, and already underway," he said. "The next big frontier will be to combine this with existing immunotherapies. There's a strong rationale that other drugs on the market could act synogistically with ours."

Trials are also underway to determine how T-VEC might do with other cancers. In the meantime, other researchers will continue to crack the codes of other viruses to make them do our bidding.

Want more science? Give these a click:

Personalized cancer vaccines have already helped treat three patients

Smartwatches might cause cancer, says article based on ‘expert’ who pushes holistic breast cancer treatments

Sun damage keeps happening even after you go inside, new study says
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does provide context regarding the limitations of the study, particularly the fact that when this trial began, there was no effective treatment for melanoma. Now there are alternative immunotherapies shown to improve survival that would be better comparators for this new agent, and the story notes that more research will be needed to see how the drug compares.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - There is never a good time to have a stroke, but a new study suggests that a person who suffers a stroke on a weekend is more apt to get clot-busting therapy on arrival at the hospital than a person who suffers a stroke on a weekday.

Nonetheless, the odds of survival are about the same for weekend and weekday admission for stroke, the study found.

Stroke requires emergency treatment and for those suffering a stroke on a Saturday or Sunday, “waiting until Monday for aggressive treatment is not an option,” Dr. Abby S. Kazley and colleagues from the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston emphasize in a report released today.

“Anyone who thinks they are having a stroke should seek care at a hospital immediately. Individuals should not wait to seek care for stroke,” Kazley told Reuters Health by email.

The current study, she added, shows that “high quality (stroke) care is available in hospitals on the weekends and weekdays.” In fact, care might even be more aggressive on weekends.

Why? On weekends, even though hospitals have lower levels of staffing, stroke patients arriving at the hospital may have greater access to equipment and doctors who might be busier during the week than they are on weekends. Elective surgeries are not usually scheduled on weekends, leading perhaps to “decreased traffic and waiting times” for diagnostic equipment, culminating in quicker and more efficient diagnosis and determination of treatment.

With less road traffic and job obligations on weekends, stroke patients may get to the hospital quicker — within the three hour window when guidelines recommend that clot-busting drugs for stroke be given.

Kazley and colleagues analyzed data on 78,657 patients admitted to Virginia hospitals between 1998 and 2006 with acute ischemic stroke — the most common type of stroke, which is caused by a blood clot in the vessels supplying the brain. Of these, 20,279 were admitted on weekends and 58,378 during the week.

Patients admitted on the weekends were 20 percent more likely than those admitted during the week to get the clot-busting drug tissue plasminogen activator, or tPA — a drug that can improve patient outcomes following stroke. A total of 543 weekend stroke sufferers got the drug versus only 229 weekday stroke patients.

Yet stroke patients admitted on the weekends were no more likely to die than stroke patients admitted during the week: 1,420 patients admitted on the weekend died versus 3,993 patients admitted on a weekday, which worked out to roughly the same rate of death.

Putting those figures together could suggest that the clot-buster tPA wasn’t doing much good. In fact, that authors note that patients who received tPA were more likely to die in the hospital. Dr. Lawrence B. Goldstein, director of the Duke Stroke Center in Durham, North Carolina, and spokesperson for the American Heart Association said the results were not surprising, since “no clinical trials ever showed that treatment with a (clot buster) improves survival.”

But Kazley said that the additional deaths among patients who received tPA is likely because doctors are more likely to give the drug to those with severe strokes, who have a higher risk of death in any case.

Overall, Kazley added, this study offers “good news that indicates that the quality of care is similar regardless of when patients present at the hospital for treatment. This is an indication of the standardization of hospital care regardless of the time/day that patients seek care.”

Studies on the potential for a “weekender effect” in care and outcome for urgent conditions such stroke and heart attack have yielded mixed results.

For example, in one study examining stroke outcomes in Canada, researchers found that patients with stroke admitted to the hospital on weekends were at greater risk of dying than those admitted on weekdays. “Even in a country with universal health insurance coverage (such as Canada), disparities in resources, expertise, or the number of healthcare providers working during weekends” may affect the stroke mortality rate, the researchers concluded. (See Reuters Health report, March 8, 2007).

In a prior US study, researchers found that people who were admitted to the hospital on a weekend for a heart attack were less likely to receive potentially life-saving procedures than their peers who were admitted on a weekday. In this study, weekend admissions for heart attack were associated with much higher death rates, leading the researchers to conclude that more appropriate hospital staffing or regionalized care of heart attack patients may prevent some of these deaths. (See Reuters Health report, March 17, 2007).
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Although it did not mention some of the limitations that the HealthDay report correctly called attention to, this report got it right regarding the issue of mortality. The lack of mortality benefit among patients admitted on the weekends was identified in the second paragraph of the story, and an expert quote emphasizes that no clinical trials have ever shown a mortality benefit from tPA therapy.    
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NIH scientists adapt new brain disease test for Parkinson’s, dementia with Lewy bodies

National Institutes of Health scientists developing a rapid, practical test for the early diagnosis of prion diseases have modified the assay to offer the possibility of improving early diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. The group, led by NIH’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), tested 60 cerebral spinal fluid samples, including 12 from people with Parkinson’s disease, 17 from people with dementia with Lewy bodies, and 31 controls, including 16 of whom had Alzheimer’s disease. The test correctly excluded all the 31 controls and diagnosed both Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies with 93 percent accuracy.

Importantly, test results were available within two days, compared to related assays that require up to 13 days. The group conducted the tests using Real-Time Quaking-Induced Conversion (RT-QuIC), an assay developed and refined over the past decade at NIAID’s Rocky Mountain Laboratories. Scientists from the University of California San Diego, University of Verona in Italy, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, and the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, collaborated on the project. The research findings were published in Acta Neuropathologica Communications.

Multiple neurological disorders, including Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, involve the abnormal clumping of a protein called alpha-synuclein into brain deposits called Lewy bodies. The pathological processes in these diseases resembles prion diseases in mammal brains. Like prion diseases, Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies result in progressive deterioration of brain functions and, ultimately, death. Parkinson’s disease is about 1,000 times more common than prion diseases, affecting up to 1 million people in the United States, with 60,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Lewy body dementia affects an estimated 1.4 million people in the United States, according to the Lewy Body Dementia Association.

Early and accurate diagnoses of these brain disorders is essential for developing treatments and identifying patients eligible for clinical trials. The diseases typically progress for years before symptoms appear, and once they do, distinguishing one disease from another can be difficult.

The NIAID group continues to adapt the RT-QuIC assay to detect additional types of neurological diseases with greater accuracy using the least invasive patient sample possible — whether that is blood, skin, nasal brushings, or other samples. The group also has trained many international colleagues to use and advance the test.

B Groveman et al. Rapid and ultra-sensitive quantitation of disease-associated α-synuclein seeds in brain and cerebrospinal fluid by αSyn RT-QuIC. Acta Neuropathologica Communications DOI: 10.1186/s40478-018-0508-2 (2018).

Byron Caughey, Ph.D., a senior investigator in NIAID’s Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, is available to comment on this study.

This research was supported in part by NIH funding awards ZIA AI001086-08, AGO5131, and PHS P30-AG010133.

NIAID conducts and supports research—at NIH, throughout the United States, and worldwide—to study the causes of infectious and immune-mediated diseases, and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing and treating these illnesses. News releases, fact sheets and other NIAID-related materials are available on the NIAID website.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release gives specific information on the scope of the study, including that researchers “tested 60 cerebral spinal fluid samples, including 12 from people with Parkinson’s disease, 17 from people with dementia with Lewy bodies, and 31 controls, including 16 of whom had Alzheimer’s disease.”
However, it doesn’t mention some limitations, such as very small number of patient volunteers and the researchers’ observations that factors such as sample volume and temperature “strongly influenced the performance of the assay.”  The researchers say further testing will be necessary to understand some of the specific detection abilities of the test, including when they’re used in clinical settings.
If the test is to be used in clinical trials, standardization across sites will have to be assured — both where samples are collected and where the assay is done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The race to create the next potent ovarian cancer drug is coming to a head.

Ovarian cancer has historically been one of the harder cancers to treat — but a promising new class of drugs, called PARP inhibitors, is proving powerful in delaying the growth of tumors by preventing cancer cells from repairing themselves after they’ve been damaged by chemotherapy.

In recent days, the researchers behind three PARP drug contenders threw down preliminary data during the European Society for Medical Oncology conference in Denmark.

Massachusetts-based Tesaro was the clear front-runner with its experimental once-a-day ovarian cancer pill, niraparib. Its results built upon exciting data it released in June — showing that its drug can increase the window of time in which a woman’s cancer doesn’t get worse. (The study did not assess whether the drug helped women live longer, just how long it stopped tumors from growing.)

A small pilot study on a drug called talazoparib, which is now owned by Pfizer, recently showed similarly compelling results.

But Colorado’s Clovis Oncology fared less well. Though its own PARP inhibitor, rucaparib, showed that it could help some women compared to chemotherapy alone, its data didn’t measure up to the other two trials. The company’s stock plunged 18 percent on Friday after the data were released.

One PARP inhibitor has already been approved by the Food and Drug Administration: olaparib, sold by AstraZeneca as Lynparza. It’s being used to treat ovarian cancer in women who have already undergone chemotherapy.

Chemotherapy deals heavy damage to tumors — but often, the cancer cells are able to regroup and repair themselves. PARP inhibitors work by stopping this repair. They’re particularly useful in treating cancers associated with the BRCA mutation, since this gene codes for proteins that help repair damaged DNA.

While chemotherapy is still used as a first line of attack, PARP inhibitors are largely being studied as maintenance drugs. The hope is that they’ll keep cancer at bay once it’s been attacked by chemo.

A number of cancers are associated with BRCA mutations — including breast, prostate, and pancreatic.

More and more clinical trials will spring up to test PARP inhibitors in combination with other cancer treatments, such as immunotherapy, said Dr. Christina Annunziata, an investigator at the National Cancer Institute who studied the efficacy of Lynparza in ovarian cancer patients.

The field is so hot that over the summer, Pfizer agreed to spend an eye-popping $14 billion to buy San Francisco-based biotech Medivation. The key asset Pfizer wanted? The PARP inhibitor talazoparib. So far, there’s just extremely early data, but it looks promising. In a pilot study of 13 breast cancer patients on the drug at MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, tumors shrank on average 78 percent.

“We found a significant decrease in the tumors with only two months of therapy,” said Dr. Jennifer Litton, the lead investigator. She’s launching a larger trial for further study.

As for Tesaro, it first shared initial data from a Phase 3 clinical trial this past June. It showed that patients with recurrent ovarian cancer treated with the drug got an extra 15 months without their disease getting worse, compared to a control group. At the European conference this weekend, Tesaro added a few more details to that data:

The study looked at 553 patients whose cancer responds to a certain type of chemotherapy, known as platinum chemo. The best results came from patients with the BRCA mutation: Their tumors didn’t start to grow again for 21 months, on average, compared to 5.5 months for a control group that just received a placebo. Other groups of patients treated with the drug also had significantly better outcomes than control groups.

The results were published this weekend in the New England Journal of Medicine.

A few weeks ago, the Food and Drug Administration granted Tesaro’s drug fast-track approval status — and this new data will support its registration applications to both the FDA and the European Medicines Agency, Tesaro CEO Lonnie Moulder said. The company is now planning trials in lung cancer, and is considering other cancers to pursue.

“In the field, these would be described as landmark results,” Moulder said. “At this time, there’s nothing available that has been approved by regulatory agencies for these women who have recurrence to their ovarian cancer.”

The company aims to use its PARP inhibitor, rucaparib, to treat only patients with BRCA mutations who have had two or more chemotherapies. But the data it presented at the European conference showed that the drug may not actually be more effective than Lynparza, the PARP inhibitor that’s been marketed by AstraZeneca since 2014.

The study’s lead investigator, Rebecca Kristeleit, defended the performance of rucaparib, adding that one can’t compare Clovis’s drug to Tesaro’s: “It’s a completely different population, and a different use of the drugs,” she said.

Because early symptoms are fairly benign — bloating and back pain — about 75 percent of women diagnosed with ovarian cancer don’t learn they have it until it has progressed to stage 3. About 22,000 new cases are diagnosed each year, and about 15,000 women die of the disease each year in the United States.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There was a limited amount of actual evidence provided by this story.  One drug was said to curb tumor growth for 15 more months than did a placebo in a trial of 553 patients.  Another was only explained as showing “similarly compelling results” in a small pilot study of just over a dozen patients, and that was for breast cancer, not ovarian.  As for the third new drug, no information was really offered other than to specify that it is intended for a different use and population than are the other two.
With all that being said, we’ll award a satisfactory grade to acknowledge that the story provided an important clarification: For the main study being covered, it noted, “The study did not assess whether the drug helped women live longer, just how long it stopped tumors from growing.” That’s crucial context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - People who get minimally-invasive surgery to replace damaged heart valves have an easier time completing daily tasks and a better quality of life after the procedure, a research review suggests.

The analysis focused on people with what’s known as aortic stenosis, which occurs when the large blood vessels leading away from the heart narrow, forcing it to work much harder to pump blood. The condition tends to develop with age and can lead to chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue and heart failure.

Patients in the study had minimally-invasive surgery that fixes the problem by inserting a replacement valve to send blood around the damaged valve while leaving it in place. This procedure, known as a transcatheter aortic valve replacement, is done by threading a catheter to the heart through a small incision in the chest or from the large artery in the groin - it doesn’t require cutting open the chest.

Afterward, patients could walk significantly further in six-minute walking tests used to assess their functional capacity. On average, they added almost 42 meters (138 feet) to their performance before surgery.

In addition, patients reported clinically meaningful improvements in their quality of life and their ability to complete daily tasks after surgery.

The results offer fresh evidence that transcatheter aortic valve replacement can help ease symptoms like shortness of breath and fatigue that limit the ability to handle physical exertion, said Dr. David Cohen, director of cardiovascular research at Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute in Kansas City, Missouri.

“These symptoms lead to reduced functional capacity (inability to perform physical exertion) and also impact a patient’s overall sense of wellbeing and quality of life,” Cohen, who wasn’t involved in the study, said by email.

“By replacing the diseased aortic valve, transcatheter aortic valve replacement (and surgical valve replacement) reverses these effects and generally allows the patient to return to his or her ‘normal’ quality of life - limited only by the impact of other conditions that the patient may have,” Cohen said by email.

Overall, the current analysis included 2,775 patients from a total of 20 previously published studies on outcomes for this type of surgery.

Participants were 82 years old, on average, and they were typically considered high-risk surgical patients due to either advanced age or other medical issues.

The smaller studies in the analysis ranged in size from 36 to 484 patients, and most of them followed patients for as long as six to 12 months after surgery.

One limitation of the current analysis is that many of these smaller studies were not controlled experiments designed to prove whether or how transcatheter aortic valve replacement might improve quality of life, lead study author Nicola Straiton of the University of Sydney and colleagues note in Age and Ageing. Straiton didn’t respond to emails seeking comment.

People who don’t get this type of minimally invasive surgery may instead get a more invasive procedure that involves surgeons cutting open the chest to repair a damaged valve.

Surgeons may also perform what’s known as angioplasty, which uses a catheter to insert a tiny balloon and inflate it to open the valve; sometimes surgeons will also insert a stent, or tiny wire mesh cage, to keep the artery propped open.

Results of the current study reaffirm that a minimally-invasive procedure can be a viable option, even for elderly people who are high-risk surgical patients, said Dr. Samir Kapadia, a cardiovascular medicine researcher at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.

“Replacing the aortic valve improves functional capacity,” Kapadia, who wasn’t involved in the study, said by email. “Transcatheter aortic valve replacement is an important minimally invasive treatment option for replacing the aortic valve that is narrowed.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a strong point of the story, which says:
Overall, the current analysis included 2,775 patients from a total of 20 previously published studies on outcomes for this type of surgery. Participants were 82 years old, on average, and they were typically considered high-risk surgical patients due to either advanced age or other medical issues.
The smaller studies in the analysis ranged in size from 36 to 484 patients, and most of them followed patients for as long as six to 12 months after surgery. One limitation of the current analysis is that many of these smaller studies were not controlled experiments designed to prove whether or how transcatheter aortic valve replacement might improve quality of life, lead study author Nicola Straiton of the University of Sydney and colleagues note in Age and Ageing.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LONDON (Reuters) - A hormone called DHEA and mostly secreted by the adrenal glands may be able to help women who are going through menopause and could also give them better sex lives, a study found on Tuesday.

Italian researchers writing in the journal of the International Menopause Society, Climacteric, said they had found the first robust evidence that low doses of DHEA can help sexual function and menopausal symptoms, suggesting it may one day become an alternative to hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

But they stressed that the trial was small, so far larger studies are needed to confirm the results.

“We must bear in mind that this is a pilot study with a small sample,” Anna Fenton, co-editor of Climacteric, said in commentary on the work. “We can’t yet say that this study means that DHEA is a viable alternative to HRT, but ... we should be looking to do larger studies to confirm these initial results.”

DHEA, or dehydroepiandrosterone, is a natural steroid hormone mostly made in the adrenal glands and has a variety of therapeutic uses.

HRT, which is a combination of the hormones oestrogen and progesterone, is an approved treatment for women going through the menopause, who often experience unpleasant symptoms such as hot flushes, night sweats, loss of sex drive and mood swings.

But sales of HRT drugs have fallen sharply since a large study in 2002 found higher rates of ovarian cancer, breast cancer and strokes in women who took the pills, and the search has since been on for alternatives.

American researchers said in January that the antidepressant Lexapro, made by drugmaker Forest Laboratories, significantly cut the number and severity of hot flushes in menopausal women, and other antidepressants including GlaxoSmithKline’s Paxil and the Pfizer drugs Prozac and Effexor also have been found to be effective.

For this trial, a team of researchers led by Andrea Genazzani of the University of Pisa followed a group of 48 post-menopausal women with troubling symptoms.

Over a year, 12 women took vitamin D and calcium, 12 took DHEA, 12 took standard HRT and 12 took a synthetic steroid called tibolone which is used to alleviate menopausal symptoms.

The women’s menopausal symptoms, sexual interest and activity were measured using a standard questionnaire that explores factors such as satisfaction with frequency of sex, vaginal lubrication, orgasm, and sexual partner.

After 12 months, all the women on hormone replacements had improvements in menopausal symptoms, but those taking vitamin D and calcium did not show any significant improvement.

At the start of the trial, all groups had similar sexual activity, but after the year, those taking calcium and vitamin D scored an average of 34.9 on the questionnaire scale, while those taking DHEA had a score of 48.6, showing that those on DHEA had more sexual interest and activity.

The results for the HRT group were similar, and both the HRT DHEA groups showed a higher level of sexual intercourse in comparison to the control group, the researchers said.

Genazzani said the results showed DHEA has potential, especially for those women who may have problems in taking more conventional HRT. “But this is a small study, a proof of concept. What we need to do now is to look at a larger study, to confirm that these initial results are valid,” she added.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story signals up high that the study was limited in scope. It explains the basic study design quickly and competently. “For this trial, a team of researchers led by Andrea Genazzani of the University of Pisa followed a group of 48 post-menopausal women with troubling symptoms,” the story says. “Over a year, 12 women took vitamin D and calcium, 12 took DHEA, 12 took standard HRT and 12 took a synthetic steroid called tibolone which is used to alleviate menopausal symptoms.”
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
LOS ANGELES (March 21, 2018)--Advanced stage liver tumors may be safely treated through image-guided injections of an immunotherapy approved for melanoma, according to a study presented today at the Society of Interventional Radiology's Annual Scientific Meeting.

Researchers found that talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC)--a genetically modified version of the herpes virus--can be safely administered into active cancer in the liver and stimulate the immune system to destroy cancer cells throughout the body.

"Advanced stage liver tumors, including ones that have spread from other locations, have limited treatment options because the patients can be in poor health; further, the complex structure of the organ can make it difficult to target with standard approaches," said Steven S. Raman, M.D., professor of radiology, surgery and urology at the David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, and lead author of the study. "This minimally invasive treatment offers patients a novel way to directly and indirectly attack the cancer cells."

Using image-guided needle injections, researchers at centers in the United States, Switzerland and Spain, treated 14 advanced-stage cancer patients with liver metastases, including those with cirrhosis. Patients were given escalating doses of T-VEC, up to the maximum FDA-approved dose for melanoma. Injection volume was based on lesion size. Researchers found the patients tolerated the treatment well with expected side effects, including temporary flu-like symptoms.

As part of the study, researchers will follow patients for up to two years, and new trials to investigate the effectiveness of the drug in treating advanced cancer in the liver are being planned. Additional investigation is also planned to test the therapy in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor to activate a stronger immune response.

"Image-guided treatments have expanded the options available for patients with liver cancer from innovative approaches to biopsies to resections to chemo," said Raman. "This is an exciting way to look to the future, but patients living with advanced liver cancer should understand that this treatment will not be available for several years, except through clinical trials."

The authors note several limitations of the current study, including the preliminary nature of the results, as well as the number of patients tested.

Amgen, the pharmaceutical company that makes T-VEC, was a sponsor of the trial.

Abstract 375: Early safety from a phase 1, multicenter, open-label clinical trial of talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC) injected into liver tumors. S. Raman; M. Pless; A. Cubillo; A. Calvo; R. Hecht; C. Liu; E. Chan; J. Chesney; A. Prat; David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA;, Department of Oncology, Kantonsspital Winterthur, Winterthur, Switzerland; HM Universitario Sanchinarro, CIOCC, Madrid, Spain; Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA; James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY; Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. SIR Annual Scientific Meeting, March 17-22, 2018. This abstract can be found at sirmeeting.org

The Society of Interventional Radiology is a nonprofit, professional medical society representing more than 7,500 practicing interventional radiology physicians, trainees, students, scientists and clinical associates, dedicated to improving patient care through the limitless potential of image-guided therapies. SIR's members work in a variety of settings and at different professional levels--from medical students and residents to university faculty and private practice physicians. Visit sirweb.org.

The Society of Interventional Radiology is holding its Annual Scientific Meeting March 17-22, 2018 at the Los Angeles Convention Center in Los Angeles, Calif. Visit sirmeeting.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release stated that the findings involved “14 advanced-stage cancer patients with liver metastases, including those with cirrhosis.”
It mentions caveats: “The authors note several limitations of the current study, including the preliminary nature of the results, as well as the number of patients tested.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Contrary to a widely promoted theory, B vitamins do not cut the risk for heart attacks or strokes, according to two large new studies.

The findings, released yesterday, are the latest in a series of recent studies that have found vitamins and other dietary supplements fail to have the health benefits they are touted for.

The new findings undermine a theory that taking B vitamins to reduce levels of an amino acid in the blood called homocysteine could protect against heart attacks and strokes. Previous research had indicated people with high homocysteine levels were at greater risk.

Although the new studies did show that the vitamins cut homocysteine levels, that did not translate into a reduction in the risk for heart attacks or strokes.

In the first study, Eva Lonn of McMaster University in Canada and her colleagues gave 5,522 Americans and Canadians who had heart disease or diabetes either the supplements or a placebo for five years. Although homocysteine levels among those taking the supplements fell, they were no less likely to die from a heart attack or stroke, the researchers found.

In the second study, Kaare Harald Bonaa of the University of Tromso in Norway and colleagues researchers gave 3,749 patients who had had a heart attack within the previous week the vitamins or a placebo for more than three years on average. Again, while those receiving the supplements had lower homocysteine levels, they were no less likely to have another heart attack or a stroke, or to die from heart disease.

The studies, released early by the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with their presentation at an American College of Cardiology meeting in Atlanta, confirm the results of another large study that was published in 2004 in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

"The consistency among the results lead to the unequivocal conclusion that there is no clinical benefit of the use of folic acid and vitamin B12 (with or without the addition of vitamin B6) in patients" with heart disease, wrote Joseph Loscalzo of the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston in an editorial that will be published with the studies.

The Council for Responsible Nutrition, a trade group representing dietary supplement makers, said the findings did not rule out the possibility that the vitamins may reduce the risk for heart disease among healthy people.

"These studies did not test whether B vitamins used by healthy people can help keep them healthy. Instead, they looked at whether B vitamins can treat or reverse heart disease in people who already have it. Vitamins should not be expected to perform like drugs -- their greatest promise is in prevention," said Annette Dickinson in a written statement.

Kilmer McCully of the V.A. Boston Healthcare System in West Roxbury, who proposed the homocysteine theory, agreed, adding that more research is needed to understand the exact role of the amino acid in heart disease.

"You really can't deny that homocysteine is involved in the disease process," McCully said in a telephone interview. "There are hundreds, if not thousands, of papers showing that."

But Steven E. Nissen, president of the American College of Cardiology, said the findings should end debate about the theory, which had already lost credibility among many scientists. "The homocysteine theory really isn't getting much attention anymore," he said.

The findings follow a number of disappointing studies testing vitamins and other dietary supplements for health reasons. Recent studies have failed to find a clear benefit for glucosamine and chondroitin for arthritis, saw palmetto for prostate problems and echinacea for the common cold.

Another study presented at the cardiology meeting did surprise researchers when it did not find any benefit to combining the blood-thinner Plavix with aspirin for preventing heart attacks, strokes or deaths in heart patients. Earlier research had indicated that the combination would be effective. The new study, involving more than 15,000 high-risk patients, did not find any overall benefit and even suggested the combination may be dangerous for some patients.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Two of the three studies referred to in the journal article are detailed; a brief reference is given for the third.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, April 19, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Taking aspirin regularly over several years may help prevent gastrointestinal cancers, a new study suggests.

There was a 20 percent lower risk of cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, especially in the colon and rectum, among people taking aspirin, said lead researcher Yin Cao, a postdoctoral research fellow at the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston.

But Cao doesn't think people should start taking aspirin to prevent cancer until more research is done. "The results of ongoing research to develop more tailored treatment based upon a personalized assessment of risks and benefits is critical before recommending aspirin for preventing cancer," she said.

Moreover, patients and their doctors need to consider the potential risks of taking aspirin, including stomach bleeding, Cao said.

However, "if considered alongside the known benefits of aspirin in the prevention of heart attacks and strokes, our data suggest the possibility that long-term regular aspirin use may have a significant benefit in prevention of the two leading causes of sickness and death in the U.S. and much of the world," she said.

The results of the study were to be presented Sunday at an American Association for Cancer Research meeting in Philadelphia. The data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

For the study, Cao and her colleagues collected data on 82,600 women enrolled in the Nurses' Health Study in 1980 and 47,650 men enrolled in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study in 1986. The researchers collected data on aspirin use, risk factors for cancer and diagnoses of cancer.

After up to 32 years of follow-up, about 20,400 women and 7,570 men developed cancer, the investigators found. Among men, prostate cancer was excluded.

Cao's team found that men and women who took a regular dose of aspirin (325 milligrams) two times a week or more had a lower risk of cancer overall than people who did not regularly take aspirin. The reduced risk was largely due to fewer cases of gastrointestinal cancers, including colon cancer, rectal cancer and esophageal cancer.

Regular aspirin use was not associated with a reduced risk of other cancers. Specifically, no link was found between aspirin use and a lower risk of breast cancer, advanced prostate cancer or lung cancer, the researchers said.

Moreover, the benefit of aspirin in reducing overall cancer risk appeared to depend on how much one took. So the more aspirin taken, the more the risk was reduced. Amounts ranged from less than one aspirin a week to 15 or more, the researchers said.

Getting the biggest benefit from aspirin required taking it for at least 16 years. The benefit was no longer seen within four years of stopping it, the researchers found. And the study only showed an association between aspirin use and gastrointestinal cancer risk, not a cause-and-effect relationship.

The association of aspirin with reduced cancer risk was the same for women and men regardless of race, history of diabetes, family history of cancer, weight, smoking, regular use of other painkillers or taking multivitamins, the study authors added.

Eric Jacobs, strategic director of pharmacoepidemiology at the American Cancer Society, said the new study "confirms the now well-established link between regular aspirin use and lower risk of developing certain cancers of the gastrointestinal tract -- cancers of the colon, rectum and esophagus."

Some, though not all, previous studies have indicated that aspirin might slightly lower risk of certain other cancers, including breast cancer, prostate cancer and lung cancer, he added.

"Although aspirin is recommended for most people who have had a heart attack, and has some benefits for cancer risk as well, at this point the American Cancer Society does not recommend that people use aspirin specifically to prevent cancer because it is not clear that the benefits with respect to cancer outweigh the risks," Jacobs said.

While not common, aspirin can cause serious, even occasionally fatal, stomach bleeding, even at low doses, he said.

"People who are uncertain about whether they should be using aspirin should talk to their health care provider, who knows their personal medical history and can help weigh their individual risks and benefits," Jacobs said.

Visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute for more on aspirin and cancer risk.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story notes that the data supporting its lede are drawn from large, long-term studies, and that the findings, presented at a conference, “should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.”
The story also wins kudos for being explicit about the difference between association and causation: “And the study only showed an association between aspirin use and gastrointestinal cancer risk, not a cause-and-effect relationship.” Although that caveat ideally could have been presented higher up in the story.
But the story’s headline and opening sentence are likely to confuse readers about the reported relationship. If the study can’t prove a cause-and-effect relationship between aspirin and cancer, it’s misleading to claim that aspirin “may help ward off” and “prevent” cancer. Those active verbs certainly imply that aspirin “causes” a reduction in cancer.
We’re on the fence with this one, but we’ll give the benefit of the doubt here, with suggestions for improvement noted for next time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Women With A Berry-Snacking Habit May Have Healthier Hearts

When it comes to supernutritious foods, the blueberry has long had a health halo floating over it.

Going back to Colonial times when Native Americans and English settlers ground up blueberries and added them to porridge, in both dried and fresh forms, there have been hints of health-promoting effects.

In recent years, regular consumption of berries has been linked to better brain health and a decreased risk of Type 2 diabetes.

Now, a new study published in the American Heart Association's journal Circulation suggests eating three servings per week of blueberries and strawberries helps cut the risk of heart attacks among some women.

"We showed for the first time that a regular intake of substances that are naturally present in red-, blue-colored fruits and vegetables can reduce the risk of a heart attack by about 32 percent in young and middle-aged women [ages mid-40s to 60]," compared with women who ate berries once a month or less, says study author Aedin Cassidy of the University of East Anglia. The researchers found other fruits such as apples and pears were not associated with a decreased risk.

To study the relationship between berry consumption and heart disease, Cassidy and her collaborators at the Harvard School of Public Health analyzed findings from the Nurses Health Study 2 which includes more than 90,000 nurses in the U.S. Periodically over the past 18 years the nurses have reported details about their diets and lifestyles to researchers. At the same time, researchers have monitored the nurses' health to see which diseases they go on to develop, or not.

It's certainly not a perfect way to detect how certain foods may influence health, but it identifies important associations. Cassidy says the association between berry consumption and heart disease was strengthened when she and her collaborators controlled for other reasons that could have explained the finding.

"Even when we adjusted for things like fat intake, fiber intake, medication use, or body size, and for example, exercise, we still got these strong reductions in risk," Cassidy says.

So what's in blueberries that makes them so good for us? Researchers have pinpointed a class of plant compounds known as anthocyanins. These compounds give the red and blue color to everything from berries to eggplants to cherries. And when you eat a steady diet of them, they seem to have a number of positive health effects.

"They have effects on blood pressure in animal models," says Cassidy. And in lab experiments they're shown to exert anti-inflammatory effects, as well as help modulate nitric oxide in the body, which could help arteries stay more elastic and flexible.

All of these effects could be beneficial, explains Robert Eckel, a preventive cardiologist at the University of Colorado. But he says it's important to point out that the women in this study weren't prime candidates for heart attacks anyway.

"Having a heart attack when you're a woman between ages of 45 and 60 is distinctly unusual," says Eckel.

Would the protective effect hold up for older women? Eckel says it's not clear.

"But nonetheless, for the first time I think we have some evidence that the intake of theses anthocyanins may have a protective effect."

So, go ahead. Load up on berries. And if they're out of season, like now, studies show frozen berries have similar levels of beneficial compounds.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We will give this story the benefit of the doubt, since it was the only story out of the three reviewed to mention any kind of study limitation. Cardiologist Dr. Robert Eckel points out, “Having a heart attack when you’re a woman between ages of 45 and 60 is distinctly unusual.” And he says that the benefits for older women are not as clear. NPR does an excellent job in bringing this up.
There is no sure way to measure the amount of anthocyanin in the body, so any possible effect could have been due to another variable. Furthermore, even though researchers tried to account for multiple factors in their analysis, it is impossible to account for all of them. They acknowledge in their study: “…it is impossible to disentangle the relative influence of all the constituents of fruits and vegetables.”
Again the key quote was: ” It’s certainly not a perfect way to detect how certain foods may influence health, but it identifies important associations”.  It seems that the writer understood and tried to convey that interpreting cohort analyses is about association and not causation.
It could have more clearly explained that such studies cannot prove cause-and-effect.  Interestingly, some of the online commenters even hit on this point, one writing:
“Correlation isn’t causation…The way the media reports these correlations isn’t always a good thing….Finding a large correlation like this is certainly a clue and a big red arrow pointing to a possible cause that should be studied further, but it isn’t the same as finding the cause. And taking action based solely on a correlation can often cause more problems than it solves.”  
That’s a smart comment.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philadelphia, PA, April 18, 2017 - In the past, all forms of metastatic prostate cancer have been considered incurable. In recent years, the FDA has approved six drugs for men with metastatic disease, all of which can increase survival. In a study published in Urology®, researchers demonstrate for the first time that an aggressive combination of systemic therapy (drug treatment) with local therapy (surgery and radiation) directed at both the primary tumor and metastasis can eliminate all detectable disease in selected patients with metastatic prostate cancer.

While the study is only a first step, one-fifth of the patients treated had no detectable disease, with an undetectable prostate-specific-androgen (PSA) and normal blood testosterone, after 20 months. The results suggest that some men who have previously been considered incurable can possibly be cured; investigators also establish a new paradigm for testing various drug combinations in conjunction with local treatment of the prostate to determine which is the best approach (ie, has the highest undetectable disease rate). Such results could not have been achieved with any single therapy alone.

According to lead investigator Howard I. Scher, MD, Chief of the Genitourinary Oncology Service at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City, "The sequential use of the three different modalities helped illustrate the role and importance of each in achieving the undetectable PSA with normal testosterone level end point, which represents a 'no-evidence of disease' status." Longer follow-up is needed to determine whether these patients were in fact cured.

Twenty men with metastatic prostate cancer, five with extra-pelvic lymph nodal disease and 15 with bone with or without nodal disease, were treated with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), radical surgery that included a retroperitoneal lymph node dissection as needed, and radiation therapy to visible metastatic lesions in bone. ADT was stopped after a minimum of six months if an undetectable PSA was achieved after combined modality therapy. Other patients were treated continuously.

The combined treatment regimen including surgery was well tolerated. Matthew J. O'Shaughnessy, MD, PhD, Urology Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, commented "While the role of local therapy in metastatic prostate cancer is still under investigation, aggressive resection of visible disease performed by experienced surgeons was critical to the outcome."

Of the five patients with extra-pelvic lymph node involvement, four achieved an undetectable PSA after ADT and surgery, while the fifth needed radiation to reach this milestone. However, none achieved the primary end point of undetectable PSA with testosterone recovery at 20 months after initiation of therapy with ADT alone, although one patient had a PSA of Of the 15 patients with bone metastases, 14 (93%) reached an undetectable PSA when ADT, surgery, and radiation were used. Ultimately, four (27%) achieved the proposed end point, a PSA of 150 ng/dL at 20 months after the start of ADT, which remained undetectable in two patients for 27 and 46 months, respectively. Commenting on the study, Oliver Sartor, MD, Cancer Research, Department of Medicine and Urology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, stated, "The end point deserves special mention, as the end point of undetectable PSA after testosterone recovery has been previously discussed but rarely studied. The authors proposed that this end point may serve as a first step toward establishing a curative paradigm. Many in the field agree, but note that the longevity of effect is essential to prove the point of curability. Regardless, the movement toward a curative paradigm is much needed and the investigators are to be congratulated for setting forth a paradigm that can be used to assess the possibility of cure in a reasonable period of time." "A multimodal treatment strategy for patients who present with disease that is beyond the limits of curability by any single modality enables the evaluation of new approaches in order to prioritize large-scale testing in early stages of advanced disease. The end point also shifts the paradigm from palliation to cure," remarked Dr. Scher. It is expected that an upcoming Phase 2 trial will further test this endpoint and combined modality approach.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release makes clear that this study is “only a first step,” and clearly describes the study — including the fact that it involved only 20 patients. The release would have been stronger if it had noted the amount of uncertainty inherent in any study involving such a small number of people — the study had almost as many authors as patients! The release would have been improved had it noted more directly that this is a small, uncontrolled study, with carefully selected patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 22, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Women who experience depression during pregnancy may have another treatment option, new research suggests.

The study found that women treated with depression-specific acupuncture had a 63 percent response rate compared to a 44 percent response rate in women treated with control acupuncture or massage.

"We tested acupuncture as a standalone treatment, and the results are very positive," said study author Rachel Manber, a professor at the Stanford University School of Medicine Sleep Medicine Center in Redwood City, Calif. But, she added, because this is the first study of its kind, and the acupuncture protocol used was specifically designed for this study, "you always need replication of the findings."

Dr. Shari Lusskin, director of reproductive psychiatry at the New York University Langone Medical Center, echoed that sentiment. "It's encouraging to see alternative treatments being studied in a scientific manner, and this study should generate further studies. It needs to be replicated on a larger scale," she noted.

"This is one treatment, and perhaps it will become another possible treatment tool in our therapeutic toolbox," said Lusskin. But, she cautioned that "acupuncture is not a substitute for the appropriate use of antidepressant therapy especially in women with a prior history of response to antidepressants."

As many as 20 percent of women may experience depression during pregnancy, according to the March of Dimes. Symptoms include sad, hopeless feelings that persist, generally for more than two weeks, Lusskin said. Women may also experience severe anxiety or feel disconnected from the baby. And, she cautioned, suicidal thoughts are never normal and are a sign that you should seek help.

Many women are cautious about using medications during pregnancy, reports the study. Interpersonal psychotherapy is an option for women who are depressed during pregnancy, but this type of therapy isn't always available, according to the study.

For the study, Manber and her colleagues recruited 150 pregnant women who were diagnosed with a major depressive disorder. All were between 12 and 30 weeks of gestation.

The women were randomly assigned to one of three groups: depression-specific acupuncture (52 women), control acupuncture (49 women) or massage (49 women). The depression-specific protocol was designed just for this study, and the control acupuncture was specifically designed to avoid using acupuncture needles in any areas known to affect depression.

The treatments lasted for eight weeks. Women received treatment twice a week for the first four weeks, and then once a week for the next four weeks. The treatments lasted an average of 25 minutes.

The researchers found a 63 percent response rate in women who received the depression-specific acupuncture, while the response rate was 44.3 percent in the control acupuncture and massage groups. A response rate was defined as a 50 percent reduction in depression symptoms, Manber said.

Results of the study are scheduled to be published in the March issue of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

"We found our acupuncture protocol was helpful, but that does not mean that any acupuncture for depression treatment will be effective. The quality of what you get can differ from one practitioner to another," said Manber.

"Our goal is always to find treatments that have the maximum benefits and minimum risk," said Lusskin. "Many women think it's safer for the baby to go off antidepressants, but there's a real risk to the baby for untreated depression in pregnancy. And, we have enough safety data about antidepressant use in pregnancy that we can make informed choices about managing treatment during pregnancy."

The bottom line, she said, is to talk with your doctor to find the right combination of treatments that can help you. "Depression is not a one-size-fits-all illness, and treatment won't be one-size-fits-all either. If acupuncture ends up being helpful for you, that's great, but make sure you're treated into remission."

To learn more about depression during and after pregnancy, visit the National Women's Health Information Center.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the current study and pointing out its limitations, most importantly, that it was a small study and the first to evaluate this specific form of acupuncture.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
No children in the study who were treated with the computer-assisted system experienced very low blood sugar overnight. But there were nine instances of very low blood sugar among children who had the standard treatment, according to the study, conducted by researchers in Britain at the University of Cambridge.

“This is an important step in diabetes control because it shows that, with this system, people can sleep safely with minimized risk of hypoglycemia,” said Dr. Eric Renard, a professor of diabetology at Montpellier University Hospital in Montpellier, France.

Dr. Renard, whose commentary accompanied the study in The Lancet, has been a consultant and speaker for several makers of diabetic products, he said.

Industry analysts have estimated that 10 to 15 percent of Americans with Type 1 diabetes — perhaps 400,000 of them — use either a continuous glucose monitor or an insulin pump, or in some cases both.

Over the last decade, the makers of medical devices have developed techniques that have widened diabetes management options beyond pricking the finger several times a day to test blood glucose levels. Companies like DexCom in San Diego now make small continuous glucose monitors whose sensors can be embedded in the skin. And Animas, a division of Johnson & Johnson, makes programmable pumps the size of a cellphone that administer insulin doses through a tiny implantable catheter.

These new-generation devices represent a significant advance over older products, said Aaron J. Kowalski, the assistant senior vice president of glucose control research at the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation in Manhattan, one of the largest nonprofit patient advocacy and research groups for diabetes.

Even so, Dr. Kowalski said, using separate devices that are not designed to work in concert poses limits to treatment, particularly overnight. If a diabetic person’s blood sugar drops during the night and the glucose monitor alarm goes off, for example, that person may not wake up and the preprogrammed pump, operating separately, could continue to deliver insulin, making the problem worse, Dr. Kowalski said. (His group was one of the sponsors of the Lancet study.)

Researchers in Europe and the United States have been racing to develop a fully automated system for Type 1 diabetes that would wirelessly connect an external glucose monitor with an insulin delivery device. Based on algorithms like the ones used in the Lancet study, the devices would continually monitor glucose levels, calibrate insulin dosages and then dispense insulin in real time — automating a delivery task performed by a nurse in the study.

Researchers call such a hypothetical integrated system an “artificial pancreas” because it would mimic the way a healthy pancreas works, sensing glucose and dispensing insulin in the right dose at the right time. The goal is a portable system that could be worn on a belt and would be no larger than a cellphone.

Last month, as part of an effort called the Artificial Pancreas Project, the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation announced an $8 million partnership with Animas to develop a first-generation combined system. Meanwhile the European Union has just started its own project, called Artificial Pancreas at Home, which involves a grant of 10.5 million euros to research teams across Europe to create a prototype combined device over the next four years, Dr. Renard said.

The new study in The Lancet, proponents say, represents a proof-of-concept milestone in the quest to develop such a system.

“The significance is in showing that the existing devices, which are available commercially, can be combined to create the first version of an artificial pancreas,” said Dr. Roman Hovorka, the lead author of the study.

Dr. Hovorka, a principal research associate in pediatrics at Cambridge, said he had been a consultant or speaker for several makers of diabetes products.

Although the Lancet study was small — only 17 children completed the entire protocol — it is significant because it demonstrated that a computer algorithm could safely interpret glucose data and calculate appropriate insulin doses for a pump, he said.

The study not only indicated that the algorithm system prevented very low glucose overnight, Dr. Hovorka said, but it also indicated that the experimental system was better able to keep blood glucose in an acceptable range.

After midnight, about 80 percent of the measured glucose levels fell in a target range in children treated with the computer-adjusted system — compared to only 35 percent in the target range for those treated with a standard preprogrammed pump system, according to the study.

Still, while the overall results were statistically significant, the study was not large enough to attain statistical significance in each of its separate arms. Those branches of the study examined how children fared after eating meals or after exercising — factors which can affect glucose levels.

And the experimental combined system itself was not fully automated. To ensure that the experimental algorithm did not recommend unsafe doses, a nurse read the computer-generated dosing suggestions and then adjusted the patients’ insulin pumps.

Indeed, even if device makers are able to develop fully automated prototypes of combination systems, they are likely to face regulatory hurdles, analysts said, and would have to factor in product liability concerns.

“This is something that companies have been striving to do for years, and as computer chip technology evolves, it gets closer,” said Rick Wise, an analyst at Leerink Swann, a health care investment bank. “But you have to appreciate how exquisitely reliable an artificial pancreas would have to be to read glucose correctly and dispense insulin correctly.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: In contrast to its competitors, which all led readers to believe there had been a fully automated system sensing glucose levels and dispensing insulin to the participants in this study, the Times noted that the insulin was dispensed by a nurse based on calculations made by a computer algorithm. The Times clearly indicated that the significance of this test was as a "proof of concept" that the algorithm works and is safe, not as a test of any specific device. It noted that a fully automated system combining glucose monitoring and insulin delivery was still "hypothetical."
In addition, the Times story was the only one to draw attention to the small size of this study and the fact the findings were not statistically significant for the primary outcomes. This note of caution was completely lacking from the competing coverage.     
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Older people who use olive oil in their cooking and on their salads may have a lower risk of suffering a stroke, researchers reported Wednesday.

In a study that followed older French adults for five years, researchers found that those who regularly used olive oil were 41 percent less likely to have a stroke than those who never used the oil.

The findings, reported in the journal Neurology, hint that the well-known connection between olive oil and heart disease might extend to stroke as well. Olive oil is a key ingredient in the so-called Mediterranean diet. And some clinical trials have suggested that the diet helps control risk factors for heart disease, like high blood pressure, abdominal obesity and elevated levels of “bad” LDL cholesterol.

High olive oil intake is also linked to a lower risk of heart attack, and a longer lifespan among heart attack survivors. These latest findings support the general advice that people replace dubious dietary fats — namely, saturated fats and “trans” fats — with olive oil and other unsaturated fats, according to an expert not involved in the study. But he also stressed that the study does not prove that olive oil, per se, helps prevent strokes.

“We need to remember that this is an observational study,” said Dr. Nikolaos Scarmeas, a neurologist at Columbia University Medical Center in New York who wrote an editorial published with the study.

The study found a correlation between people’s olive oil use and their stroke risk, he told Reuters Health — but that doesn’t necessarily translate into cause-and-effect.

“People who use a lot of olive oil may be very different from people who don’t,” Scarmeas said.

Olive oil users may, for example, have higher incomes, eat better overall or exercise more often than people who never use the oil. The researchers on the new study, led by Cécilia Samieri of the French national research institute INSERM, tried to account for those differences. And after they did, olive oil was still linked to a lower stroke risk.

But it’s impossible to fully account for all those variables, Scarmeas noted. What’s needed, he said, are clinical trials where people are randomly assigned to use olive oil or not, then followed over time to see who suffers a stroke. Such clinical trials are considered the “gold standard” of medical evidence.

The current study included 7,625 French adults age 65 and older who reported on their diets and other lifestyle factors. People who said they used olive oil for both cooking and as a dressing were considered “intensive users.”

Over the next five to six years, those intensive users suffered strokes at a rate of 0.3 percent per year. That compared with just over 0.5 percent among non-users, and 0.4 percent among moderate users.

When the researchers factored in other diet habits, exercise levels and major risk factors for stroke — like high blood pressure and diabetes — heavy olive oil use was tied to 41 percent reduction in the odds of stroke.

Samieri’s team also took blood samples from another 1,245 older adults, measuring their levels of oleic acid — a monounsaturated fat that accounts for most of the fatty acids in olive oil. The one-third of participants with the highest oleic acid levels were 73 percent less likely to suffer a stroke than the one-third with the lowest levels.

The findings, according to Scarmeas, argue for more research into olive oil’s potential benefits against not only heart disease, but stroke and other neurological diseases as well.

For now, he suggested that people choose olive oil and other unsaturated fats over saturated fats (found largely in meat and dairy) and trans fats (found in some processed foods, like crackers, cookies and chips).

“It’s better to rely on this type of fat for your overall health,” Scarmeas said.

That said, no single food is consumed in isolation, he points out in his editorial. Olive oil is one part of the Mediterranean diet that has been tied to heart benefits. The diet also boasts plenty of fruits and vegetables, legumes, whole grains, fish and moderate amounts of red wine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Excellent.  The story devoted almost 200 words to the potential limitations of such an observational study. Also a clear description of the cohort design.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new pill may help in the fight with cystic fibrosis.

A study, funded in part by Vertex Pharmaceuticals, found the drug ivacaftor (pronounced eye va kaf tor) caused patients with a specific type of cystic fibrosis to improve lung function, gain weight, and fight other aspects of the disease.

“This is the first time that we have a therapy that is directed at the cause of cystic fibrosis,” says Dr. Michael Konstan, the chair of the Department of Pediatrics at Rainbow Babies and Children’s Hospital in Cleveland and one of the authors of the study. There is no cure for this disease and existing treatments just help alleviate some of the symptoms.

“This is a big deal,” says Robert Beall, the president and CEO of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. “The fact is it is obviously going to make a very big difference in the lives of patients.”

Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that causes problems with the balance of salt going in and out of cells. A sticky mucus clogs organs, particularly the lungs and liver. It can also cause digestive problems. About 1,000 new cases are diagnosed each year, according to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, and the average person with the disease dies before age 40.

Ivacaftor works for people with the G551D mutation of cystic fibrosis. Konstan says that only about 4% of the people with the disease have this specific mutation. “It really is a major milestone in the treatment of cystic fibrosis,” he says. “Even thought it only affects a small percentage (of patients) the hope is there that we can finally do something about this disease.”

The study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine Wednesday, looked at 84 people who got the drug. Those taking ivacaftor saw improvements within two weeks, which continued for the nearly yearlong trial. Drug recipients could blow out more than 10% more air from their lungs compared with patients who were not taking the drug, and were about half as likely to have a “pulmonary exacerbation” or a worsening of their lung disease that often requires hospitalization. On average, patients taking the drug grew more and put on more weight than the placebo group, according to the study, and had lower sweat chloride – an indicator of the disease.

Beall says the improved lung function helped patients double their ability to walk and one patient even started going the gym for the first time.

“We have an incredible proof of concept,” Beall says. He points to other research under way with ivacaftor combined with another drug that could help people with the most common mutation of cystic fibrosis. That trial is ongoing and the treatment is at least four or five years away from approval, but if it works, Beall says, it could help 90% of the people with cystic fibrosis.

In an editorial accompanying the study, Dr. Pamela Davis, of Case Western University paraphrased Winston Churchill, “This study is also a great victory in the war against genetic diseases and marks the end of the beginning for the treatment of the cystic fibrosis defect.”

Ivacaftor has been submitted to the FDA for approval, and could be available next year, according to Konstan. When it goes on sale it will be sold under the brand name Kalydeco (pronounced kuh-LYE-deh-koh).
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story reports that only 84 patients were randomized to receive the experimental drug. It also reported the length of the trial and the specific endpoints that researchers evaluated. However, there were also speculative comments about which patients the drug could help as well as references to benefits that were not measured as part of this trial. Readers might well be confused about what was actually demonstrated by this trial and what is mere speculation or personal observation. 
We could have gone either way with this grade, but will give the story the benefit of the doubt.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The delivery virus, carrying a good version of the human gene for the clotting agent known as Factor IX, was prepared by researchers at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis. The patients had been recruited and treated with the virus in England by a team led by Dr. Amit C. Nathwani of University College London; researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia monitored their immune reactions.

Hemophilia B is caused by a defect in the gene for Factor IX. Fatal if untreated, the disease occurs almost only in men because the Factor IX gene lies on the X chromosome, of which men have only a single copy.

Women who carry a defective gene on one X chromosome can compensate with the good copy on their other X chromosome, but they bequeath the defective copy to half their children. About one in 30,000 of newborn boys have the disease, with about 3,000 patients in the United States.

Dr. Nathwani and his team reported that they treated the patients by infusing the delivery virus into their veins. The virus homes in on the cells of the liver, and the gene it carries then churns out correct copies of Factor IX. A single injection enabled the patients to produce small amounts of Factor IX, enough that four of the six could stop the usual treatment, injections of Factor IX concentrate prepared from donated blood. The other two patients continued to need concentrate, but less frequently.

Treating a patient with concentrate costs $300,000 a year, with a possible lifetime cost of $20 million, but the single required injection of the new delivery virus costs just $30,000, Dr. Katherine P. Ponder of the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis notes in her commentary in The New England Journal of Medicine, calling the trial “a landmark study.”

The patients have continued to produce their own Factor IX for up to 22 months, said Dr. Edward G. D. Tuddenham, director of the Hemophilia Center at the Royal Free Hospital in London. One patient, a geologist, had a good response at first, but his level of Factor IX has declined to 1 percent of normal, the level at which the disease kicks in.

“We attribute this to the fact that he had an inflammation, and although we treated it promptly, we should have been quicker off the mark,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

The patient cannot be injected again with the same virus because his immune system is now primed to attack it. “He’s very philosophic about it, but he’s a scientist, and his motivation is to help the science,” Dr. Tuddenham said.

Twenty more patients will be treated to assess the best dose of the virus, the goal being the highest dose that does not set off an immune system attack, Dr. Tuddenham said. “We are pretty close to the sweet spot,” he said. If all goes well, a genetic treatment for hemophilia B “could be available for widespread use in a couple of years.”

In a trial in 2006, a patient injected with a corrective gene produced his own Factor IX but only for 10 weeks. The designer of that treatment, Dr. Katherine A. High of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, said the new therapy had worked because the delivery virus had been made more efficient and because the research team had treated the patients with steroids to suppress immune system attacks on the virus.

“I think it’s incredibly exciting, and I say that even though these people are my competitors,” she said. Dr. High is listed as a co-author of the report because her laboratory helped monitor the patients and provided proof for regulators that the virus would not insert its human gene into the patients’ sperm and make the change hereditary.

A serious problem with other delivery viruses is that they insert themselves randomly into chromosomes, sometimes disrupting a gene. The virus used by Dr. Nathwani’s team, known as adeno-associated virus-8, generally stays outside the chromosomes, so it should not present this problem. Still, patients will need to be monitored for liver cancer, a small possibility that has been observed in mice.

“I don’t think it’s a showstopper, but it’s a critical safety issue that has to be assessed,” Dr. High said.

Patients have little or no immunity to the adeno-associated virus, which infects rhesus monkeys. The virus has a propensity for making liver cells its target, which is good for the therapy because these cells are the natural producers of Factor IX. However, liver cells do not live forever and slowly replenish themselves, possibly limiting how long the therapy will last.

About 80 percent of hemophilia cases are of the type known as hemophilia A, which is caused by defects in a different blood-clotting agent, Factor VIII. Researchers have focused on hemophilia B, in part, because the Factor IX gene is much smaller and easier to work with.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a good job of putting the new findings into the context of past research and explaining the difference in this approach.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Alzheimer's Redefined, But Changes Mean Little For Patients

The definition of Alzheimer's disease just got wider and deeper, but the expansion won't change how the vast majority of people are diagnosed. It also doesn't change the very limited treatment choices.

But the new criteria, which were developed by the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association, are almost guaranteed to prompt confusion, even in people who are thinking quite clearly.

The guidelines say, for instance, that newly developed "biomarker" tests, such as assays for proteins in spinal fluid, and some specialized brain scans can be used for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's. But, the guidelines say, the tests are to be used only for research, and not for diagnosing Alzheimer's in the general public.

The distinction is nothing to worry about for patients and their families. "You don't need a biomarker test" for everyday clinical practice, says David Knopman, a professor of neurology at the Mayo Clinic, who was co-chairman of the group that revised the dementia diagnosis. The existing tests for Alzheimer's are adequate, he says. And those biomarkers? "It's in the fine print, but it definitely says in multiple places that the biomarkers are for research purposes."

Why? Well, the biomarker tests and PET scans aren't yet accurate enough to reliably diagnose Alzheimer's, and haven't been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. And it's also because there are no treatments that can prevent, slow or stop early signs of Alzheimer's.

"For research, there's a lot of value," Knopman says. "For everyday clinical use, very very little."

About 5 million Americans have Alzheimer's. The hallmark signs are problems with thinking, learning, and memory. The current definition, created in 1984, describes Alzheimer's that way. But over the past few years there's been solid evidence that Alzheimer's starts damaging the brain years before a person starts having noticeable problems thinking. Scientists have been putting a lot of effort into trying to identify what starts the disease process, but have so far come up empty.

The new definitions, which were just published online by the journal Alzheimer's & Dementia, acknowledge this dimly understood early phase of Alzheimer's. Now there are two new pre-dementia phases: mild cognitive impairment and "preclinical Alzheimer's."

In mild cognitive impairment, a person's changes in thinking are noticeable to himself, friends, or family. They would show up on tests of memory and recall, but don't interfere with everyday activities. Alzheimer's is just one possible cause. Because there are no treatments to prevent or stop Alzheimer's, many people may not consider this diagnosis a blessing.

The second new phase, preclinical Alzheimer's, is much squishier. There's no list of symptoms that a doctor can whip out to say you've got it. Rather, the goal in creating this category is to see if scientists can define when the disease starts, and track it through biomarker tests, brain imaging, or other yet-to-be-invented tests. If that happens, it might someday lead to ways to prevent Alzheimer's. But for now this category is useful only to researchers.

The goal in all this, according to the Alzheimer's Association, is to increase opportunities for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The problem is that there aren't yet any reliable tools for earlier diagnosis and treatment. The new criteria are really a call for more research — and the money to fund it. That would be good for the Alzheimer's Association and the National Institute on Aging, which sponsored the work on the new criteria.

And it does leave one wondering if a lot more worry will be generated by the notion of "preclinical Alzheimer's," when science and medicine can't offer anything to ease those fears.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story clearly points out that brains scans and lab tests for Alzheimer’s disease have yet to demonstrate their accuracy and reliability, and so are useful for research only. It also reminds readers that since there are no treatments that can slow or stop Alzheimer’s, early diagnosis has limited value.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An immunotherapy drug has been hailed as a potential 'game changer' after being found to greatly improve survival for patients with relapsed head and neck cancer - a disease which is notoriously difficult to treat.

Nivolumab became the first treatment to extend survival in a phase III clinical trial for patients with head and neck cancer in whom chemotherapy had failed - and it did so with fewer side-effects than existing therapeutic options.

More than double the number of patients taking nivolumab were alive after one year as those treated with chemotherapy, reported the major international trial, published today (Sunday) in the New England Journal of Medicine.

There are currently no other treatment options that improve the survival of patients with cisplatin-resistant relapsed or metastatic head and neck cancers. This group of patients are expected to live less than six months.

The trial was led in the UK by Professor Kevin Harrington of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, and involved 20 research organisations from around the world. It was funded by Bristol Myers Squibb.

Of the 361 patients in the trial, 240 with relapsed or metastatic head and neck cancer were allocated to receive nivolumab and 121 to one of three different chemotherapies. UK patients received the chemotherapy drug docetaxel, which is the only treatment approved for advanced head and neck cancer by NICE.

After one year of the study, 36 per cent of patients treated with nivolumab were still alive compared with 17 per cent for the comparator arm.

Median survival for patients on nivolumab was 7.5 months, compared with 5.1 months for chemotherapy.

The survival benefit was more pronounced in patients whose tumours had tested positive for human papillomavirus (HPV). These patients survived an average of 9.1 months with nivolumab and 4.4 months with chemotherapy.

HPV-negative patients survived an average of 7.5 months with nivolumab and 5.8 with chemotherapy.

Importantly, fewer patients experienced serious side-effects from taking nivolumab than with conventional treatment - only 13 per cent compared with 35 per cent of patients who received chemotherapy.

Patients given chemotherapy reported feeling physically, socially and emotionally worse off, whereas those who were given nivolumab remained stable during the course of treatment.

Professor Harrington will be presenting some of the findings at the European Society for Medical Oncology 2016 Congress in Copenhagen, simultaneously with publication.

Nivolumab will still have to go through approval by the European Medicines Agency and NICE before it is available for head and neck cancer patients on the NHS.

UK trial lead Professor Kevin Harrington, Professor of Biological Cancer Therapies at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and Consultant at The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, said:

"Nivolumab could be a real game-changer for patients with advanced head and neck cancer. This trial found that it can greatly extend life among a group of patients who have no existing treatment options, without worsening quality of life.

"Once it has relapsed or spread, head and neck cancer is extremely difficult to treat. So it's great news that these results indicate we now have a new treatment that can significantly extend life, and I'm keen to see it enter the clinic as soon as possible."

Professor Paul Workman, Chief Executive of The Institute of Cancer Research, London, said:

"Nivolumab is one of a new wave of immunotherapies that are beginning to have an impact across cancer treatment. This phase III clinical trial expands the repertoire of nivolumab even further, showing that it is the first treatment to have significant benefits in relapsed head and neck cancer.

"We hope regulators can work with the manufacturer to avoid delays in getting this drug to patients who have no effective treatment options left to them."

Some of the data was presented at 16:25 CEST today (Sunday) at the European Society for Medical Oncology 2016 Congress in Copenhagen.

For more information please contact Claire Hastings on 020 8722 5380 or claire.hastings@icr.ac.uk. For enquiries out of hours, please call 07595 963 613.

There were around 11,000 new cases of head and neck cancer and 3,300 deaths in the UK in 2012, 600,000 globally, and more than half relapse within 3-5 years.

The Institute of Cancer Research, London, is one of the world's most influential cancer research organisations.

Scientists and clinicians at The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) are working every day to make a real impact on cancer patients' lives. Through its unique partnership with The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and 'bench-to-bedside' approach, the ICR is able to create and deliver results in a way that other institutions cannot. Together the two organisations are rated in the top four centres for cancer research and treatment globally.

The ICR has an outstanding record of achievement dating back more than 100 years. It provided the first convincing evidence that DNA damage is the basic cause of cancer, laying the foundation for the now universally accepted idea that cancer is a genetic disease. Today it is a world leader at identifying cancer-related genes and discovering new targeted drugs for personalised cancer treatment.

A college of the University of London, the ICR is the UK's top-ranked academic institution for research quality, and provides postgraduate higher education of international distinction. It has charitable status and relies on support from partner organisations, charities and the general public.

The ICR's mission is to make the discoveries that defeat cancer. For more information visit http://www.

The Royal Marsden opened its doors in 1851 as the world's first hospital dedicated to cancer diagnosis, treatment, research and education. The Head and Neck Unit at The Royal Marsden is one of the largest of its kind in Europe.

Today, together with its academic partner, The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR), it is the largest and most comprehensive cancer centre in Europe treating over 50,000 NHS and private patients every year. It is a centre of excellence with an international reputation for groundbreaking research and pioneering the very latest in cancer treatments and technologies.

The Royal Marsden, with the ICR, is the only National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for Cancer. First awarded the status in 2006, it was re-awarded in 2011. A total of £62 million is being provided over five years, to support pioneering research work, and is being shared out over eight different cancer themes.

The Royal Marsden also provides community services in the London boroughs of Sutton and Merton and in June 2010, along with the ICR, the Trust launched a new academic partnership with Mount Vernon Cancer Centre in Middlesex.

Since 2004, the hospital's charity, The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity, has helped raise over £100 million to build theatres, diagnostic centres, and drug development units.

Prince William became President of The Royal Marsden in 2007, following a long royal connection with the hospital.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does an adequate job of describing the study design; however, the introduction of another disease — human papillomavirus (HPV) — added some unnecessary confusion. It stated:
“The survival benefit was more pronounced in patients whose tumours had tested positive for human papillomavirus (HPV). These patients survived an average of 9.1 months with nivolumab and 4.4 months with chemotherapy.
HPV-negative patients survived an average of 7.5 months with nivolumab and 5.8 with chemotherapy.”
The release is noting a survival benefit in both HPV positive and in HPV negative patients. Biomarkers on tumors can be very helpful in directing which drugs a tumor may respond to, but that didn’t seem to be the case here in any definitive way.
We’re not sure what to make of this post hoc exploratory analysis of HPV. This seems on the surface to be a subtle way to bias a cancer study. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Details of a large heart safety study presented on Monday appear to give Merck and Co’s diabetes drug Januvia a clean bill of health, possibly setting the stage for a return to sales growth for the drugmaker’s biggest product.

Merck in April said the study, called Tecos, of 14,724 patients with type 2 diabetes and a history of heart disease demonstrated that adding Januvia to usual care did not increase major heart problems any more than adding a placebo, removing a cloud that has been holding back sales of the medicine and the company’s share price.

Januvia, an oral medication known chemically as sitagliptin that helps lower blood sugar levels, had sales of about $4 billion in 2014, plus another $1.8 billion for the related combination product Janumet

On the study’s main focus, after about three years 11.4 percent of Januvia patients had experienced cardiovascular death, non-fatal heart attack, non-fatal stroke or hospitalization for unstable angina versus 11.6 percent in the placebo group.

The detailed results also showed no increase in hospitalization for heart failure, which had been a particular concern with DPP-4 inhibitors, the class to which Januvia belongs. There were 228 such hospitalizations for Januvia and 229 in the placebo group, according to data also published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

“We can be reassured we can use this drug for glucose lowering without affecting the already high cardiovascular risk in people with type 2 diabetes,” said Professor Rury Holman, the study’s lead investigator, who presented the data at the American Diabetes Association meeting in Boston.

“For the heart failure concern raised by other agents in the class there is no difference (with placebo),” he added.

There was also no significant difference between Januvia and placebo in infections, cancer, kidney failure or severe hypoglycemia, which is dangerously low blood sugar, researchers reported.

Acute pancreatitis, a concern with some diabetes drugs, was uncommon but higher with Januvia, 23 versus 12. That was not statistically significant.

“Numerically this is hardly a major risk, just something we need to keep an eye on,” Holman said.

Pancreatic cancers, also uncommon, were numerically fewer with Januvia, 9 versus 14.

Death from any cause occurred in 7.5 percent of Januvia patients versus 7.3 percent for placebo.

The Tecos heart safety study was conducted by an independent academic research collaboration between the University of Oxford Diabetes Trials Unit and the Duke University Clinical Research Institute. It was undertaken after heart safety concerns were raised over other diabetes medicines.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The study itself was a good design and the story’s description is consistent with the quality of the evidence. So we’ll award a Satisfactory rating, although the story could have been a little clearer about where this evidence was coming from. The story talks about the drug company presenting information, and then information being presented at a conference, and then some data being published in a journal. There’s a big difference between comments made at a conference or in a company press release and findings that were subjected to peer review and published in a journal. We think the reporter had all those facts at hand but that, on deadline, they did not come out clearly in the final piece.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 12, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- People taking popular cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins may have a slightly lower risk than others of developing Parkinson's disease, new research suggests.

This effect may be even more pronounced among people younger than 60, according to the study published in the March issue of Archives of Neurology.

However, the risk reduction was modest and may have been due to chance, the authors said, noting that more research is warranted, especially because statins can cause adverse side effects.

"There is no clear verdict," said Dr. Stuart Isaacson, director of the Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center of Boca Raton, who was not involved in the study.

"Right now we don't have any good evidence that there is anything we can do to reduce the risk of developing Parkinson's disease, but research is ongoing," added Isaacson, also an associate professor of neurology at Florida International University's Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine in Miami.

For the study, researchers led by Dr. Xiang Gao, of Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard University School of Public Health in Boston, analyzed data on more than 38,000 men and almost 91,000 women enrolled in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study and the Nurses' Health Study in 1994.

During 12 years of follow-up, 644 people were diagnosed with Parkinson's disease. People taking cholesterol-lowering drugs, especially those younger than 60, were less likely to develop the neurological disorder than those not using cholesterol drugs, the researchers found.

Nearly one million people in the United States have Parkinson's disease, a chronic and progressive movement disorder, and no one knows what causes it.

The researchers can't say exactly how -- or even if -- statins reduce the risk of Parkinson's. It's thought these drugs may have potent anti-inflammatory effects, which could protect the brain.

The study had some limitations, the authors acknowledged. For example, only about 70 percent of people who were taking drugs to lower cholesterol were actually on statins at the study's start.

Dr. Roy Alcalay, an assistant professor of neurology at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City, said it is way too early to say that statins lower risk for Parkinson's disease. "This is a promising avenue for future research," said Alcalay, an advisor for the Parkinson's Disease Foundation.

But there is some good news, he added. The data are compelling evidence that statins are not detrimental for people with or at risk of Parkinson's disease, he said. There was a concern that statins could be harmful as they might lower the level of coenzyme Q10 in the blood. Co-Q10, an antioxidant, is thought to have benefits for people with Parkinson's disease.

"If you need to be on statins for your heart, it is not going to increase your risk for Parkinson's," Alcalay said.

Learn more about Parkinson's disease and its symptoms at the Parkinson's Disease Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: In the lead, the story takes a cautious note, saying that those taking statins “may have a slightly lower risk” of Parkinson’s, and, in the third sentence, it says “the risk reduction was modest and may have been due to chance”. The story goes on to say, “The study had some limitations, the authors acknowledged. For example, only about 70 percent of people who were taking drugs to lower cholesterol were actually on statins at the study’s start.” This is all important context for readers and underscores what seems to be the main point of this study, that there is more research needed before people start taking statins for Parkinson’s.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
January 30, 2018 - For older women undergoing mastectomy for breast cancer, direct-to-implant (DTI) breast reconstruction provides good outcomes in a single-step procedure, while avoiding some of the inconvenience and risks of staged approaches to breast reconstruction, reports a study in the February issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery®, the official medical journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS).

"The DTI approach is a powerful tool for breast reconstruction in elderly patients," comments ASPS Member Surgeon Andrea Moreira, MD, of the Cleveland Clinic. The researchers believe the DTI technique may expand the options for older women, who are less likely to undergo breast reconstruction.

Good Results with DTI Breast Reconstruction in Women over 65

Direct-to-implant breast reconstruction has emerged as a single-stage approach to immediate breast reconstruction after mastectomy. So far, however, most studies of DTI have focused on younger women.

"Half of all breast cancers occur in women over 65, yet only four to 14 percent of these women undergo reconstruction," Dr. Moreira and coauthors write. Most studies of breast reconstruction in older women have focused on multiple-step techniques such as tissue expander implant (TEI) reconstruction.

The researchers identified women over age 65 who underwent DTI reconstruction at the Cleveland Clinic between 2012 and 2015. They identified a total of 24 breasts reconstructed by DTI in 19 patients, all with at least 30 days' follow-up and most with one year of follow-up

Patient characteristics and outcomes were compared to those of 109 breasts with TEI reconstruction in 98 patients. The women undergoing DTI reconstruction were older (73.5 versus 69.2 years) and had a higher body mass index, compared to the TEI group.

Both DTI and TEI were safe and effective options for breast reconstruction. Complication rates were similar between groups, including blood and fluid collections (hematoma and seroma), infection, unplanned surgery, and failed reconstruction.

However, DTI had some important advantages. Women in the DTI group were less likely to be readmitted to the hospital and spent fewer total days in the hospital. In the year after surgery was completed, women in the DTI group made an average of 6.5 office visits, compared to about 12 visits in the TEI group.

The DTI group also spent fewer days with a surgical drain in place: average about 13 days, compared to 23 days in the and had fewer total days in the hospital. That's an important consideration, as drains require antibiotic treatment to prevent infection, in addition to causing discomfort for the patient.

The authors note some important limitations of their study--particularly the fact that it was a review study of one hospital's experience with a relatively new procedure. Dr. Moreira and colleagues write, "These reported cases include our learning curve patients as we familiarized ourselves with appropriate patient selection and surgical technique."

The researchers emphasize that DTI isn't an option for every patient, depending on breast shape and other factors. Despite these limitations, their experience suggests that complications of the DTI approach in older women are similar to those of the more commonly used TEI technique. Dr. Moreira adds, "In appropriately selected cases, DTI reconstruction is a viable alternative to staged techniques requiring multiple surgeries."

Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® is published by Wolters Kluwer.

Click here to read "Direct-to-Implant Breast Reconstruction in Women Older than 65 Years: A Retrospective Analysis of Complication Rate and Overall Outcomes."

For more than 70 years, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® (http://www. ) has been the one consistently excellent reference for every specialist who uses plastic surgery techniques or works in conjunction with a plastic surgeon. The official journal of the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery® brings subscribers up-to-the-minute reports on the latest techniques and follow-up for all areas of plastic and reconstructive surgery, including breast reconstruction, experimental studies, maxillofacial reconstruction, hand and microsurgery, burn repair and cosmetic surgery, as well as news on medico-legal issues.

The American Society of Plastic Surgeons is the largest organization of board-certified plastic surgeons in the world. Representing more than 7,000 physician members, the society is recognized as a leading authority and information source on cosmetic and reconstructive plastic surgery. ASPS comprises more than 94 percent of all board-certified plastic surgeons in the United States. Founded in 1931, the society represents physicians certified by The American Board of Plastic Surgery or The Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.

Wolters Kluwer N.V. (AEX: WKL) is a global leader in information services and solutions for professionals in the health, tax and accounting, risk and compliance, finance and legal sectors. We help our customers make critical decisions every day by providing expert solutions that combine deep domain knowledge with specialized technology and services.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2016 annual revenues of €4.3 billion. The company, headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands, serves customers in over 180 countries, maintains operations in over 40 countries and employs 19,000 people worldwide.

Wolters Kluwer Health is a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry. For more information about our products and the organization, visit http://www. , follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.

For more information about Wolters Kluwer's solutions and organization, visit http://www. , follow us on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and YouTube.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release does well in reminding us this is a retrospective chart review of just one hospital’s experience. The size of the study — comparing 24 breasts reconstructed by DTI in just 19 patients, with 109 breasts with expander-implant approach in 98 patients — also limits the generalizability of these findings. With just over 100 patients the study is quite small.
We appreciate mention of the fact that DTI is not an appropriate choice for all women (breast size, shape, and other factors come into play).
The study mentioned that many of the DTI reconstructions necessitated the use of acellular dermal matrix (a soft tissue substitute that is derived from donated human skin tissue) which has to be considered with regards to risk profile of the patient and whether this is a suitable procedure.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
No Cure For Morning Sickness Just Yet

Expectant moms in search of help with morning sickness will have to keep looking.

There's still no reliable treatment to relieve vomiting and feelings of nausea in early-term pregnant women, according to a review of 27 clinical trials published by the Cochrane Library.

Dublin City University's Anne Matthews, the review's lead researcher, says it was disappointing not to find more studies that were consistent in testing the same approaches. Without enough data that could be pooled together, it wasn't possible for the Cochrane folks to figure out if anything really works reliably and safely.

Morning sickness is quite common, with most pregnant women getting nauseous early on and around a third throwing up.

Unfortunately, medicines to relieve morning sickness have a checkered history. Remember thalidomide? In the late '50s the drug was billed as a way to ameliorate morning sickness. The medicine, though never approved for use in the United States, led to birth defects in some 10,000 kids in Europe and Canada.

In the latest look at various treatments, the Cochrane group evaluated studies that examined both pharmaceutical and alternative techniques, including acupuncture, acupressure (a noninvasive variation of acupuncture), ginger, vitamin B-6 and conventional anti-vomiting drugs.

The studies in the review comprised more than 4,000 women who were up to 20 weeks pregnant.

Sounds impressive, right? But Matthews says reviewers found few high-quality studies about any treatment. Also, inconsistencies in methodology from study to study made it difficult to pool the results and draw firm conclusions.

Take ginger. Matthews says different studies used different forms of ginger -- some tried ginger syrup and others used capsules -- at different doses. The comparison groups in the experiments varied as well.

What's more, "people tended to measure the outcomes very differently," Matthews says. Most focused on the symptoms of nausea and vomiting, but they measured the symptoms at different times, she says.

And here's a biggie: There wasn't much information about adverse effects on women and babies, something everyone would certainly want to know. And there wasn't much hard data on psychological, social or economic outcomes, according to the report.

Authors of the review found some evidence that ginger, vitamin B-6 and anti-vomiting drugs relieved nausea. But Matthews says the evidence isn't strong enough to make a recommendation.

All too often, Matthews says, researchers in the field seem to forge ahead without paying enough attention to what's been done before. "The onus is back to researchers to carry out studies that would stand up" to rigorous review and that would build on what's already been tested.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The Cochrane systematic review discussed in this article is actually a "study of studies." In this case, the story told us how many clinical trials were included in the review (27) and how many women participated in those studies (about 4,000). The story told us why the included studies, which at first glance might seem like an impressive volume of research, couldn’t provide reliable answers about the effectiveness of morning sickness treatments. The story noted that many of studies used different methods and had different ways of measuring outcomes, so the results couldn’t be pooled together to increase the statistical power of the analysis. 
The lead overstates the case a bit by saying that the review concluded that there was "no reliable treatment to relieve vomiting and feelings of nausea in early-term pregnant women." But, in the third paragraph, the story says, "Dublin City University’s Anne Matthews, the review’s lead researcher, says it was disappointing not to find more studies that were consistent in testing the same approaches. Without enough data that could be pooled together, it wasn’t possible for the Cochrane folks to figure out if anything really works reliably and safely."
It would have been nice to see Cochrane’s methods evaluated as closely as those of any other type of research experiment. But it didn’t provide key information about how the researchers selected which studies to include in the review. We don’t know, for example, whether the included studies were randomized controlled trials or if uncontrolled trials were allowed. We also don’t know if the studies had to be of a certain size or quality to be included. This information is vital to understanding the strength of the review’s conclusions. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Two groups of scientists presented results at an HIV conference on Monday suggesting that a vaginal ring could prevent HIV transmission in women. In both studies, the ring lowered HIV cases by about 30%, though its effectiveness appears to be much better for women who used the ring consistently.

The ring contains an antiretroviral medication called dapivirine, which prevents HIV from making copies of itself. In the ring, the drug is used as “pre-exposure prophylaxis,” or PrEP, slowly leaching out in the vagina and preventing the virus from taking hold in nearby cells.

One of the new studies, published today in the New England Journal of Medicine, tested the ring in more than 2,600 women in four countries — Malawi, SouthAfrica, Uganda, and Zimbabwe — over nearly two years. At the end of the study, the group of volunteers who had used the dapivirine ring had 27% fewer HIV infections than a control group who had a placebo ring with no drug, the study found.

Looking by age, the researchers saw that the ring did not seem to help women younger than 21. But among women over the age of 21 who used it, new HIV cases went down by 61%.

The other study, which has not yet been published but was presented on Monday at the Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections meeting in Boston, studied 2,000 women in South Africa and Uganda. Like the other study, in this one the ring had no visible effect in women younger than 21, whereas new HIV cases dropped by 37% in women over 21.

These age differences are probably due in part to how the women used the drug, the researchers say. Much like the contraceptive NuvaRing, the dapivirine ring should be kept in every day and replaced once a month for maximum effectiveness.

“If used perfectly, how much HIV protection could there be? We don’t know that yet,” Jared Baeten, professor of global health, medicine, and epidemiology at the University of Washington and lead author on the study, told BuzzFeed News.

Adherence is also a big issue for the only other PrEP on the market, a once-a-day pill called Truvada. Initial trials for the pill showed it led to a 44% decrease in HIV infection rates overall. But it’s now known that, when taken properly, Truvada cuts new cases of HIV by at least 92%. Because of its high effectiveness, the CDC has since recommended that 1 in 4 gay and bisexual men should be prescribed the drug to prevent the spread of HIV.

The ring adds a new HIV prevention tool, which some experts say will be particularly useful in African countries where women are at highest risk for HIV infection. More than half of the 35 million people living with HIV worldwide are women, and the vast majority live in sub-Saharan Africa.

“A prevention tool like a ring could be used discreetly, a woman would have control over it, and it could allow her to keep herself safe from HIV without having to ask a male partner to take on prevention strategies,” Baeten said. “That individual control of prevention is so powerful.”

The dapivirine ring has been in development for more than a decade, and the the new studies are the first to show that it prevents HIV transmission. Still, experts caution that the ring should not be a woman’s sole source of protection.

“There is absolute reason to celebrate. But 27% is a lower number than any of us would like to see,” Mitchell Warren, executive director of AVAC, a global HIV-prevention advocacy group, told BuzzFeed News.

“We obviously always want higher numbers. But 1 in 3 infections were prevented overall — and that’s huge.”

Warren noted that other rings with antiretrovirals are also being developed, as well as rings that could offer multipurpose protection, against not only HIV but pregnancy.

Like birth control, the more types of HIV prevention, the better, experts say.

“For some women, a pill every day might work really well. For others, that may be not achievable,” Baeten said. “Pills and rings should be sitting next to each other as options.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story explains the size of the studies — each including at least 2,000 women. One study was already published in the NEJM and the other is not yet published. Some of the details given help establish the credibility of the results, although we are not given much detail about study protocols. It would have been helpful to link to the conference abstract, similar in the way it linked to the NEJM study, for readers that wanted a bit more detail.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Parents of children with autism take note. It may be possible to predict autism in infants as young as 6 months who have older siblings with the disorder, according to a new study by a national network of researchers.

Infants in such families are at increased risk of developing autism, which is typically diagnosed when a child is 2- to 3-years-old and develops symptoms such as challenges with social skills, repetitive behaviors, delayed speech or nonverbal communication.

Researchers used magnetic resonance imaging — or MRI — to scan the brains of 343 infants when they were 6 months, 12 months and 24 months old. Two-thirds of the infants were high risk, having an older sibling with autism. The scans showed that 70 percent of high-risk toddlers diagnosed with autism at age 2 had an elevated amount of cerebrospinal fluid around their brains at 6 and 12 months, compared to toddlers who were not diagnosed with autism. Cerebrospinal fluid is a clear, colorless liquid that bathes the brain and spine.

This excess fluid “could possibly be an early biological marker for autism,” said Mark Shen, the lead author of the article, published in Biological Psychiatry, and a post-doctoral fellow at the University of North Carolina’s Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities. Additional studies are needed to confirm the finding, he said.

Such a marker would allow doctors to identify infants at high risk of developing autism before symptoms are present.

“The earlier we can get biological markers for autism, the earlier intervention can be initiated, and the greater the chance of better outcomes, ” said David Kennedy, Ph.D., co-director of the Child and Adolescent NeuroDevelopment Initiative at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. Typically, therapists work with children and parents to improve eye contact, social interactions and communication skills.

Related: See the special bond between a boy with autism and a deaf shelter dog

The study results are “very exciting,” said Dr. Adriania Di Martino, a professor of child and adolescent psychiatry at NYU Medical School. Excess brain fluid may be more than an early marker for autism, Di Martino said. It may also be a mechanism in the development of autism, and it opens up new possibilities for research, she said. “You can start thinking about conditions that might lead to increased cerebrospinal fluid.”

Shen and his colleagues are already looking for genes associated with excess brain fluid. Normally, the liquid, refreshed four times a day, washes away byproducts that build up in the brain. But if the fluid is not flowing properly, these byproducts hang around and cause inflammation, which could “hamper brain development” and lead to autism, said Shen.

Completely different mechanisms may be at work for kids without an older sibling with autism, said Shen and Dimartino. More studies are needed, they said.

Related: De Niro says 'find the truth on vaccines'. But scientists already did

Parents with children with autism should not rush to their pediatrician demanding brain MRIs for younger siblings, Shen said.

“We wouldn’t recommend that every high-risk infant get an MRI until we know that the accuracy can be improved closer to the 90 percent range” from the current 70 percent, Shen told TODAY.

He and his colleagues are working on improving accuracy by combining their brain fluid findings with other recent research. In addition to flushing out the brain’s garbage, brain fluid also delivers signals to the brain that tell it how and when to grow. In a study published last month in Nature, 80 percent of infants diagnosed with autism as toddlers had an increased rate of growth in the surface area of their brains in their first year, compared to toddlers who were not diagnosed with autism.

“We’re going to combine those two markers to see if we can improve the prediction closer to the 90 percent range, where it could be really clinically useful,” said Shen.

About 1 in 68 children develop autism in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, But as many as 20 out of 100 infants with an older sibling with autism will develop the disorder, said Di Martino.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story describes the size of the sample, and the proportion of infants within the sample who had siblings with autism. The sample is fairly large and was followed over two years. All of this is explained in reader friendly language. The story also told readers not to rush out and request an MRI for autism screening, as it’s not ready for clinical use yet.
The story would have been stronger if it also had mentioned that there is not clear evidence that such early detection of autism will improve outcomes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Any woman who is struggling with infertility will tell you that one of the worst parts of going through in vitro fertilization (IVF) are the daily hormone injections. And for some women, those injections could even be downright dangerous.

Although IVF is still considered the gold standard, there’s an infertility treatment available that is offering hope — in vitro maturation (IVM). IVM has the potential to improve the chances for women to have babies without a long course of hormones.

What is IVM?

 IVM is an experimental fertility treatment that collects and matures a woman’s eggs in a lab. Although the treatment is used in conjunction with IVF, the initial process isn’t the same.

With IVF, a woman must undergo between 8 to 11 nights of ovary-stimulating hormone injections before her eggs can be retrieved. With IVM, women undergo a shorter course— between 3 and 6 days— of hormones known as a “priming phase.”

Once the eggs are retrieved, they’re matured in a laboratory for approximately three days, fertilized and then implanted. They can also be frozen as eggs or embryos to be implanted later.

Clinics that specialize in IVM require a doctor who has expertise in retrieving small eggs and a lab with embryologists who have the skills to look for them, said Dr. Janelle Luk, medical director of Neway Fertility in New York City.

Who is IVM helpful for?

Although IVF is considered the standard of care, experts say some women may benefit from IVM.

For starters, since there is less time involved with IVM, women who are undergoing chemotherapy, radiation or plan to have surgery may be good candidates.

IVM may also help women who have a contraindication to the increased levels of estradiol, a form of estrogen, which elevates as the follicles develop and mature. These would include women with an estrogen-sensitive cancer or a history of blood clots.

IVM can also help women who are adverse to injections or who have failed IVF, Luk said.

Women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) or who are at increased risk for ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS)— which affects between 3 and 6 percent of women who go through IVF— may also benefit from IVM. OHSS can usually be managed on an outpatient basis but severe OHSS may lead to blood clots, even death, said Dr. Shefali Shastri, a board-certified reproductive endocrinologist and OB/GYN at Reproductive Medicine Associates of New Jersey in Somerset and Short Hills.

What are the limitations of IVM? 

A study in the journal Facts, Views and Vision found that IVM achieved up to a 35 percent clinical pregnancy rate in young women, which is comparable to IVF.

Yet most studies have found that IVF is superior to IVM.

Although there are different protocols for IVF, and there aren’t any randomized controlled trials that have compared IVF and IVM side by side, studies that look at standard IVF cycles show a significantly higher pregnancy rate than IVM, Shastri said.

Plus, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) committee opinion on IVM states that implantation rates for IVM—between 5.5 and 21.6 percent— are a more reliable indicator of IVM success and are lower than expected for women of the same age who use IVF. They also note that the technology hasn’t been widely used and that there are no studies looking at the outcomes of birth defects or developmental delays.

Since IVM results in lower fertilization rates, protocols that use IVM are more likely to also use intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), in which one sperm is injected into one egg. Although ICSI is safe and effective, the bigger concern is if a patient going through IVM doesn’t use ICSI, Shastri said.

While IVM is cheaper initially because there are fewer hormones to take, it may be more costly if several rounds are required.

Although IVM may eventually become more common, IVF still remains the standard of care and the most effective way for women to get pregnant.

“With medicine, you always want to optimize a patient’s outcome,” Shastri said. “Ultimately, you want to do the best for the patient so my preference would not be IVM.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We give this a Satisfactory rating because the article repeats the information that no randomized controlled trials have compared IVM and IVF or established IVM success/failure rates. The story concludes strongly that IVF remains the standard of care. Kudos for that.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Can acupressure achieve a sustained reduction in menstrual pain? Is an app-based self-care program particularly attractive to young women? These questions addressed in a new study by researchers from Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, the results of which have been published in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology*.

Approximately 50 to 90 percent of young women experience pain during their periods. While this pain primarily manifests itself as lower abdominal cramping, other symptoms include headache, backache, nausea and diarrhea. Acupressure is a technique derived from traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In contrast to acupuncture, this technique can be used as a form of self-care and is suitable for use at home. Rather than using needles, this technique involves massage or pressure being applied to specific points on the body.

The researchers wanted to evaluate whether in a group of women suffering from severe menstrual pain, aged between 18 and 34, self-acupressure would be more effective at achieving a sustained reduction in menstrual pain than usual care alone (e.g. pain medication and hormonal contraceptives). A total of 221 participants were randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups, both of which received a study app and short introduction. Acupressure-based features - with instructions on how to administer self-acupressure shortly before and during menstruation - were only made available to the intervention group. One advantage of an app-based intervention is its ability to provide visual descriptions of the pressure points users need to target in order to achieve the desired effect. It can also send regular reminders. Additionally, the app was used to collect all study-related data.

"Initially, we simply wanted to conduct a study on the use of self-care techniques for menstrual pain. However, the women who were involved during the planning stages, all of whom were affected by menstrual pain, wanted an app," reports the study's principal investigator, Prof. Dr. Claudia Witt of the Institute of Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics. The app helped participants to apply simple self-acupressure techniques to three different acupressure points.

After three months, 37 percent of participants in the acupressure group reported a 50 percent reduction in pain intensity. After six months, this proportion had increased to more than half of the women in this group (58 percent). Only 25 percent of women in the control group reported a similar reduction in pain intensity at both the 3-month and 6-month marks. Women in the acupressure group also used less pain medication than women in the control group and reported lower levels of pain overall.

"We were surprised to see that, after six months, two thirds of participants continued to use self-acupressure. So far, research into the clinical effectiveness of apps has been limited, and only a few have been tested using randomized controlled trials," says Dr. Daniel Pach of the Institute of Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics. He adds: "We were able to show that apps can be evaluated in a clinical trial setting. However, despite our experience with conventional clinical trials, there was a lot for us to learn - something we found both exciting and eye-opening." The app Luna has recently been updated and optimized for use with iOS.

*Susanne Blödt, Daniel Pach, Sanna von Eisenhart-Rothe, Fabian Lotz, Stephanie Roll, Katja Icke, Claudia M. Witt: Effectiveness of app-based self-acupressure for women with menstrual pain compared to usual care: a randomized pragmatic trial. In: American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Volume 218, Issue 2, February 2018, Pages 227.e1-227.e9. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2017.11.570.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release states that the study was randomized and controlled and that it included 221 young women that were assigned to one of two treatment groups. Only the treatment group (those doing acupressure) were given instructions on how to administer self-acupressure before and during menstruation. Participants were assessed on their pain levels at 3- and 6-months.
Some limitations described in the study but not mentioned in the release: about 90% percent of volunteers had at least 12 years of school education, higher than the average population which would affect the generalizability of the results to the general population. Researchers also stated that the relatively short follow-up time could have resulted in an overestimation of the treatment’s benefit.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When actress and author Lena Dunham went public about having endometriosis, a disorder of the uterus, she wanted to make something clear: The pain it causes can be completely debilitating, and women desperately need better treatments.

Soon, it seems, women like Dunham with endometriosis pain will have a new option for relief. An endometriosis pain treatment was just approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and it’s expected to arrive at pharmacies as soon as August. The pill, called elagolix (brand name Orilissa), from the drugmaker AbbVie, is the first FDA-approved oral treatment in more than a decade for the moderate to severe pain that comes with endometriosis.

“This [medication] could really be transformative,” said Hugh Taylor, an OB-GYN at Yale Medical School who led the key trials testing the drug.

Endometriosis is one of the most common gynecological conditions, affecting as many as one in 10 women of reproductive age. And it can be incredibly painful. The reason is simple: Women with the condition are growing excess tissue in their abdomen that they can’t shed.

Every month, a woman’s uterine lining thickens and sheds during her period if she’s not pregnant. With endometriosis, that tissue thickens and bleeds, but it happens outside of the uterus — on the fallopian tubes, or even in the nose or lungs. Because the extra tissue has no way to exit the body (it can’t go through the vagina since it’s not growing in the uterus), it builds up and becomes trapped, leading to pain and, in some cases, infertility.

There’s no cure for endometriosis. To manage symptoms, women are usually prescribed birth control or over-the-counter painkillers as a first-line approach, but they don’t always work. In severe cases, a doctor may suggest “excision surgery” to remove the extra tissue. (Dunham had eight surgeries and ended up getting a hysterectomy, which was considered an extreme measure.)

Enter elagolix. Endometriosis is an estrogen-driven disease, and the drug works by lowering estrogen levels. Two large double-blind, placebo-control randomized trials, which 1,285 women completed, tested whether it can help women control endometriosis pain. The results, published last year in the New England Journal of Medicine, were impressive. The patients in those trials scored their pain from 0 (no pain) to 3 (severe pain). On average, they had pain levels of 2.2 out of 3 before starting on the drug — and they experienced a 2-point reduction in pain after taking the treatment for three months.

“It’s a major advance,” said Dr. Louis DePaolo, head of the fertility and infertility branch at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, “and another option women have that’s effective.”

Now the less good news: The drug won’t cure endometriosis; it’ll only tamp down the pain it causes. Many women in the trial experienced the symptoms of menopause — hot flashes, headache, insomnia — and researchers have also found the drug causes bone loss. We have no idea about the long-term effects of taking the drug because there are no trials lasting for longer than a year, or how it stacks up against other painkillers (since the trials only compared it to placebo). That’s not to mention cost: The drug’s price is listed at $850 per month. But for some, the risks and costs may be worth it. Here’s why.

Endometriosis is incredibly common — but it can go undiagnosed for years

Endometriosis is a chronic, sometimes highly disruptive condition. The three main ways it manifests are through pelvic pain, infertility, and pelvic masses such as cysts, scar tissue, and fibroids. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, some important signs of endometriosis include:
• Pain before and during periods

But many women don’t know they have endometriosis. It’s sometimes mistaken or dismissed for regular period pain. Definitively diagnosing the disorder requires invasive surgery; doctors need to peer inside the pelvis through a laparoscopy. (Imaging is rarely helpful in getting a clear diagnosis.) This involves making a small incision in the belly and inserting a tube with a tiny camera to see if the pelvic organs show signs of tissue scarring and buildup. So it’s no surprise it takes between three and 11 years after the onset of symptoms to diagnose endometriosis.

Doctors aren’t sure why some women get it

Adding to the mystery around endometriosis: No one knows exactly what causes it, but doctors have some theories.
• Retrograde menstrual flow: During a period, when a woman is shedding her uterine lining, some of that tissue can flow through her fallopian tubes and into her pelvis, which researchers think may cause endometriosis. But doctors have also found that the rate of retrograde menstruation is about the same in women with and without endometriosis, so they think additional factors spur the disorder in some.
• Genes: The disorder runs in families, so doctors believe there’s a genetic component. If a woman’s mom or sister had endometriosis, the woman is believed to be at a higher risk.
• Somatic mutations: Researchers are also finding that somatic mutations — acquired changes to DNA that happen after a person is born — may also be an endometriosis driver.
• Immune system dysfunction: Problems with the immune system can hamper a woman’s ability to clear her menstrual debris, leading to endometriosis.
• Environmental factors: There’s some evidence to suggest environmental exposures to certain chemicals may contribute to one’s risk of developing endometriosis.

The treatments available don’t always help, and some have severe side effects

When birth control pills or over-the-counter painkillers fail to help endometriosis pain, women are often left choosing between a monthly injection called Lupron Depot, which can put women into a profoundly menopausal state, or Danazol, a male hormone that often causes acne and facial hair growth.

In women for whom these drugs aren’t effective, or who don’t want to take medications, surgery to remove the displaced endometrial tissue can be a highly effective option. But the trouble with surgery is that endometriosis can recur, so women may need more surgeries. The success of surgery also depends on finding a skilled and experienced surgeon, and there’s always the risk of surgical complications.

The new drug elagolix is not risk-free, either. In the trials, women who took the drug had greater bone loss than did those who received placebo, and this wasn’t entirely surprising. Like other endometriosis treatments, the drug works by lowering estrogen levels (since endometriosis needs estrogen to grow). When that happens, women experience menopausal side effects. The most common in the trials were hot flashes, headaches, and insomnia. (Elagolix is available in two doses — 150 mg per day, or 200 mg twice daily — and the women on the higher dose experienced the side effects more frequently.) Mood swings and night sweats were less common, and one woman in the trial died by suicide (though there’s no indication that the medicine was a cause of her death).

DePaolo pointed out, “[Elagolix] doesn’t have the pronounced side effects some of the other compounds have.” That’s because, he said, it doesn’t drive down estrogen levels as severely.

But for patients who have tried other estrogen-lowering medicines, elagolix isn’t all that appealing. “This drug is palliative in nature. It does not cure or shrink the disease,” Casey Berna, director of programs and partnerships for the advocacy group EndoWhat. The drug’s side effects also concerned her, as did the lack of knowledge about its long-term impact.

For other women, though, the trade offs may be worth it. But in either case, women with severe endometriosis are still left choosing between terrible pain, surgery, or drugs with serious side effects.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The double-blind, placebo-controlled trials are described, as are cautions, such as the short-term nature of the research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - According to a new study, women experiencing difficulty with time management, attention, organization, memory, and problem solving - often referred to as executive functions - related to menopause may find improvement with a drug already being used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The study led by researchers at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania is the first to show that lisdexamfetamine (LDX) improved subjective and objective measures of cognitive decline commonly experienced in menopausal women. Results of the study are published online today in the journal Psychopharmacology.

"Reports of cognitive decline, particularly in executive functions, are widespread among menopausal women," said lead author, C. Neill Epperson, MD, professor of Psychiatry and Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, and director of the Penn Center for Women's Behavioral Wellness. "There are approximately 90 million post-menopausal women living in the US alone, and with the average age of onset occurring at 52, the great majority of those women will live in the postmenopausal state for at least one-third of their lives. Therefore, promoting healthy cognitive aging among menopausal women should be a major public health goal."

The Penn-led team administered a once-daily dose of LDX for four weeks to 32 healthy, non-ADHD-diagnosed women between the ages of 45 and 60 experiencing difficulties with executive functions as a result of mid-life onset menopause, and as measured using the Brown Attention Deficit Disorder Scale (BADDS). All participants served as their own controls by being randomly assigned to cross-over to a placebo for an additional four weeks.

The researchers found a 41 percent overall improvement in executive functions for women receiving LDX, compared to a 17 percent improvement when taking placebo medication. There were also significant improvements in four out of the five subscales for women taking LDX: organization and motivation for work; attention and concentration; alertness, effort, and processing speed; and working memory and accessing recall.

While psychostimulants such as LDX are primarily marketed for the treatment of ADHD, they have been successful in treating cognitive complaints in some patients including postmenopausal women. They work by promoting the release of dopamine, which is impaired in ADHD and other disorders characterized by executive function problems.

"Although we observed that short-term use of LDX was well tolerated and effective in several subjective and objective areas, long-term studies of menopausal women receiving LDX are needed, similar to those conducted for ADHD patients," said Epperson. "It is also important for clinicians to confirm that a woman's complaints of worsening memory are in the executive function domains, are temporally related to the transition to menopause, and are not indicative of some other pathological cognitive impairment before prescribing a trial of LDX."

In addition to Epperson, other Penn co-authors are Sheila Shanmugan, Deborah R. Kim, Sarah Mathews, Kathryn A. Czarkowski, Jeanette Bradley, Dina H. Appleby, Claudia Iannelli, and Mary D. Sammel.

This project was funded in part by Shire Pharmaceuticals, the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Institute on Aging, and the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania (founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $4.9 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 17 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $409 million awarded in the 2014 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania -- recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report; Penn Presbyterian Medical Center; Chester County Hospital; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2014, Penn Medicine provided $771 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This release does identify the nature of this trial, pointing to the randomization of the participants and that they served as their own control group as crossovers in the study. It also comments on the short duration of the study, noting that “long-term studies of menopausal women receiving LDX are needed.” However, the study only involved 32 women, and the original study paper recommends testing the hypothesis with a much larger cohort.  Moreover, in the paper itself, the researchers state: “While these findings are compelling, there are several aspects of the study design that limit our ability to generalize these data to all women with cognitive complaints during the menopause transition.”  (For example, women with mood problems were excluded from the study.) Both the lede of the story and its headline could have better represented this caveat by referring to “some menopausal women.” We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here with suggestions for improvement for next time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: Obese patients who underwent weight-loss surgery had a lower rate of death from any cause compared with obese adults who received nonsurgical care to manage their obesity.

Why The Research Is Interesting: Much is known about the short-term outcomes of bariatric surgery for weight loss but relatively little is known about its long-term effects. Some previous research has been limited by a number of factors, including the lack of a comparison group of obese patients who did not undergo bariatric surgery.

Who and When: 8,385 obese patients in Israel who underwent bariatric surgery (laparoscopic banding, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, or laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy) from 2005-2014; 25,155 obese patients who received nonsurgical care for obesity management from primary care physicians that may have included dietary counseling and behavior modification.

What (Study Measures): Bariatric surgery (exposure); death from any cause (outcome)

How (Study Design): This is a retrospective cohort study that used data from the past to compare obese patients who had bariatric surgery with those who didn't and death from any cause. The study is observational. Because researchers are not intervening for purposes of the study they cannot control for all the natural differences that could explain study findings.

Results: The rate of death from any cause over about 4.5 years was lower among obese patients who underwent bariatric surgery compared with patients who managed their obesity with nonsurgical care.

Study Limitations: Imbalances caused by matching groups of obese patients for comparison based on age, sex, body mass index and diagnoses of diabetes.

Study Conclusions: The association between bariatric surgery and a lower rate of death from any cause adds to the limited literature describing the beneficial outcomes of these surgical procedures for obese patients.

The following related elements from this issue of JAMA are also available on the For The Media website:

-- Effect of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy vs Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass on Weight Loss at 5 Years Among Patients With Morbid Obesity

-- Effect of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy vs Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass on Weight Loss in Patients With Morbid Obesity

-- Lifestyle Intervention and Medical Management With vs Without Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass and Control of Hemoglobin A , LDL Cholesterol, and Systolic Blood Pressure at 5 Years in the Diabetes Surgery Study

-- Association of Bariatric Surgery vs Medical Obesity Treatment With Long-term Medical Complications and Obesity-Related Comorbidities

-- Editorial: Comparing the Outcomes of Sleeve Gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass for Severe Obesity

For more details and to read the full study, please visit the For The Media website.

Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Want to embed a link to this report in your story? Link will be live at the embargo time http://jamanetwork.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release does well in describing this retrospective cohort study as observational and that a significant limitation is the imbalance that occurs in trying to match surgical and nonsurgical groups by age, sex, body mass index, and diabetes status.
It would have been helpful to make it clear that patients were not assigned randomly, and many surgical candidates were excluded because they could not be matched. These limitations, along with some confounding socioeconomic factors, would have been helpful to include in the bulleted section, “Study Limitations,” which we were happy to see included.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“These people are worried about lung cancer, and now there is an opportunity to offer them something,” said Dr. Mary Reid, an associate professor of oncology at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo.

But health officials involved in the study refused to endorse widespread screening of current or former smokers, saying more analysis of the study’s results is needed to further identify who benefited most. Such an analysis is months away. And they pointed out that the study offers no reassurance about the safety of smoking or the advisability of CT scans for younger smokers or nonsmokers.

“No one should come away from this thinking that it’s now safe to continue to smoke,” said Dr. Harold E. Varmus, director of the National Cancer Institute.

Patients wishing to get a CT lung screen will most likely have to pay the roughly $300 charge themselves, since few insurers pay for such scans unless an illness is suspected. The federal Medicare program will soon reconsider paying for such screens, a Medicare official said.

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, was conducted by the American College of Radiology Imaging Network and the cancer institute. It involved more than 53,000 people ages 55 to 74 who had smoked at least 30 pack-years — one pack a day for 30 years or two packs a day for 15 years. Ex-smokers who had quit within the previous 15 years were included in the group.

Each was given either a standard chest X-ray or a low-dose CT scan at the start of the trial and then twice more over the next two years. Participants were followed for up to five years. There were 354 lung cancer deaths among those who received CT scans and 442 among those who got X-rays. The $250 million study, which began in 2002, was paid for by the cancer institute and carried out at 33 sites.

Its preliminary results were announced days after an independent monitoring board determined that the benefits of CT scans were strong enough to stop the trial. The study will be published in the coming months.

The study found that for every 300 people who were screened, one person lived who would otherwise have died during the study. But one-quarter of those given CT scans were found to have anomalies, nearly all of which were benign. These false signals generally led to more worry, more CT scans and sometimes to lung biopsies and thoracic surgery.

“There are economic, medical and psychological consequences of finding these abnormalities,” Dr. Varmus said.

Deaths due to all causes declined by 7 percent among study participants who received CT scans, suggesting the tests helped to detect other life-threatening diseases besides lung cancer.

Dr. Claudia Henschke, a clinical professor of radiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center and a longtime advocate for use of CT to screen for lung cancer, said the study was likely to have underestimated the benefits of CT scans because participants were screened only three times. Had the screening continued for 10 years, as many as 80 percent of lung cancer deaths could have been averted, she said. Dr. Henschke’s research has been controversial because of its statistical methods and its financing, which included money from a tobacco company. She earns royalties from makers of CT machines.

“What we also have found is that low-dose CT scan gives information on cardiovascular disease, emphysema” and other pulmonary diseases, Dr. Henschke said. “Those are the three big killers of older people. There is just tremendous potential.”

But Dr. Edward F. Patz Jr., professor of radiology at Duke who helped devise the study, said he was far from convinced that a thorough analysis would show that widespread CT screening would prove beneficial in preventing most lung cancer deaths. Dr. Patz said that the biology of lung cancer has long suggested that the size of cancerous lung tumors tells little about the stage of the disease.

“If we look at this study carefully, we may suggest that there is some benefit in high-risk individuals, but I’m not there yet,” Dr. Patz said.

Since 46 million people in the United States smoke and tens of millions more once smoked, a widespread screening program could cost billions annually. Any further refinement of those most at risk could reduce those costs. Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms. Little is known about how the cumulative risks of years of such scans would balance the benefits.

The study’s results could have both legal and political consequences. Suits against tobacco companies have sought to force cigarette makers to pay for annual CT screens of former smokers. But with the science uncertain, those claims have so far been rebuffed. Congress has diverted some research money to create pilot CT lung screening programs, diversions that may gain momentum now.

Some Obama administration officials argued during the debate on the health care law that patients’ health was often harmed by getting too many tests and procedures that, if reduced, would improve health while reducing costs. This study suggests that, at least in lung cancer, spending more on tests saves lives.

Laurie Fenton, president of the Lung Cancer Alliance, which has lobbied for widespread CT lung screening, said the debate about the advisability of such scans is now over.

“The challenge now shifts from proving the efficacy of the method to developing the proper quality standards, infrastructure and guidelines to bring this needed benefit to those at high risk for the disease — now,” Ms. Fenton said.

But Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said no one should rush out and get a CT scan yet because further analysis will better define whom the screening helped.

“Very soon we’ll have an answer about who should be screened and how frequently,” Dr. Bach said, “but we don’t have that answer today.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story describes the trial, including who was enrolled, that they were screened by either chest x-rays or low-dose CT scans, and that they were followed for up to five years. It also notes that early trials of CT scanning of smokers had failed to demonstrate a difference in death rates.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Allos defends the price, saying it made a significant investment to develop the first approved drug for this type of cancer.

“It’s a very aggressive disease, and patients right now have no options,” said James V. Caruso, the chief commercial officer for Allos, a 17-year-old publicly traded company based in Westminster, Colo., that has no other drugs on the market.

Mr. Caruso also said the price of Folotyn was not out of line with that of other drugs for rare cancers. Patients, moreover, are likely to use the drug for only a couple of months because the tumor worsens so quickly, he said. So the total cost of using Folotyn will be less than for many other drugs with lower monthly prices.

“We believe we are fairly priced,” he added, “and we’re benchmarked” against other drugs. In a conference call with analysts last month, Mr. Caruso said Allos had “not had pushback of any type at this point” from insurers.

Some drugs for rare cancers are close to Foltyn’s price. Genzyme’s Clolar for pediatric leukemia costs about $34,000 a week, though the company says that only two weeks of treatment are typically needed. Genzyme’s drug Campath, for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, costs about $5,000 a week for several weeks.

GlaxoSmithKline is charging up to $98,000 for a six-month treatment course of Arzerra, a drug approved in late October for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, which strikes about 15,000 Americans a year. About $60,000 of the cost would be incurred in the first eight weeks, when the drug is given more frequently.

Gloucester Pharmaceuticals, which won approval in November for a drug to treat cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, another rare cancer, declined to discuss what it would charge when that treatment, called Istodax, goes on sale in January.

Despite such comparisons, Dr. Lee N. Newcomer, senior vice president for oncology at the big insurer UnitedHealthcare, called the price of Folotyn “unconscionable.” He said that Folotyn alone would cost as much as UnitedHealthcare now typically spends in total to treat a lymphoma patient from diagnosis until death. That median expenditure now, he said, is $87,000 for a little over a year of treatments.

But Dr. Newcomer said insurers would be obligated to pay for Folotyn because there were no alternatives.

Folotyn has not yet shown an effect on longevity. In the clinical trial that led to approval of the drug, 27 percent of the 109 patients experienced a reduction in tumor size. The reductions lasted a median of 9.4 months.

But considering all the patients in the trial, only 12 percent had a reduction in tumor size that lasted for more than 14 weeks. The trial did not compare Folotyn to another drug or a placebo.

“This drug is not a home run,” Dr. Brad S. Kahl, a lymphoma specialist at the University of Wisconsin, said during a meeting of an advisory committee to the F.D.A. on Sept. 2. “It’s not even a double. It’s a single.”

Saying that even a single was helpful, Dr. Kahl was part of a majority on the panel that recommended approval of the drug, 10 to 4.

But after recently learning what Allos planned to charge for Folotyn, Dr. Kahl said he was “disappointed” by the “excessive” price.

“It dampens my enthusiasm for using that drug,” he said. “It creates these huge ethical quandaries about trying a drug that has a modest benefit for the average patient at enormous expense.”

Folotyn is given by a rapid intravenous procedure once a week for six weeks out of every seven. Even to try the drug for the first seven-week cycle to see if it works would cost over $50,000. In the clinical trial, the median duration of use was 70 days, which would cost roughly $70,000 to $80,000. But some patients used the drug for many months.

In a note to clients in October, Joshua Schimmer, an analyst at Leerink Swann, estimated that a typical treatment would last 3.5 months and cost $126,000, or about $36,000 a month.

For investors, a high price is usually a good thing. Mr. Schimmer’s note was entitled “Folotyn Prices High, Reiterate Outperform.” He estimated annual sales of the drug in the United States reaching about $300 million by 2014.

Patient advocacy groups say that while they wish prices were lower, high prices might be needed to encourage companies to develop new drugs.

“It’s a two-edged sword that we have to live with and deal with,” said Louis J. DeGennaro, chief scientific officer of the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, which has received donations from Allos and other companies. “A peripheral T-cell lymphoma patient,” he said, “at first blush will see this therapy as a very good thing.”

Allos, which is still unprofitable, has lost $350 million since its founding in 1992 and failed to win approval of a previous drug.

“Every dime that goes into the company supports Folotyn,” Mr. Caruso said.

At the time Folotyn was approved in September, stock in Allos briefly peaked above $8.50 but has slipped since then, closing up 16 cents at $6.62, or an increase of nearly 2.5 percent, on Friday.

After the approval, Allos raised $93 million in a secondary stock offering. In the prospectus for that offering, the company said that one of the risks for investors was “the relative price of Folotyn as compared to alternate treatment options.” It said there was a risk it might have to lower the price or offer discounts to successfully market Folotyn.

Like many other companies with high-priced drugs, Allos has established a program to help patients arrange insurance reimbursement. It says it will give the drug free to uninsured patients who cannot pay for it any other way.

And because a patient’s out-of-pocket co-payments alone — Medicare’s is 20 percent — could be thousands of dollars a month for Folotyn, Allos is financing a co-payment assistance program run by the National Organization for Rare Disorders, a patient advocacy group.

While this helps patients, it also helps the company sell more of its drug. If the 20 percent Medicare co-payment is made, then Medicare will pay the other 80 percent of the drug’s price — or about $24,000 a month.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story describes the evidence to support Folotyn, which is rather thin. The story mentions one clinical trial that showed a reduction in tumor size in some participants, but that to date, the drug has not been shown to prolong longevity. The quote from a member of the FDA advisory board that recommended approval provides an excellent overview and counterpoint to the comments of the company spokesperson.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A glass of wine or two a week — and not more than one large glass on any occasion — may be safe during pregnancy, according to a large study just published in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. The British research found no negative effects of such light drinking on 5-year-olds whose mothers had imbibed while pregnant with them. Indeed, these kindergartners were slightly less likely to have behavioral problems and performed somewhat better on cognitive tests than children whose mothers had abstained. (More on Time.com: 5 Pregnancy Taboos Explained (or Debunked))

But this does *not* mean that light drinking in pregnancy is good for your baby. When researchers controlled for factors like maternal education and income, which tend to be higher in light drinkers, it significantly reduced the positive effects associated with alcohol. For example, before adjusting for these kinds of differences between the groups, the researchers found that light drinking was connected with 33% lower rates of overall behavior problems in boys — after the adjustment, that effect fell to 23%.

The study did find negative effects in children whose mothers drank moderately: this was defined as not having more than 3 to 6 British units of alcohol per week or more than 3 to 5 units on a single occasion. (One British unit of alcohol equals a small glass of wine.) Heavier drinking in pregnancy, not surprisingly, resulted in increased levels of behavior problems and lowered cognitive performance among children.

The research included 11,513 children participating in a large U.K. study. The authors had earlier published similar results looking at the data for children in the study when they were 3, finding those whose mothers who didn’t drink had slightly more behavior problems and slightly poorer performance on mental tests than kids born to light drinkers; the results also showed increasingly negative effects of alcohol going from moderate to heavy drinking. Other research has repeatedly shown that heavy, binging patterns of consumption are most dangerous to the developing child. (More on Time.com: If I’m Drunk, Then You Stepped On My Toes On Purpose)

Interestingly, the new study parallels the effects of alcohol on health more generally; lighter drinkers tend to do better than teetotalers while the heaviest drinkers do worse. (But see here for coverage of a study that found even heavy drinkers beat abstainers when it comes to mortality in mid- to late life.)

Yet previous research in the area of maternal drinking has repeatedly found negative effects from even the lowest levels of alcohol consumption during pregnancy. This data is notoriously hard to interpret, however, in part because it is based on women’s self-reports: the public health message against drinking during pregnancy has been so widely adopted that women who do drink may significantly underreport their consumption to researchers. If women who say they are drinking at “light” levels are actually drinking at moderately or heavily, that might make the data on light drinking look more dangerous than they are.



Whatever the case, American health authorities remain united in their advice that no amount of alcohol is safe for the fetus during pregnancy — and anyone who is familiar with fetal alcohol syndrome knows why. But for those women who drink before finding out they’re pregnant or who have an occasional glass of wine afterward, this study can provide reassurance that very low levels of alcohol consumption during pregnancy are unlikely to cause serious problems.

Even More Evidence for the Health Benefits of Drinking

Photos: What Booze Looks like Under a Microscope
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: From the first sentence, this story is more specific and more detailed than the other story we reviewed on this topic. The other story might leave readers with the impression that, while pregnant, they could have two beers, two high balls of whiskey, or two full glasses of wine without incident. This story says "a glass of wine or two a week — and not more than one large glass on any occasion — may be safe during pregnancy". It also takes readers through the current published paper carefully and previous published research that is part of the ongoing study. Unlike the other study reviewed, this story explains how the study determined whether alcohol was having a negative effect and talks about the limitations of the study and the field of research in general. It says, "This data is notoriously hard to interpret, however, in part because it is based on women’s self-reports: the public health message against drinking during pregnancy has been so widely adopted that women who do drink may significantly underreport their consumption to researchers. If women who say they are drinking at “light” levels are actually drinking at moderately or heavily, that might make the data on light drinking look more dangerous than they are." It would have been helpful to describe how the study was done to judge its quality. In fact, it was a well-designed cohort study (following mothers and children over time, starting soon after birth), a more reliable way of assessing cause-and-effect than other types of studies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new pilot study led by McLean Hospital's Ipsit Vahia, MD, medical director of Geriatric Psychiatry Outpatient Services at McLean Hospital, suggests that the use of tablet computers is both a safe and a potentially effective approach to managing agitation among patients with dementia.

"Tablet use as a nonpharmacologic intervention for agitation in older adults, including those with severe dementia, appears to be feasible, safe, and of potential utility," said Vahia. "Our preliminary results are a first step in developing much-needed empirical data for clinicians and caregivers on how to use technology such as tablets as tools to enhance care and also for app developers working to serve the technologic needs of this population."

"Use of Tablet Devices in the Management of Agitation Among Inpatients with Dementia: An Open Label Study" was recently published in the online version of The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. This research builds upon previous studies demonstrating that art, music, and other similar therapies can effectively reduce symptoms of dementia without medication. By using tablet devices to employ these therapies, however, patients and providers also benefit from a computer's inherent flexibility.

"The biggest advantage is versatility," said Vahia. "We know that art therapy can work, music therapy can work. The tablet, however, gives you the option of switching from one app to another easily, modifying the therapy seamlessly to suit the individual. You don't need to invest in new equipment or infrastructure."

Researchers loaded a menu of 70 apps onto the tablets for the study. The apps were freely available on iTunes and varied greatly in their cognitive complexity--from an app that displayed puppy photos to one that featured Sudoku puzzles.

The researchers found that tablet use was safe for every patient, regardless of the severity of their dementia, and that with proper supervision and training, the engagement rate with the devices was nearly 100 percent. The study also found that the tablets demonstrated significant effectiveness in reducing symptoms of agitation, particularly--but not exclusively--among patients with milder forms of dementia.

Vahia cited several examples of the tablet's potential to improve a patient's condition. One particular patient, who only spoke Romanian, was very withdrawn and irritable, and medications were ineffective in controlling his symptoms.

"We started showing him Romanian video clips on YouTube, and his behavior changed dramatically and instantaneously," said Vahia. "His mood improved. He became more interactive. He and his medical support team also started using a translation app so that staff could ask him simple questions in Romanian, facilitating increased interaction. These significant improvements are a clear testament of the tablet's potential as a clinical tool."

Based on such promising outcomes, the Geriatric Psychiatry Outpatient Services clinical team is expanding the use of tablet devices as a means to control agitation in dementia patients at McLean. This will allow researchers to develop more robust data and expand the scope of the study, including a focus on specific clinical factors that may impact how patients with dementia engage with and respond to apps.

McLean Hospital is the largest psychiatric affiliate of Harvard Medical School and a member of Partners HealthCare. In addition to providing a full continuum of psychiatric clinical care, McLean maintains the largest neuroscience and psychiatry research program of any private psychiatric hospital in the United States. McLean's robust research program is backed by more than $40 million in funding from a variety of sources, including foundations, private contributors, National Institutes of Health, United States Department of Defense, and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. For more information about McLean, visit mcleanhospital.org or follow the hospital on Facebook or Twitter.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release clearly states that the study is a “pilot,” which means it is not expected to generate much evidence beyond safety and feasibility. The release also notes that researchers plan to expand use of the tablets in order to gather more data on the intervention’s usefulness.
We would have liked some more detail on the study protocol such as how long did it last? Was it days, weeks or months?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Heart researchers have long known that plaques in coronary arteries start out as pimplelike bumps but get waxy and hard and filled with calcium as time passes. Calcium shows up as white flecks in CT scans. The hard plaques are not the dangerous ones — it is the softer ones that rupture and cause a heart attack. But the amount of calcium in arteries can give a good idea of the presence or extent of coronary artery disease.

Dr. Krumholz and Dr. Khurram Nasir, a preventive cardiologist at Baptist Health South Florida, who conceived the new study, reasoned that research on heart scans had not been designed to help doctors make treatment decisions they face today.

Current guidelines have vastly increased the number of people who are eligible to take statins. Many people, though, are reluctant to take them. So, the investigators asked, could a scan identify those whose actual risk is lower than what was calculated?

The study subjects were nearly 4,000 men and women ages 45 to 84 and included blacks, whites, Hispanics and Asians who were recruited in 2000 through 2002. According to today’s guidelines, half had risk scores high enough that a statin would be recommended or should be considered. But guidelines then were more conservative, and in accordance with them, the subjects did not take the drugs. All had heart scans, and half had no calcium visible on the scans. The subjects were followed for 10 years.

It turned out that the actual incidence of heart attacks or disabling chest pain in those with zero calcium was half or less than what the risk calculator predicted.

For example, a person who, according to the current risk calculator, has a 12 percent risk of a heart attack in the next decade should take a statin, the guidelines say. But if that person has a calcium score of zero, the actual risk turned out to be 4 percent, below the 7.5 percent threshold for recommending a statin according to the guidelines and below the 5 percent risk for considering a statin.

Dr. Nasir said he has been using the study’s findings in his clinic. First, he asks patients for whom statins are recommended according to the current guidelines if they would want to avoid taking the drugs if they turn out to have a calcium score of zero and an actual risk of less than 5 percent. Most tell him that they would. He then sends them for a scan.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story points out that the study was observational, “not the highest level of evidence”. It goes on to explain that since people in the study were not randomly assigned to testing or no testing, the results do not demonstrate that changing current practice would change real health outcomes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the first time, an immune checkpoint inhibitor has been proven to increase survival among patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC), a patient population for whom treatment options are currently limited.

Researchers at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center demonstrated a median overall survival benefit of 25 months with nivolumab, a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved immunotherapy agent, compared with 19.6 months for everolimus, a current standard of care for patients with metastatic kidney cancer.

Published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and being presented this week at a Presidential session of the European Cancer Congress (ECC), the findings of CheckMate-025 provide definitive evidence that an immune checkpoint inhibitor is a valid treatment strategy for patients with advanced RCC, and supports a paradigm change in the standard of care treatment, according to the authors.

Nivolumab, marketed as Opdivo, is currently used to treat metastatic melanoma and advanced non-small cell lung cancer. CheckMate-025 is an example of how investigators are examining approved immunotherapy drugs to determine potential impact on other tumor types.

"Immunotherapy has long been believed to have the potential to make an impact in kidney cancer, but until now we had not been able to demonstrate such a significant survival benefit. We have a real opportunity to change clinical practice for patients when other therapies have failed," said principal investigator Padmanee Sharma, MD, PhD, professor, Departments of Genitourinary Medical Oncology and Immunology and scientific director of the Immunotherapy Platform, part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program.

"Through studies such as CheckMate-025, we are learning to target the patients' immune systems to fight cancer rather than targeting the tumor itself. This is a new way forward."

In the randomized phase III clinical trial, patients whose disease progressed on antiangiogenic therapies were treated with either nivolumab or everolimus. Median overall survival was 5.4 months longer with nivolumab (25 months) compared with everolimus (19.6 months).

The study included 821 patients with advanced RCC across 151 sites in 24 countries in North America, Europe, Australia, South America and Asia. All had previously been treated with one or two antiangiogenic therapies, drugs that inhibit the growth of new blood vessels, a critical component of cancer development. The median duration of treatment was 5.5 months with nivolumab and 3.7 months with everolimus.

In addition to demonstrating increased overall survival, the researchers showed a higher objective response rate - the number of patients who respond to the treatment - with nivolumab. Of the 821 patients enrolled, 25% responded to nivolumab versus 5% of those treated with everolimus.

Among these patients, partial responses were observed in 24% of those treated with nivolumab and 5% of patients treated with everolimus; complete responses were observed in 1% (four patients) treated with nivolumab and fewer than 1% (two patients) treated with everolimus.

Further, among patients who showed a response, the impact was "durable," according to Sharma. While median progression-free survival appeared similar between treatments (4.6 months and 4.4 months with nivolumab and everolimus, respectively), when researchers explored a delayed progression-free survival benefit at six months, they reported 15.6 months with nivolumab and 11.7 months with everolimus. This ongoing response was observed among 44% of those treated with nivolumab and 36% of those treated with everolimus. More than 12 months later, 31% and 27% of patients treated with nivolumab and everolimus, respectively, continued to show a response.

For some patients, even after treatment with nivolumab ended, response to the drug continued. "The immune system has a memory, so even when treatment has stopped, the body continues to exhibit a long-term response - meaning these patients can live normal lives without progressive disease."

Finally, the investigators observed fewer treatment-related adverse events, including fatigue and nausea, and improved quality of life with nivolumab.

These results led the trial to be halted early in July 2015 when an assessment conducted by the independent Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) concluded that the study met its primary endpoint, demonstrating superior overall survival in patients receiving nivolumab.

Nivolumab blocks a T cell inhibitory signaling pathway known as PD-1 that controls the immune response and can prevent the immune system from attacking cancerous cells. The drug is approved for metastatic melanoma patients who show no response to other treatments and for advanced squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with progression on or after chemotherapy. Based on the CheckMate-025 findings, earlier this month (September 16) the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation to nivolumab for the potential indication of metastatic RCC. The Breakthrough Therapy designation is intended to expedite the development and review of medicines with early signals of clinical benefit in serious diseases to help ensure patients have access to new therapies as soon as possible.

"The next questions are, 'how do we increase the number of patients who respond?' and 'how do we move immune checkpoint agents into the frontline setting?' - not just using them when other therapies have failed but intervening earlier," said Sharma. "We're studying combination therapies to answer these questions and believe these studies will change the way we treat many cancers."

Each year, there are 338,000 new cases of RCC diagnosed worldwide; it is the most common type of kidney cancer among adults and approximately 30% of patients present with metastatic disease at diagnosis, according to the scientific literature. A number of targeted therapies have been approved in recent years for the treatment of advanced RCC, with five antiangiogenic and two mTOR inhibitors (including everolimus; these drugs block a protein that regulates cell growth, proliferation, survival, etc.), showing benefits in pivotal phase III trials.

"While these treatments have changed the therapeutic landscape for RCC, they are associated with limited survival following emerging resistance to therapy," said Sharma. "The overall survival benefit shown in this study sets a new benchmark for therapeutic strategies for advanced RCC patients in need of a second-line therapy."

Sharma is scientific director of MD Anderson's immunotherapy platform, which provides immune monitoring expertise to MD Anderson's 85 clinical trials of immunotherapy drugs as single agents or in combinations. Platform investigators conduct research to understand which patients will benefit from immunotherapy, to evaluate effective drug combinations and to identify new molecules that block or stimulate immune response.

The platform is part of MD Anderson's Moon Shots Program, which is designed to harness scientific knowledge and develop new technologies that will dramatically reduce cancer deaths through prevention, early detection and treatment.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release provides a good deal of information on the study design, number of subjects treated in each arm and provides additional comments on secondary outcome measures.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- DNA testing for the human papillomavirus should replace the Pap smear as the main way to screen women for cervical cancer, according to Italian researchers.

Their recommendation is based on a study that found that the human papillomavirus (HPV) test prevented more cases of cervical cancer than the conventional Pap smear. Results of the study were published online Jan. 19 in The Lancet Oncology.

The HPV test should become the screening tool of choice for women 35 and older, the researchers said. It could be done less frequently than the Pap test, which could be used only in women who have tested positive for HPV, they said.

The Pap smear, first introduced in the 1950s, looks for changes in the cervix that could lead to cervical cancer. The HPV test works a step further back in the process, looking to see if women are infected with HPV.

HPV causes cervical cancer, which remains a significant health problem, particularly in less resource-rich areas of the world.

DNA testing for HPV, though, does have drawbacks -- namely that it is less specific, meaning it is likely to pick up more false-positives, than a Pap smear. This results in many more callbacks for women to undergo further testing.

Using HPV as a primary screening tool results in a callback rate of about 25 to 30 percent, said Dr. Mark Einstein, a gynecologic oncologist and director of clinical research at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City. By contrast, Pap smears have a callback rate of about 5 to 7 percent, he said.

For their study, the Italian researchers compared HPV testing alone with HPV testing plus a Pap smear in 94,370 women aged 25 to 60 years old.

During the first phase of the study, women 35 to 60 who tested positive for HPV were given a cervical examination, called a colposcopy. Younger women got a colposcopy if their Pap smear was abnormal or if HPV results were positive several times, indicating that their body had not been able to clear the infection.

Screening for HPV DNA appeared more effective in older women, but the testing in younger women led to over-diagnosis of a particular type of cervical lesion, the study found.

Not all experts agree, though, that current practice would change based on the study's findings alone.

"I don't think this is going to change any strategies we do now, but I do think it's more evidence that HPV testing can predict who's going to develop cervical cancer," said Dr. Jay Brooks, chairman of hematology/oncology at Ochsner Health System in Baton Rouge, La. "HPV testing, in certain populations, can really predict who would benefit from treatment."

Einstein had a somewhat different take on the findings. "This shows that the strategy does work," he said. "It does make sense, it's cost-effective and effective. This is happening in single-payer health systems which have national screening. We're behind in the U.S."

The strategy makes particular sense in less-developed countries, where women could do an HPV test themselves with a "self swab" and then send the swab in for analysis, Einstein said.

In the United States, cervical cancer screening guidelines were changed in November. Women now are being told that they should get their first screening for cervical cancer -- including a Pap test -- at age 21. The previous recommendation was to start Pap tests three years after becoming sexually active or at age 21, whichever came first.

And, rather than have an annual Pap test, most women need to be screened every other year or less, depending on their age, according to the new guidelines.

Cervical cancer rates have dropped more than 50 percent in the last 30 years in the United States, according to the guidelines. That decline has been largely attributed to widespread use of the Pap test.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on cervical cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the current study and the strength of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a landmark medical clash pitting the diagnostic merits of fancy tech versus vintage exercise machines, the new toys and old ways finished in a dead heat, cardiologists reported Saturday.

The first showdown pitting 3-D, heart-imaging exams against older stress tests atop treadmills or stationary bikes found that among 10,003 heart patients, their rates of eventually having serious heart events were the same — no matter which method doctors used to check their tickers, researchers said.

Even more surprising, the rate of bad outcomes among the heart patients studied were extremely low. In both test groups, only about 3 percent of the people had heart attacks, suffered "major" complications, needed hospitalization for chest pain or died during two years of tracking, researchers found.

Which prompts a big question: Could the use of stress tests or expensive scans become less frequent for heart patients, replaced by more watchful waiting?

"We were very pleasantly surprised," said Dr. Pamela Douglas, Ursula Geller professor of research in cardiovascular diseases at Duke University, and the study’s lead author.

Results of the federally funded trial — Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain (PROMISE) — were presented at the American College of Cardiology’s 64th Annual Scientific Session in San Diego. Findings also were published the New England Journal of Medicine.

"Knowing how well the patients did in spite having a very high cardiovascular-risk burden opens up the door to thinking differently about how we might manage those patients. And, certainly, one option is watchful waiting," Douglas said in an interview. "We now have the data to support that as a reasonable way to go for a lot of patients. We didn’t before."

The 10,000-plus patients, who visited 193 health centers in the U.S. and Canada, had no prior diagnosis of coronary artery disease. But they had new symptoms that caused physicians to suspect heart disease — and nearly all had at least one risk factor like high blood pressure, diabetes or a history of smoking.

Half were randomly selected to get a computed tomographic angiography (CTA), which creates a 3-D image of the heart's arteries, allowing physicians to spot narrowing. The rest took stress tests — either an exercise electrocardiogram, a stress echocardiography or a nuclear stress test, which uses radioactive dye. Stress tests measure the heart's response to exertion, letting doctors see or hear any disease.

"The remarkable thing about the study is ... these were quite high-risk patients, but the actual [bad] event rate was very low ... It is a real testament to how far we’ve come in the treatment of patients with suspected coronary disease," said Dr. Steven Nissen, department chair of cardiovascular medicine at the Cleveland Clinic. He was not part of the study.

Prevention tactics do seem to be working: Lowering cholesterol through diet and medicine, keeping blood pressure in check, and helping people to stop smoking.

"Traditionally, when you come in with chest pain, some sort of stress test or CT angiogram will be performed," Nissen said. "And I wonder if it's worth doing those tests when rates of cardiac events are so low."

Until this study, doctors have been "guessing" which form of those two diagnostic tests is best, Douglas said.

And while there's often no wrong choice between CTAs and stress tests, the new findings underscore a vital nuance, she added.

CTAs, the study found, result in fewer instances of patients with suspected heart issues undergoing unneeded catheterization procedures — only to later learn they had no artery problems.

"If you have chest pains and you needed a test," Douglas said, "and if I said to you: 'Either one of these two tests will be equally effective in preventing heart attack or death, but this one will have less chance of going to the cath lab if you don’t have blockages,' which one would you pick?"

Each year, about 4 million Americans report heart symptoms such as chest pain or shortness of breath.

But one Cleveland Clinic patient epitomizes a difference between CTAs and stress tests — and he does so just by being alive.

At age 48, David, an electrical engineer, was in great condition, biking 50 miles on a weekend. Be he'd been feeling vague sensations for a year, including chest tightness and heart palpitations. (He did not want his last name published). He easily passed several stress tests on treadmills.

But — partly because his mother had died of coronary artery disease at age 49 — David remained unconvinced by those results. He underwent a CTA at Cleveland Clinic, and it showed severely blocked arteries. He soon underwent a bypass surgery. He is healthy today, now 50.

As a result, however, David's two brothers, both close to his age, were convinced to undergo CTAs. Both were found to have blocked arteries, also requiring immediate surgeries.

"None of us had any indications," David said. "Just because I had a CTA, that had a domino effect to my brothers getting it, and it very well saved all three of our lives."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article offers reasonable detail about the study methods, including the large sample size (more than 10,000 heart patients) and patients’ random placement into one of the two stress test conditions. It fails to explain that the study monitored incidence of problems for only two years after tests, information that was provided in the press release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But it's not clear that women concerned strictly about breast cancer will line up for this drug, either. A closer look at the recent study suggests that raloxifene's advantages may not be as great as the government announcement implied. Some cancer experts were less than enthusiastic, and patient advocates were downright skeptical.

"The outcome of the study is not as clear cut as we might have hoped for," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society. "It will take some time for experts to review the data to determine which of the two treatments is preferable."

Fran Visco, president of the National Breast Cancer Coalition, said the new study had been hyped adding, "We have many concerns about it on many levels."

Another group, Breast Cancer Action, said, "We are very concerned that treating risk as a medical condition will result in substituting one disease for another."

The study included nearly 20,000 women 35 and older who were past menopause and had an increased risk of developing breast cancer. To qualify, their risk had to be at least that of an average 60- to 64-year-old woman — a 1.66 percent chance of getting the disease within 5 years. On average, the participants actually had more than twice that risk, around 4 percent, meaning that 40 of 1,000 would be affected. (Women can quickly figure out their own risk at the Web site cancer.gov/bcrisktool).

Half the participants took one drug, and half the other for about five years. Their rates of invasive breast cancer were the same, 163 cases for tamoxifen and 167 for raloxifene — about half as many as would have been expected without treatment.

So raloxifene looked just as good as tamoxifen. Even better news, the cancer institute said, was that those taking raloxifene "had 36 percent fewer uterine cancers and 29 percent fewer blood clots." Based on those findings, it is easy to see why raloxifene was declared the winner.

But numbers can be tricky. Expressed as percentages, the differences between the drugs for uterine cancer and blood clots sound large.

"But the actual numbers are small," Dr. Lichtenfeld said.

Among women taking tamoxifen in the study, 36 of 4,732 got uterine cancer, while for raloxifene the number was 23 of 4,712. (Women who had had hysterectomies were not counted.) As for blood clots, there were 141 in the 9,726 women on tamoxifen and 100 in the 9,745 on raloxifene

"Women who took raloxifene did get uterine cancer, and they did have blood clots," Dr. Lichtenfeld said. "Any suggestion that tamoxifen is the only drug saddled with getting these diseases is not accurate."

More important, the difference between the numbers of side effects was not statistically significant, meaning that it could have occurred by chance and that the drugs could be similar or even the same. That fact was not stated in the news release, and the researchers mentioned it only briefly during the news conference, calling the results "borderline" significant.

Many researchers say that results don't count unless they pass the statistical tests. But Dr. Leslie Ford, an associate director for clinical research at the cancer institute, said that the differences could not be ignored because they came so near to being significant. Had the study gone on a little longer, they might have crossed the line, she said.

Another issue is that the message from the cancer institute seemed to play down a shortcoming of raloxifene that cancer doctors consider important. The institute emphasized that raloxifene lowered the risk of "invasive" breast cancer, tumors that have penetrated surrounding tissue and that have the potential to spread and turn deadly.

But raloxifene did not prevent two other serious breast conditions, whereas tamoxifen did reduce their risk by 50 percent. Those conditions, sometimes called noninvasive breast cancers, are L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., for lobular and ductal carcinomas in situ. Lobular growths increase the likelihood of invasive cancer, and ductal ones can become invasive. D.C.I.S. is often treated like breast cancer, with surgery and radiation.

"D.C.I.S. is not inconsequential," said Dr. Lichtenfeld, adding that it leads some women to have both breasts removed. Since tamoxifen lowers the risks of both invasive and noninvasive tumors, he said, it "has a broader spectrum of activity against breast cancer."

Dr. Larry Norton, a breast cancer expert at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, said he also found it worrisome that raloxifene did not share tamoxifen's ability to prevent the noninvasive growths.

When it came to L.C.I.S. and D.C.I.S., the difference between the two drugs was statistically significant, meaning it was likely to be real and not due to chance. Yet that distinction was not pointed out in the news release, and, Dr. Lichtenfeld noted, it was "de-emphasized" during the news conference.

But Dr. Ford of the cancer institute said raloxifene's ability to prevent invasive cancers was more important.

"Invasive cancer is what kills you," she said, adding that only about 10 percent of D.C.I.S. turn invasive, and that those that do can be treated. She called it "twisted logic" to dwell on tamoxifen's superior ability to prevent the noninvasive cancers because, she said, "We're not preventing noninvasive cancers because nobody's taking tamoxifen anyway."

Given that there are shades of gray and room for debate about these findings, some critics questioned the way they were made public.

The results were announced by the cancer institute in a news release and a telephone conference for news reporters. Contrary to usual practice, the complete data had not yet been revealed to scientists or published in a medical journal, though the institute said it intended to do so. Officials said they announced the findings before publishing them because they had implications for public health.

Ms. Visco said, "How is it ethical to do that, to make this much hype around something that is not a health emergency, and you can't check their data?"

She said she also worried that the announcement might have left the impression that the drugs could prevent breast cancer entirely.

"It's not prevention," Ms. Visco said. "It's risk reduction, short term, for a subset of women we cannot identify."

The concern is that many women would have to take tamoxifen or raloxifene for a few to benefit. In 1,000 high-risk women like those in the study, for instance, without treatment 40 would be expected to develop invasive breast cancer over the next five years. If all 1,000 were treated, only 20 cases would occur.

But since there is no way to predict who will actually get cancer, everyone has to be treated, meaning that 980 will be exposed to the drug's risks but will get no cancer benefit.

"The hope is that at some point we'll be able to pinpoint who really is at high risk of breast cancer and then we'll know what to do," Ms. Visco said. "But we're not anywhere near there."

In the meantime, Dr. Ford said, at least tamoxifen and raloxifene give women at risk the chance to do something. She compared the drugs to statins and blood pressure drugs, which people take even though they feel well, to lower their risks of heart attacks and strokes. But others argue that heart attacks are far more common than breast cancer, and the drugs to prevent them much safer.

To Dr. Norton, the most important conclusion to be drawn from the study is that more research on breast cancer prevention is needed. He said the next step should be to test another class of drugs called aromatase inhibitors, already in use to treat breast cancer, to see if they can do better at risk reduction than tamoxifen or raloxifene.

"Until we have zero cancer," he said, "I'm not going to make any claims about a great advance."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the design of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Eric Rowe turned 50, the question was not whether the Washington lawyer would be screened for colon cancer, but how. His wife had undergone a colonoscopy, the gold-standard exam that costs about $1,500, but Rowe's internist recommended an alternative that was less invasive and expensive: a virtual colonoscopy, which uses three-dimensional images from a CT scan to detect benign polyps or cancers.

"It sounded good to me," said Rowe, pleased that he could schedule the $800 procedure for 7:45 a.m. at a downtown medical building. Unlike standard colonoscopy, generally performed under anesthesia, in which a long, flexible scope is inserted into the rectum and snaked through the large intestine to find and snip out polyps, the new procedure doesn't require a ride home or a day off. Rowe planned to be at his desk an hour or so later.

Invented 16 years ago by a radiologist who got the idea while playing video games on a flight simulator during advanced training at Johns Hopkins, virtual colonoscopy has become an increasingly popular alternative to standard, or optical, colonoscopy, which is typically performed by a gastroenterologist. Initially regarded as a high-tech novelty, the new procedure has in recent months received key endorsements as a first-line screening test from influential medical groups, notably the American Cancer Society, after several large studies found it to be effective at finding large polyps.

Like other mass screening tests including mammography, the overarching question is whether the benefits of virtual colonoscopy outweigh the risks.

Its supporters, many of them radiologists who read CT scans, tout virtual colonoscopy as a more palatable alternative that has the potential to boost low rates of screening. One of the most common and deadliest malignancies, colon cancer can be prevented -- or even cured -- if detected early. Currently about half of Americans over 50 are screened for the disease; some shun traditional colonoscopy, which is the only way to remove polyps, because of its invasive nature.

"This is a really good test that's going to find way more cancer than optical colonoscopy," said Mark Klein of Washington Radiology Associates, who has performed more than 1,200 virtual colonoscopies since 2002, Rowe's among them. "Is it perfect? No. But no test is."

The prospects for significant expansion of the procedure, which is covered by a growing number of insurance companies, have collided with a large and unexpected roadblock. In February, officials at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced a preliminary decision not to cover the procedure as a mass screening test for Medicare recipients.

CMS officials, who are scheduled to issue their final ruling May 12, cited reservations expressed by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of health experts, and concluded that there is insufficient evidence that virtual colonoscopy would benefit Medicare recipients. CMS cited concerns about radiation exposure and the number of patients who would require follow-up colonoscopies to remove polyps, as well as the inability of CT scans to reliably detect small or flat growths.

Medicare's decision has sparked a furious lobbying campaign. More than 40 members of Congress have signed letters urging federal officials to reconsider, and the dispute has split doctors in the same specialty: the American Gastroenterological Association favors Medicare coverage, while the American College of Gastroenterology does not.

In many ways, the debate mirrors some of the complexities inherent in overhauling health care, a top priority of the Obama administration. At issue is whether virtual colonoscopy will enhance quality or whether it is, in the words of one physician blogger, "a proxy for high-tech excesses."

"CMS made the right decision," said John Petrini, a Santa Barbara, Calif., gastroenterologist who heads the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. Why, he asks, should patients undergo two tests when one is sufficient?

Klein disagrees. "They got it completely wrong," he said. "Some people will die from that decision, completely unnecessarily," because they won't get a standard colonoscopy.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the evidence to support the procedure and cites conflicting conclusions from two different organizations – the American Cancer Society and the USPSTF.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EAST HANOVER, N.J., June 22, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- A new analysis published today in JAMA Cardiology has found that timely and broad adoption of Entresto® (sacubitril/valsartan) by all eligible heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) could prevent or postpone more than 28,000 deaths each year in the US alone.1 This analysis, based on an application of the results of PARADIGM-HF to published heart failure statistics, is the first to quantify the possible impact of Entresto's potential benefit in reducing death.1

Heart failure is a chronic condition that contributes to more than 300,000 deaths in the US every year.4 About half of people with heart failure have HFrEF.5 This new analysis estimates that as many as 28,484 deaths in HFrEF patients annually could be prevented or postponed with optimal use of Entresto (with sensitivity analyses demonstrating a range of 18,230 to 41,017).1

Further, the study suggests that delaying routine use of Entresto in clinical practice could have a substantial negative effect on patients, given the expected risk-benefit profile, as it could result in failure to prevent tens of thousands of deaths.1 These findings demonstrate the significant survival benefits Entresto could offer to those living with HFrEF, if patients in the group defined by the authors were given access to treatment.1 The study authors stated that nearly 84% of HFrEF patients – 2.2 million people – may be candidates for treatment with Entresto.1

Heart failure is a life-threatening condition and despite available medicines, about half of patients diagnosed with heart failure die within 5 years.4,6,7 According to the study authors, these findings may substantially impact the national health of the HFrEF population, offering significant clinical benefit in preventing or postponing death when applied in clinical practice.1

"This expert analysis adds to the already compelling case for the treatment of heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction with Entresto," said Fabrice Chouraqui, president of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. "In addition to survival benefits, the study also recognizes other treatment effects of Entresto, particularly in reducing HF hospitalizations.1 Coupled with the recent Class I recommendation, the strongest endorsement, in the focused update to the US HF Guideline,2 these findings underscore the potential of Entresto as a standard therapy for chronic HFrEF patients."

In a separate analysis published in the same issue of JAMA Cardiology, researchers used data from the PARADIGM-HF trial to model the health consequences and cost-effectiveness of Entresto over a 30-year time period.3 They compared Entresto to the ACE-inhibitor enalapril and found Entresto was associated with more than a year longer average survival time, and that it was cost-effective compared to enalapril when these medications were used with other standard of care therapies.3 For every 1,000 patients treated with Entresto vs. enalapril, potentially 59.7 HF hospital admissions could be averted per each year alive in the model.3 In addition, Entresto increased life expectancy at an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio consistent with other high-value widely accepted cardiovascular interventions such as implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) and cholesterol-lowering statins before they became generic.3

About Heart Failure

Heart failure is a debilitating and life-threatening condition, which impacts nearly 6 million Americans and is the leading cause of hospitalization among Americans over the age of 65.4,8 About half of people with heart failure have heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF).5 Reduced ejection fraction means the heart does not contract with enough force, so less blood is pumped out.9 Heart failure presents a major and growing health-economic burden that currently exceeds $30 billion in the United States, which accounts for both direct and indirect costs.10

About Entresto

Entresto is a twice-a-day medicine that reduces the strain on the failing heart. It does this by enhancing the protective neurohormonal systems (Natriuretic Peptide system) while simultaneously inhibiting the harmful effects of the overactive renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).11 Other heart failure medicines only block the harmful effects of the overactive RAAS.12 Entresto contains the neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril, and the angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) valsartan.11

Entresto is indicated in the US to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and hospitalization for heart failure in patients with chronic heart failure (NYHA Class II-IV) and reduced ejection fraction.11 Entresto is usually administered in conjunction with other heart failure therapies, in place of an Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB).11 Entresto film-coated tablets are available in three dosage strengths: 24/26 mg, 49/51 mg, and 97/103 mg (sacubitril/valsartan).11 These doses are referred to as 50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg in the clinical trial literature including the New England Journal of Medicine publication of the results of PARADIGM-HF. The target treatment dose of Entresto is 97/103 mg twice daily.11

Novartis is committed to providing patients with affordable access and resources through Entresto Central. For more information, please call 1-888-ENTRESTO or visit www.entresto.com.

IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION 

Entresto can harm or cause death to an unborn baby. Patients should talk to their doctor about other ways to treat heart failure if they plan to become pregnant. If a patient gets pregnant while taking Entresto, she should tell her doctor right away.

Patients are not to take Entresto if they are allergic to sacubitril or valsartan or any of the ingredients in Entresto; have had an allergic reaction including swelling of the face, lips, tongue, throat or trouble breathing while taking a type of medicine called angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB); or take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto for at least 36 hours before or after they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients should talk with their doctor or pharmacist before taking Entresto if they are not sure if they take an ACE inhibitor medicine. Patients are not to take Entresto if they have diabetes and take a medicine that contains aliskiren.

Before they take Entresto, patients should tell their doctor about all of their medical conditions, including if they have kidney or liver problems; are pregnant or plan to become pregnant; are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Patients should either take Entresto or breastfeed. They should not do both.

Patients should tell their doctor about all the medicines they take, including prescription and over-the-counter medicines, vitamins, and herbal supplements. They should especially tell their doctor if they take potassium supplements or a salt substitute; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); lithium; or other medicines for high blood pressure or heart problems such as an ACE inhibitor, ARB, or aliskiren.

Entresto may cause serious side effects including serious allergic reactions causing swelling of the face, lips, tongue, and throat (angioedema) that may cause trouble breathing and death. Patients are to get emergency medical help right away if they have symptoms of angioedema or trouble breathing. Patients are not to take Entresto again if they have had angioedema while taking Entresto. People who are black or who have had angioedema may have a higher risk of having angioedema if they take Entresto. Entresto may cause low blood pressure (hypotension). Patients are to call their doctor if they become dizzy or lightheaded, or they develop extreme fatigue. Entresto may cause kidney problems or an increased amount of potassium in the blood.

The most common side effects were low blood pressure, high potassium, cough, dizziness, and kidney problems.

Please see full Prescribing Information, including Boxed WARNING available at http://www.pharma.us.novartis.com/product/pi/pdf/entresto.pdf.

Patients are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit www.fda.gov/medwatch, or call 1-800-FDA-1088.

Disclaimer 

The foregoing release contains forward-looking statements that can be identified by words such as "could," "potential," "call for," "accelerate," "possible," "suggests," "expected," "may," "compelling," "endorsement," "potentially," "growing," "committed," or similar terms, or by express or implied discussions regarding potential new indications or labeling for Entresto, or regarding potential future revenues from Entresto. You should not place undue reliance on these statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of management regarding future events, and are subject to significant known and unknown risks and uncertainties. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. There can be no guarantee that Entresto will be submitted or approved for any additional indications or labeling in any market, or at any particular time. Nor can there be any guarantee that Entresto will be commercially successful in the future. In particular, management's expectations regarding Entresto could be affected by, among other things, the uncertainties inherent in research and development, including unexpected clinical trial results and additional analysis of existing clinical data; unexpected regulatory actions or delays or government regulation generally; the company's ability to obtain or maintain proprietary intellectual property protection; general economic and industry conditions; global trends toward health care cost containment, including ongoing pricing pressures; unexpected safety, quality or manufacturing issues, and other risks and factors referred to in Novartis AG's current Form 20-F on file with the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Novartis is providing the information in this press release as of this date and does not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statements contained in this press release as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.

About Novartis

Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation researches, develops, manufactures and markets innovative medicines aimed at improving patients' lives. We offer a broad range of medicines for cancer, cardiovascular disease, endocrine disease, inflammatory disease, infectious disease, neurological disease, organ transplantation, respiratory disease, eye and ear care and skin conditions. The company's mission is to improve people's lives by pioneering novel healthcare solutions.

Located in East Hanover, NJ Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation is an affiliate of Novartis AG, which provides innovative healthcare solutions that address the evolving needs of patients and societies. Headquartered in Basel, Switzerland, Novartis offers a diversified portfolio to best meet these needs: innovative medicines, eye care and cost-saving generic pharmaceuticals. Novartis is the only global company with leading positions in these areas. In 2015, the Group achieved net sales of USD 49.4 billion, while R&D throughout the Group amounted to approximately USD 8.9 billion (USD 8.7 billion excluding impairment and amortization charges). Novartis Group companies employ approximately 118,000 full-time-equivalent associates. Novartis products are available in more than 180 countries around the world. For more information, please visit http://www.novartis.com

Novartis is on Twitter. Sign up to follow @Novartis at http://twitter.com/novartis.
• Fonarow GC, Hernandez AF, Solomon SD, et al. Potential Mortality Reduction with Optimal Implementation of Angiotensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor Therapy in Heart Failure. JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-4. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1724
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey Jr DE, Colvin MM, Drazner, MH, Filippatos G, Fonarow GC, Givertz MM, Hollenberg SM, Lindenfeld J, Masoudi FA, McBride, PE, Peterson PN, Stevenson LW, Westlake C, 2016 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update on New Pharmacological Therapy for Heart Failure: An Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure, Journal of the American College of Cardiology (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.05.011.
• Gaziano TA, Fonarow GC, et al. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Sacubitril/Valsartan versus Enalapril in Heart Failure Patients with Reduced Ejection Fraction in . JAMA Cardiol. 2016;1(6):1-7. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2016.1747
• Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2016 Update: A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;133;e38-e360. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000350.
• Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:251–259.
• Roger VL, Weston SA, Redfield MM, et al. Trends in heart failure incidence and survival community-based population. JAMA. 2004;292:344-350
• Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG, et al. Long term trends in the incidence and survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(18):1397-1422.
• Weir LM, Pfuntner A, Maeda J, et al. HCUP facts and figures: statistics on hospital-based care in , 2009. : Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2011.
• Heidenreich PA, Albert NM, , et al. Forecasting the impact of heart failure in : a policy statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:606-619.
• Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240-e327.

For questions about the site or required registration, please contact: journalisthelp@thenewsmarket.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release provides some detail on the statistical model used and the analysis findings. Data was drawn from a previous trial to model health outcomes and cost-effectiveness of the drug over a 30-year period.
The release would have been stronger with a discussion of possible limitations of the analysis. Patients out in the real world tend to be older, sicker, and have other differences compared with those who participate in clinical trials, so it’s not clear that the benefits seen in the trial can be extrapolated to the broader population. In the study itself, the researchers mention several issues that could throw their findings off, but the release doesn’t address them. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ROSEMONT, Ill. (May 1, 2018)--An estimated 45 percent of people are at risk of developing knee osteoarthritis (OA) in their lifetime. According to a network meta-analysis research article published in the May 1, 2018 issue of the Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (JAAOS), the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) naproxen was ranked most effective in individual knee OA treatment for improving both pain and function, and is considered a relatively safe and low-cost treatment method.

Nonsurgical treatments for knee OA supported by previous research evidence include strength training, low-impact aerobic exercises, NSAIDs, and weight loss in individuals with a body mass index over 25. This new research analyzed data from multiple trials to determine the relative effectiveness of various nonsurgical treatments for knee OA. The treatments that were compared and ranked included acetaminophen; ibuprofen; intra-articular (IA) or joint injections of cortisone; platelet-rich plasma (PRP); hyaluronic acid (HA); several NSAIDs, such as naproxen, celecoxib, and diclofenac; and both oral and IA placebo.

"This is the first comprehensive mixed-comparison analysis comparing best-evidence scientific research and excluding lower quality studies that can bias the outcomes," said lead author and orthopaedic surgeon David Jevsevar, MD, MBA. "Using a statistical ranking technique, we worked to provide evidence regarding which of the most common NSAIDs are most likely to decrease pain and improve function, and we attempted to fill in the gaps in evidence for more inconclusive treatments such as HA, PRP, and corticosteroids."

Authors analyzed 53 randomized controlled trials that examined knee OA treatments for at least 28 days and included a minimum of 30 participants per study group. Knee OA treatments were ranked on a scale of one to five, with one being the most effective. They found the following:
• For pain reduction, cortisone injections provided the greatest short-term (4 to 6 weeks) pain relief, followed by ibuprofen, PRP injections, naproxen, and celecoxib.
• Naproxen ranked the highest for probability for improving function, followed by diclofenac, celecoxib, ibuprofen, and PRP injections.
• Naproxen was ranked the most effective individual knee OA treatment for improving both pain and function followed by cortisone injections, PRP injections, ibuprofen and celecoxib.
• HA injections did not achieve a rank in the top five treatments for pain, function, or combined pain and function. An analysis of 12 articles also found that results with HA are not significantly different from those with IA placebo for treatment of knee OA.

"Because knee OA has both a high disease burden and high treatment costs, additional prospective studies using similar outcomes, timelines, and measures of clinically important changes are needed," explained Dr. Jevsevar. "While the information in this analysis is helpful to physicians, patients also can benefit from these findings and use it with their doctors to weigh all possible treatment options."

Although the use of NSAIDs for arthritic conditions such as knee OA has potential risks, including heart attack and stroke, existing evidence indicates that naproxen has less potential for adverse cardiovascular events.

More information about the AAOS and JAAOS

Follow the AAOS on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram 

Follow the conversation about JAAOS on Twitter

From the Department of Orthopaedics, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH (Dr. Jevsevar), American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, Rosemont, IL (Mr. Shores, Mr. Mullen, Ms. Schulte, and Dr. Cummins), and Franciscan Orthopedic Associates, Tacoma, WA (Dr. Brown). J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2018; 26:325-336. DOI: 10.5435/JAAOS-D-17-00318
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release includes key attributes of the methods the authors used to compare the results of clinical trials. These methods are what make this report potentially newsworthy.
The sort of network meta-analysis the researchers used is a powerful method for combining the results of many individual trials. However, the sophistication and complexity of the method also mean that the conclusions depend on the skill, discipline and effort of the researchers. Indeed, the authors criticize an earlier network meta-analysis for including lower-quality studies. Journalists reporting on this study should seek out qualified independent sources in order to get informed perspectives about how well this meta-analysis was performed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
U.S. prisons are experimenting with a high-priced monthly injection that could help addicted inmates stay off opioids after they are released, but skeptics question its effectiveness and say the manufacturer has aggressively marketed an unproven drug to corrections officials.

A single shot of Vivitrol, given in the buttocks, lasts for four weeks and eliminates the need for the daily doses common with alternatives such as methadone. But each shot costs as much as $1,000, and because the drug has a limited track record, experts do not agree on how well it works.

Proponents say Vivitrol could save money compared with the cost of locking up a drug offender — about $25,000 a year for each inmate at the Sheridan Correctional Center, 70 miles southwest of Chicago.

Dr. Joshua Lee, of New York University’s medical school, said more evidence is needed to determine whether the medication can help substantial numbers of people and whether it’s worth paying for, but the early results are encouraging.

“It sounds good, and for some of us, it feels like the right thing to do,” said Lee, a leading researcher on the treatment.

Vivitrol is emerging as the nation searches for ways to ease an opioid epidemic that affects more than 2 million Americans and an estimated 15 percent of the U.S. prison population. Many experts view prisons — where addiction’s human toll can be seen most clearly — as a natural place to discover what works.

Christopher Wolf had already served prison time for nonviolent crimes when he was ordered into treatment for a heroin addiction by a judge who suggested Vivitrol. Three months later, the 36-year-old from Centerville, Ohio, is clean and working full time as a cook.

He now suggests the medication to other addicts.

“I don’t have cravings,” Wolf said. “I see how much better life is. It gets better really fast.”

Vivitrol targets receptors in the brain’s reward system, blocking the high and extinguishing urges. In some programs, prisoners get an injection before release, then follow-up shots from any clinic.

For decades, researchers have recognized addiction as a relapsing brain disease with medication an important part of therapy. But most jails and prisons reject methadone and buprenorphine, the other government-approved medications for opioid addiction, because they are habit-forming and can be abused.

Just ask Joshua Meador, 28, an inmate at Sheridan who hopes to get into the Vivitrol program before his release in January. Before incarceration, he abused both older treatment drugs. When given take-home doses of methadone for the weekend, he would sell them for heroin.

“When I’m on Vivitrol, I can’t get high,” he said. The drug has no street value or abuse potential.

“You couldn’t design something better for the criminal justice system,” said David Farabee of the University of California at Los Angeles, who leads a Vivitrol study in a New Mexico jail. “There’s been pushback with other medications, people saying, ‘We’re just changing one drug for another.’ That argument goes out the window when you’re talking about a blocker” like Vivitrol.

Prison systems in Illinois, Vermont, Wyoming and Wisconsin are trying the drug on a small scale. Michigan is offering Vivitrol to parolees who commit small crimes, if addiction is the reason for their new offense. The federal Bureau of Prisons ran a field trial in Texas and plans to expand the program to the Northeast next year. The drug’s manufacturer hopes prisons will be the gateway to a larger market.

Also known as extended-release naltrexone, the medication won Food and Drug Administration approval for alcohol dependence in 2006 and in 2010 to prevent relapse in post-detox opioid users.

The evidence for giving Vivitrol to inmates is thin but promising.

In the biggest study, sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, about 300 offenders — most of them heroin users on probation or parole — were randomly assigned to receive either Vivitrol or brief counseling and referral to a treatment program.

After six months, the Vivitrol group had a lower rate of relapse, 43 percent compared with 64 percent. A year after treatment stopped, there had been no overdoses in the Vivitrol group and seven overdoses, including three deaths, in the other group. The results, published in March in the New England Journal of Medicine, have been promoted by the drugmaker, Ireland-based Alkermes, as it markets Vivitrol to U.S. correctional systems.

Yet addiction is stubborn. When the injections stopped, many in the study relapsed. A year later, relapse rates looked the same in the two groups.

“It does suggest six months wasn’t enough,” said Lee, the lead author.

T.J. Voller was a Vivitrol success story — until he wasn’t. After Vivitrol was approved by the FDA, Voller talked about getting the shot with The Associated Press and Dr. Sanjay Gupta in a CNN segment. The 30-year-old was back at work and seemed proud of his recovery. But after 10 months on Vivitrol, he died of a heroin overdose.

“He was alone for the weekend and picked up that needle one last time,” said his mother, Kathi Voller of Raynham, Massachusetts.

Advocates argue that inmates have a constitutional right to all FDA-approved addiction medications throughout their incarceration.

“Treatment should be offered from the moment they are brought into the system,” said Sally Friedman, legal director of the New York-based Legal Action Center, which is looking for a test case to bring to court.

Physicians have learned to be cautious about pharmaceutical company marketing, said Andrew Kolodny, senior scientist at the Heller School for Social Policy and Management at Brandeis University.

Not so for criminal justice officials, who may be too trusting, Kolodny said.

“When the drug company sends someone in to give them a talk and buy them pizza, they think they’re getting a scientific lecture,” he said.

Alkermes spokeswoman Jennifer Snyder said the company’s sales team helps educate corrections staff and community care providers only after they have shown interest in Vivitrol.

There’s widespread agreement that counseling, support groups and treatment for underlying problems such as depression are crucial for Vivitrol patients, said Dr. Joseph Garbely of Pennsylvania-based Caron Treatment Centers, which supports medication-assisted treatment and prefers Vivitrol.

“The disease of addiction is a cunning, baffling and powerful one,” Garbely said. “And you need all hands on deck.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The reader will gain some detailed information about one peer-reviewed study exploring the use of Vivitrol in a criminal-justice connected population. And although researchers involved in studying the drug reflect on it as a success story, the text brings home the argument that systematic evidence remains slim. Further, although the text offers one anecdotal success story, it also highlights the tale of a second opioid user who initially avoided relapsing through use of Vivitrol but then subsequently died from an overdose. Vivitrol has been approved for use by opioid users for six years; this story would have benefited from at least a brief evidentiary look at past research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
When Detective Thomas Tobin was busting bad guys for the New York City Police, he never imagined that his toughest adversary would turn out to be … pain.

"What I usually have constantly is a dull aching crushing pain like deep in my bones, as if my shin is in a vice or somebody is standing on my foot," he told CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook.

It all started 10 years ago after an operation for a knee injury.

"It was life-changing. I went from working constantly to not working at all," he said.

For years, his only relief was a cocktail of prescribed medications.

"I take about 35 pills a day," he said. "Every day."

Now he's trying something that might seem shocking: an electrical current applied to his head - part of a clinical trial at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.

It's called TDCS, Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation. A small electrical current seems to work by affecting pain centers deep within the brain, somehow muffling the perception of pain. The main side effect so far is slight scalp irritation.

"In some way that nobody understands and still seems rather magical, pain might be reduced," said Dr. Russell Portenoy.

The idea dates back 2,000 years, when a Roman physician found he could relieve gout and headache by placing an electric fish on the scalp.

Since then, the technique has been refined.

"It's very early," Portenoy said. "And we don't know how effective it will be. We think it will be very safe."

Thirty years ago, electrodes were surgically implanted deep within the brain. Years later, on the surface. This new approach places them right on the scalp.

This kind of surface stimulation has shown promise in small studies of patients with fibromyalgia and spinal cord injury.

"The idea is when you get the treatment and it is successful and the pain gets better then you can start cutting down the on the medication, and see how low you can go" said Dr. Richard Cruciani.

Every few months, Tobin gets treatments 20 minutes a day for five days. He says his pain drops significantly after therapy and then slowly returns over time.

"I am in a lot less pain today and now it just feels as though I have a sunburn that is a few days old," he said.

This therapy is being tested at several centers around the world and more study is needed, but this new variation on an ancient concept is promising -- using electricity to try to zap the perception of pain.

Could this could work for all kinds of pain?

"That's the hope," says Lapook. "Whatever the cause, it dials down the pain on the brain center. With chronic pain you have to throw the kitchen sink at it. That means integrative medicine, acupuncture, massage, medication in as low doses as possible."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story is based on a continuing multi-center trial and on the results of two previous, small trials of targted applications of TDCS. While this is not high quality evidence, the story makes clear, repeatedly, that this is preliminary evidence only. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers, who published their findings in The New England Journal of Medicine, noted that the deck might have been stacked in favor of a hazardous outcome because study participants, especially the group that received testosterone, had high rates of high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity and elevated blood lipids. Then again, this may be a realistic population to study, given that many candidates for hormone therapy are likely to have such health issues.

A $45 million study financed by the National Institute on Aging is under way at 12 medical centers to see if a year of treatment with testosterone will help 800 men aged 65 and older with low levels of the hormone and problems with physical functioning, fatigue and sexual or cognitive performance. The study, in which the men are being randomly assigned to receive the hormone or a look-alike placebo, will also evaluate the hormone’s effects on cardiac risk factors.

Still, this study will not answer the question of whether it is safe to use the hormone for years, even decades, which would be necessary to maintain any benefits. A major concern is whether long-term use would promote the growth of prostate cancer, which is present but hidden in as many as half of older men.

“There are not many good studies of testosterone in older men,” Dr. William J. Bremner, a urologist at the University of Washington in Seattle, said in an interview. “The studies are small and the longest of them lasted only three years. We need the same kind of study for testosterone as the Women’s Health Initiative — several thousand men followed for maybe 10 years. Currently, we’re in limbo as to how to advise patients.”

He acknowledged that the need for such a study for men is “less compelling” because, in contrast to women, who experience an abrupt drop in estrogen at menopause, often with disruptive symptoms, hormone decline in aging men is far more gradual, and symptoms, when they occur, are commonly viewed as normal signs of aging, not hormone deficiency.

A large European study published in the same issue of the journal sought to better determine who, among middle-aged and elderly men, might be candidates for testosterone replacement. Among a sample of 3,369 men aged 40 to 79, researchers at eight European medical centers found that “limited physical vigor” and three sexual symptoms — diminished sexual thoughts and morning erections and erectile dysfunction — were most closely linked to low levels of testosterone.

Although low hormone levels are widely thought to increase a man’s risk of depression, the researchers found that “psychological symptoms had little or no association with the testosterone level.”

There are four main approaches to testosterone therapy available in this country: intramuscular injections every one to three weeks; skin applications through a patch or gel; and pellets implanted under the skin that last for months. The patch can cause skin irritation, and the gel can be transferred to others through skin contact unless care is taken to cover the area where it is applied. But oral administration is rarely used because of toxic effects on the liver.

The most common reason men seek testosterone therapy is waning sexual desire or performance, although the ability of the hormone to relieve sexual symptoms is unpredictable. More than one-quarter of men with normal testosterone levels have such symptoms, and many men with subnormal levels do not. Dr. Bremner said he typically suggests a trial of therapy for up to a year to see if sexual function or other symptoms improve.

Citing the results of many small studies, Dr. Bremner said, “There is good evidence that testosterone administration can improve muscle mass and strength and increase bone density” in men with subnormal levels. Dr. Abraham Morgentaler, a urologist at Harvard Medical School and author of “Testosterone for Life” (McGraw-Hill, 2009), said in an interview that other noted benefits include a decrease in body fat and total cholesterol and improved blood sugar metabolism.

In a report on the risks of testosterone therapy, written with Dr. Ernani Luis Rhoden and published in 2004 in The New England Journal of Medicine, Dr. Morgentaler noted that testosterone has widespread effects throughout the body, but he and Dr. Rhoden concluded that with proper monitoring, any looming hazards can be readily detected.

Before the most recent study, at doses considered normal, the testosterone gel showed little or no effect on cardiovascular risk, the two doctors reported. Injections could result in harmful thickening of the blood, however, especially if above-normal blood levels of the hormone result.

Although testosterone can cause overgrowth of the prostate, studies have not shown harm to urinary function, Dr. Morgentaler said. The risk of prostate cancer is of greater concern, given that suppressing the body’s natural production of testosterone can cause this cancer to regress. Men considering treatment should first undergo a full prostate exam and PSA measurement, with periodic prostate checkups during therapy, Dr. Bremner said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The point of this article is to call attention to the conflicting evidence on testosterone therapy, a goal which it  achieves in the process of satisfying this criterion. Some high points include:
We wish the story had been a bit more thorough in its discussion of a large European study that found that "limited physical vigor" and sexual symptoms were linked to low levels of testosterone. Elsewhere in the story we learn about the perils of relying too heavily on observational studies to guide treatment decisions. The article should have noted that this was an observational study which could not establish whether low testosterone or some other factor was responsible for these individuals’ symptoms.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FRIDAY, March 26, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Treatment with blood pressure-lowering drugs known as beta blockers appears to help reduce the spread of breast cancer in women, a team of British and German researchers report.

The drugs are believed to work by preventing stress hormones from stimulating cancer cells. "Beta- blocker drugs compete with stress hormones and bind to the same target receptors [on a cellular level], but unlike stress hormones, do not activate cancer cells," said Dr. Des Powe, a senior healthcare research scientist at Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, in Nottingham, England.

Powe is due to present the findings Friday at the annual European Breast Cancer Conference in Barcelona, Spain.

Powe and his colleagues from the U.K. and Germany evaluated 466 cancer patients: 92 had received blood pressure-lowering medications and 43 of those 92, or nearly half, were on beta blockers at the time of their breast cancer diagnosis.

Those on beta blockers had a substantial reduction in the formation of distant cancers, or metastases, and of local recurrence. They had a 71 percent reduced risk of death from breast cancer during the study compared to those who were either taking other blood pressure drugs or weren't on any blood pressure medications. Those on beta blockers also had a 57 percent reduced risk of getting a secondary cancer.

"Our study was performed retrospectively, using patient notes [from women] that had received treatment in the late 1980s and 1990s," Powe said.

Other experts called the results interesting, but preliminary. "The concept of controlling tumor growth by preventing a stress or inflammatory response is not novel," said Dr. Cathie Chung, a medical oncologist and an assistant professor of oncology at the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, Calif.

For instance, other research has found that women with breast cancer who regularly take aspirin, which is an anti-inflammatory, may have a decreased risk of recurrence.

"I think this study is interesting, but very far from being conclusive," said Chung. It's not known, she said, whether there is a true association or whether it may be due to chance or another factor.

"There is more work to be done before you can say whether this relationship is meaningful and will hold up," agreed Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society.

As in other retrospective studies, he said, more research is needed to verify the potential link.

"There are many other factors that come into play that could explain what happened," Lichtenfeld said. "What if the women who take the beta blockers are more attuned to their health and they may be taking better care of themselves?"

Like Chung, he agreed the proposed association is not far-fetched, just that more study is needed. Previous research, Lichtenfeld said, has found a reduced rate of skin cancer among men who take another type of blood pressure-lowering drug.

Powe said he plans to do another study to validate the results.

To learn more about inflammation and cancer, visit the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: While the story mentioned that the findings were presented at the European Cancer Conference, it did not explicitly indicate that the results are preliminary and have yet to be published in a medical journal.  Results that are unpublished have yet to undergo a rigorous review process. It would have also been helpful, had the writer pointed out that the women in the study had primary operable breast cancer. More information on the stage and whether the treatments received were similar across the groups would have also been useful.
Despite these shortcomings, the story did a nice job of describing the methods and indicating that this was a retrospective study and more research is needed to verify the results.  Furthermore, it’s clearly stated that the reported relationship between beta blockers and a reduced risk of recurrence and death may be by chance or there may be confounding factors involved. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
BOSTON (Reuters) - If you’re checking into the hospital for surgery, doctors may soon be swabbing your nose in an effort to prevent an infection from appearing after your operation.

Researchers in the Netherlands said on Wednesday they were able to cut the risk of a common bacterium by nearly 60 percent by first looking for signs of it in the nose and then treating it with an antibiotic nasal gel and full body wash.

The treatment combination also shaved two days off a typical 14-day stay in the hospital.

Hospital-acquired infections are a major problem in medicine, so doctors are always looking for the best way to reduce the risk.

About 27 million surgeries are done just in the United States each year, and in as many as half a million cases, infections occur at the site of surgery.

Up to 30 percent of those infections are caused by strains of the bacterium Staphylococcus aureus, which otherwise benignly resides in the nose and on the skin.

The new study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, used a rapid test to identify which patients, most of whom were scheduled to undergo surgery, had the bacteria in at least one nostril.

The 504 patients treated with the antibiotic nose gel mupirocin, also known as Bactroban, and washed with chlorhexidine, a common ingredient in mouthwash, developed an S. aureus infection 3.4 percent of the time. The rate for 413 volunteers given placebo treatment was 7.7 percent.

The research team, led by Dr. Lonneke Bode of Erasmus University Medical Center in Rotterdam, estimated that 250 patients would need to be screened to prevent one infection.

“Preventing one infection will pay for thousands of these screenings,” Dr. Henri Verbrugh of Erasmus, a coauthor of the study, said in a telephone interview.

Infections are also a problem when doctors put tubes into the body. Although his team did not evaluate enough patients to study the problem directly, “We feel this technology is capable of preventing those types of infections as well,” Verbrugh said.

A second infection study, also reported in the journal, found that a chlorhexidine-alcohol combination produced 41 percent fewer surgical-site infections as the commonly used mixture of povidone and iodine, which gives a yellow-orange tinge to the skin.

In a commentary, Dr. Richard Wenzel of the Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond said the chlorhexidine-alcohol mixture should replace the older disinfectant when scrubbing people for surgery, and the nasal disinfection technique should primarily be used for people undergoing cardiac surgery, receiving an implant, or whose immune system is likely to be affected.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article mentions the large number of subjects, placebo control group, and the peer-reviewed presentation of the data. It implies treatment randomization.  
The story could have provided a bit more detail on the methods for this study, and more importantly for the second study. The accompanying editorial is important in its assessment and should have been discussed more completely in the story.  The comments in the story relative to the editorial appear to miss the central point: of the two interventions, the use of chlorhexidine-alcohol appears to be preferable for the majority of patients. 
Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Feb. 24, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Blood tests that indicate prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels are rising rapidly over time are of little use in detecting aggressive prostate cancer and should not be done, a new study indicates.

PSA is a protein produced by cells of the prostate gland. High levels of PSA can be a marker for prostate cancer, although it's far from a perfect screening tool, experts say. Men with both high and low levels of PSA can have cancer or not have cancer.

The thought was that since high PSA levels are correlated with prostate cancer, rapidly rising levels of PSA, called "PSA velocity," from one year to another would also be an indicator of prostate cancer.

However, the new study found that PSA velocity doesn't add any useful information beyond what physicians can already tell from other methods of prostate cancer screening, including the one-time PSA level test and digital rectal exams.

Current screening guidelines that recommend biopsies for men who have high PSA velocity but no other signs of prostate cancer -- such as a suspected abnormality during a digital rectal exam or high PSA level during a single test -- are leading to many unnecessary biopsies, the researchers said.

"We found there was no strong association between PSA velocity and prostate cancer, and virtually none with aggressive prostate cancer," said study author Andrew Vickers, of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City. "The velocity didn't add anything more to detecting aggressive prostate cancers."

The study is published online Feb. 24 in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute.

The whole issue of prostate cancer screening -- including the PSA test, the digital rectal exam and PSA velocity -- has been controversial, said Dr. Otis Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society (ACS).

Part of the difficulty is, while current screening methods are good at detecting cancer, they can't distinguish between aggressive, life-threatening prostate cancers and those that are slow-growing and relatively benign. And many prostate cancers are just that -- of little risk to men during their lifetimes, Brawley said.

Current ACS prostate screening cancer guidelines recommend that men make an informed decision with their doctor about whether to be tested for prostate cancer. "Research has not yet proven that the potential benefits of testing outweigh the harms of testing and treatment," according to the ACS.

As for PSA velocity, the ACS doesn't have a position on what PSA velocity warrants a biopsy.

But the National Comprehensive Cancer Network and American Urological Association guidelines do recommend biopsies based on high PSA velocities, even in the absence of an elevated PSA or a suspicious digital rectal exam, according to background information in the study.

And many internal medicine and primary-care doctors, in part because of fears of litigation, do order biopsies based on fast-rising PSA levels, Brawley said.

"It's something that has become almost a community standard. If a guy has a PSA of .8 last year, and a year or so later you've repeated it and it's 1.9, because it has increased by a factor of 1 he gets sent to biopsy," Brawley said.

In the study, researchers used data on more than 5,500 men in their 60s and 70s who took part in a drug trial for a prostate cancer prevention drug. The men in the study were all from the placebo arm, meaning they had not received the drug. As part of the trial, all of the men agreed to have a biopsy at the end of the trial, needed or not.

Researchers did find a statistical association between PSA velocity and the chances of a biopsy coming back cancerous. But when they factored in other things that can influence risk, including a family history of the disease, being older, being black, PSA level and results of a digital rectal exam, there was virtually no association between PSA velocity and biopsy outcome.

"PSA velocity measurement is not useful," Brawley said.

Grace Lu-Yao, a cancer epidemiologist at the Cancer Institute of New Jersey who wrote an accompanying editorial, said she agreed with the authors' conclusions that PSA velocity does not seem to be a good predictor of prostate cancer.

In addition, tracking PSA levels overtime can also cause anxiety to men, who often worry if their PSA level has suddenly shot up.

"According to the data, PSA velocity does not add any value, but it may add more anxiety," Lu-Yao said.

The National Cancer Institute has more on the PSA test.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story included the number of men that were studied and that the men studied had taken part in a prostate cancer prevention study.

 

 

 
Better than its AP competition, the story mentioned that the study of PSA velocity only included those individuals who were in the placebo arm of a drug trial.   
But neither story explained that this was a highly selected population – men with abnormal digital rectal exams and PSA values greater than 3 were excluded. This information is important for understanding how generalizable the result of the study might be.
   
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The antidepressant Prozac may alleviate repetitive behavior and obsessive-compulsive symptoms in adults with autism, reducing these defining symptoms of the disorder, according to new research.

The research, which included 37 high-functioning autistic adults, mainly diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome, followed participants for 12 weeks. Taking Prozac (fluoxetine) doubled the chances that a patient would show overall improvement, measured by their clinicians. Half of the participants taking Prozac had significant reductions in obsessive-compulsive symptoms, compared with 8% taking placebo. Side effects were mild to moderate and participants taking Prozac did not show increases in suicidal thoughts or ideas.

“Repetitive behavior is a core symptom of the illness,” says lead author Dr. Eric Hollander, medical director of the Autism and Obsessive-Compulsive Spectrum Program at Montefiore Medical Center in New York, explaining that “from a very early age, these children have rituals and routines. For example, they like to line up their toys and they get very bent out of shape if there is any deviation.”

MORE: What Does a 400% Increase in Antidepressant Use Really Mean?

A previous, larger study of a similar medication, Celexa (citalopram), in autistic children did not find a reduction in repetitive behaviors, but the drug did reduce irritability and was superior to placebo among children who had the highest levels of irritability. Irritability can sometimes lead to repetitive behaviors because autistic people often engage in these activities to soothe themselves.

Both Prozac and Celexa belong to a class of antidepressants known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. Prior research on SSRIs in autistic people has also looked at Luvox (fluvoxamine) and found a reduction in repetitive behavior in adults but not children. It is not known if the differences between these studies are due to differences between the medications or other factors.

Obsessive behaviors may also arise in autistic people in response to the stress or discomfort of unpredictable situations. “Many of these individuals have expectations for what’s going to happen, and if there is an unexpected deviation, they experience a lot of discomfort and then they do all these kinds of behaviors,” says Hollander. That’s why people with autism may obsessively avoid locations where they previously experienced discomfort, for example, or they may engage in a repetitive habit like washing, checking, counting, touching or tapping.

When taking Prozac, Hollander says, “Patients acknowledge experiencing less discomfort. They’re more able to go outside their comfort zone and to better resist their habits and rituals.” One participant in Hollander’s study was previously too anxious to take the subway or eat in a restaurant, but, when taking Prozac, was able to tolerate these unpredictable environments.

“It takes the edge off,” Hollander explains, noting that the findings were statistically significant and clinically meaningful. “The clinicians could tell that people were doing better not only in terms of OCD symptoms but overall distress and ability to function.”

MORE: Why Are So Many Foster Care Children Taking Antipsychotics?

The only drugs approved to treat irritability and repetitive behaviors in autistic children are the atypical antipsychotics Risperdal (risperidone) and Abilify (aripiprazole), which tend to have more severe side effects than Prozac does. Those drugs carry significant risk for weight gain, diabetes and movement disorders.

Responding to the research, Yale Child Study Center director Fred Volkmar told WebMD: “The question remains, ‘Is fluoxetine better than risperidone for this symptom?’ It would be interesting to see studies comparing these two drugs head to head.”

Hollander has previously received funding from pharmaceutical companies, but the current study was paid for by a grant from the Food and Drug Administration’s “orphan” drug program. That program funds research on rare conditions with new drugs or those no longer patented that are not likely to be pursued by industry. When the research was originally funded, Hollander says, autism was considered to be a rare condition.

The study was published in the American Journal of Psychiatry.

Maia Szalavitz is a health writer at TIME.com. Find her on Twitter at @maiasz. You can also continue the discussion on TIME Healthland’s Facebook page and on Twitter at @TIMEHealthland.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We liked how the story put up high some of the basics of the study, that it was limited to 37 subjects, that they were “high-functioning autistic adults, mainly diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome,” and that they were followed for 12 weeks. Even though it sometimes feels like boilerplate language, it would have been appropriate to emphasize how small and short-term was this study and that it needs to be replicated in a larger, longer-term study.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Nick Collado, a 26-year-old insomniac and the founder of Lulla Pies, argued that the melatonin they contain, while synthetic, is more “natural” than the Ambien he used to take. “I realized there’s got to be more people like me who don’t want to take prescription drugs anymore, who want to take an alternative,” Mr. Collado said.

But Dr. David S. Seres, the director of medical nutrition at Columbia Medical Center, cautioned that consumers should consult their doctors before trying such products.

“The promoters of these are appealing to people who think it’s better to do things outside of the medical establishment,” he said, adding that “the desire to help people is an extremely strong motivator, but so is money.” He pointed to a section of the National Institutes of Health’s Web site that lists several drugs, including sedatives like clonazepam and birth control pills, whose efficacy might be altered by melatonin.

“A hangover effect has been reported” with large doses, said Anna Rouse Dulaney, a toxicologist with the Carolinas Poison Center. But she added, “I don’t want to go on the record saying this drug ‘can’ cause respiratory issues, that should be a ‘may.’ ”

Lazy Cakes appear harmless, even amusing, with swirly purple packaging; Kush Cakes have a tie-dye-printed wrapper. But they are not to be underestimated.

Of melatonin, Dr. Seres warned, “If you take it while you’re driving a car, you will find yourself in a ditch.”

Maybe. Dr. Alfred J. Lewy, a professor of psychiatry at Oregon Health and Science University who has studied melatonin, a neurohormone, estimated that only a third of the population is susceptible to its effects in a supplement.

And yet Tracy Evans, who owns a bar where musicians perform in Erie, Pa., that has sold hundreds of Lazy Cakes, said she instructs employees to tell partygoers, “I highly recommend you wait to where you’re going to be at the end of the night before eating.”

Why? “It knocks you out — in a good way, not a bad way,” said Ms. Evans, 34. “For me, it’s not to chill. For me, it’s to get a good night’s sleep.”

Yet the products, intended for adults only, are being marketed as a novel way to relax in a stressed-out, wired world. Labels on Lazy Cakes and Mary J’s brownies that were bought online urge users to “Take ½ brownie, two times a day.” With tiny type, the labels warn against operating heavy machinery or driving.

But some medical professionals are concerned that the chocolate taste might encourage indiscriminate gobbling.

“It’s a colossally bad idea to put melatonin in food,” Dr. Czeisler said. “It should not be permitted by the F.D.A.”

Technically, it is not. Stephanie Yao, a spokeswoman at the F.D.A., wrote in an e-mail that any item that uses melatonin “as an additive may be subject to regulatory action.”

That is why the makers of these new baked goods label them “Not for food use.” They want them to be considered dietary supplements, which do not need the F.D.A.’s premarket approval and are not required to be proved safe or effective.

“It sounds to me like they are trying to claim that the entire brownie is like a tablet, which is, of course, preposterous,” Dr. Czeisler said.

Tim Barham, the vice president of HBB, the maker of Lazy Cakes, said, “We look at the brownie as a supplement.”

News reports have classified Lazy Cakes as dietary supplements, but last month, Douglas Karas, an F.D.A. spokesman, said in an e-mail that the agency “has not made a determination on Lazy Cakes’ status as either a food or a dietary supplement.”

In January last year, the F.D.A. sent a warning letter to Peter Bianchi, the creator of Drank, a purple drink with 2 milligrams of melatonin in each can that went on the market in 2008, spawning several competitors.

The letter cited safety concerns about melatonin in food, specifically research indicating that melatonin reduced glucose tolerance for people with Type 1 diabetes and that some men using it had reported enlarged breasts. It also warned that women who are pregnant or trying to conceive should avoid melatonin “based on possible hormonal effects.” (Drank’s bottle now say it is a dietary supplement.)

Dr. Lewy dismissed the idea that harm might lurk in a melatonin-laced brownie. “It really doesn’t have any documented side effects except for making you sleepy at bedtime, which is good,” he said. That said, he would not advise eating Lazy Cakes, partly because he was not sure that their other purportedly sleep-inducing ingredients like valerian root work and partly because food delays rather than hastens the absorption of melatonin.

Also, Dr. Lewy said, “I don’t need the calories.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story shows how evidence is elusive, partially due to the lack of regulatory clarity about the products in question.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Feb. 2, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A large international trial finds that the Gardasil vaccine shields young men from human papillomavirus (HPV) as well as it protects young women.

HPV is the leading cause of cervical cancer in women, but also has been linked to penile cancer and other malignancies in men.

According to a study in the Feb. 3 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, which was funded by the vaccine's maker, Merck & Co., Gardasil was 90 percent effective in older teenaged boys and young men.

"Studies like this underscore the 'human' in human papillomavirus," said Fred Wyand, director of the HPV Resource Center at the American Social Health Association. "This well-designed study reinforces the idea that there is value in vaccinating young men against a virus that is nearly ubiquitous among sexually active individuals."

Gardasil protects against several strains of HPV, which is the leading cause of cervical cancer in women. It has also been linked to vulvar, anal and throat cancers. Studies have shown it to be about 100 percent effective in preventing precancerous cervical lesions in females.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the vaccine for girls in 2008 and for boys aged 9 through 26 in 2009. Although the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that 11- and 12-year-old girls begin receiving the vaccine as part of school vaccination efforts, an advisory panel voted against routine use of the vaccine in boys and men.

Uptake of the vaccine, which costs about $390 for the 3-shot regimen, has been far from universal among girls. According to a study presented last year by researchers at the University of Maryland, just one-third of teen girls and young women who start the three-dose series actually finish, and almost three-quarters don't start it at all.

But study author Anna Giuliano believes that, "vaccinating males would have a direct benefit that men would receive, as well as a community benefit. If you reduce infections in men, you're going to reduce transmission to their partners so you have the herd immunity effect."

HPV is almost ubiquitous in males and females, but experts note that most people will clear the virus naturally so that it does not result in any harm.

This study involved more than 4,000 boys and men aged 16-to-26 from 18 different countries who were randomly assigned to get the vaccine or not. All were HPV-free at the beginning of the trial, and were followed for about three years.

Among participants who completed the three-vaccine series, Gardasil afforded 90 percent protection against HPV.

"It's a similar efficacy to what we've seen in females," said Giuliano, who is chair of cancer epidemiology and genetics at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa.

The researchers also saw some reduction in the number of precancerous penile lesions, although at this point they said it's impossible to know whether this will result in a lower rate of penile cancers.

"We're going to finally be able to see men benefit from vaccine, as women have, in coming years," said Giuliano.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on HPV.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: It was good to see the story included the size of the study population and the fact that it was randomized and included three-year follow up.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
That wouldn’t be surprising. The mineral found in popular supplement pills — and in dairy foods, leafy greens and many fortified foods — is unquestionably good for your bones. But in recent years, doctors have raised concerns that calcium supplements might be over-used and bad for hearts.

Recently, two new studies made headlines. One found a link between the supplements and a build-up of calcium in arteries, a possible precursor to heart attacks and strokes.

A second, wider-ranging study found no heart risks and was the basis of new guidelines from two medical groups saying that calcium supplements should be considered heart safe.

“The public has been receiving very confusing and alarming messages about calcium supplements,” says JoAnn Manson, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and chief of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.

About 35% of U.S. adults take calcium supplements, alone or in multivitamins, according to a recent report in the medical journal JAMA.

So here’s what all those people need to know.

Concerns about heart risks may be fading.

Over the past decade, some studies have raised the possibility that calcium, from supplements but not from food, might raise heart risks.

Most recently, researchers at Johns Hopkins University tracked nearly 3,000 adults and found that those who took calcium supplements at the study outset were 22% more likely to show artery calcification 10 years later. Those who got the most calcium from food had a decreased risk. But the study, published in the Journal of the American Heart Association, was not designed in a way that could prove the supplements caused the artery changes.

And its findings were quickly refuted by a larger review of 31 previous studies, including some with more rigorous designs. Taken together, those findings suggest healthy adults face no increased heart risks from calcium, in food or supplements, in amounts of up to 2,000-2,500 mg a day, researchers reported in the Annals of Internal Medicine. The review was funded by the non-profit National Osteoporosis Foundation, with support from Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, which makes calcium supplements.

“If you look at the overall totality of the evidence, there’s a lack of association between supplement use and heart attack and other cardiovascular events,” says Manson, who co-wrote an editorial accompanying the review.

The review “is really reassuring,” says Clifford Rosen, senior scientist at the Maine Medical Center Research Institute at the University of Maine. He was not involved in the research.

Also reassured: The osteoporosis foundation and the American Society for Preventive Cardiology, which issued new guidelines saying supplements appear heart safe.

Not everyone is convinced.

The larger review did not include all potentially relevant studies, says Erin Michos, an associate professor of medicine and epidemiology who led the Johns Hopkins study. “I’m still concerned about harm from supplements and I don’t advise them for my patients,” she says.

There are other reasons not to take calcium supplements.

The first is that most people don’t need them, Rosen says. Calcium intake from food has been rising, he says, with recent surveys finding averages around 1,000 mg a day — close to or meeting the 1,000 mg. to 1,200 mg recommended for adults (the higher level is advised for women over 50 and men over 70). Many people get more than they realize, he says, not just from milk, cheese and yogurt, but from vegetables, grains, and, increasingly, fortified foods and beverages.

When there is a gap, food is a better choice than supplements, the experts agree. Calcium-rich foods, such as milk (300 mg a cup), plain yogurt (400 mg per cup) and kale (100 mg a cup), come with added nutritional benefits. And supplements come with extra risks: increases in kidney stones and, for some people, constipation and bloating.

Some people do need supplements.

Older adults with osteoporosis — bone thinning severe enough to raise the risk of debilitating fractures — can benefit from calcium supplements, Rosen says, though most need just one 500 mg to 600 mg dose a day. Larger doses are poorly absorbed and rarely needed, he says.

Among others who might need a boost: Vegans, people with lactose intolerance and anyone who, for whatever reason, does not consume enough calcium, says Taylor Wallace, an affiliate professor of nutrition at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., and a co-author of the new cardiovascular statement.

Teen girls, who are in crucial bone-building years, often have diets that fall short of their needs, 1,300 mg a day, Wallace says.

Your bones need more than calcium alone.

Vitamin D — found in fatty fish, fortified foods and supplements, and produced by the skin in response to sun exposure — also is essential to bone health. Many supplements combine vitamin D and calcium, but experts disagree on who should take those supplements and in what doses. Under current U.S. nutrition guidelines, teens and adults are advised to get 600 to 800 international units of vitamin D each day.

Also important for bone health: weight-bearing exercise, such as walking, dancing and workouts with weights.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Given the scope of this piece, involving two studies and a slew of background information, the story does a good job of offering readers adequate insight into the evidence. First, the story includes links to both of the relevant studies. That’s always a good thing. Second, the story describes the scope of both studies (3,000 adults for the observational study in JAHA, 31 studies in the meta-analysis in AIM). Third, the story addresses the shortcomings of the relevant studies. For example, the story notes that the JAHA study “was not designed in a way that could prove the supplements caused the artery changes.” Similarly, the story notes that some critics feel the AIM meta-analysis “did not include all potentially relevant studies.” In both cases, those are points worth making.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philadelphia, PA, August 14, 2017 - Stanford University scientists have described a new type of test that can detect genetic mutations in minute amounts of DNA released from cancer cells into the blood. The test, which is called single color digital PCR, requires only a fraction of a tube of blood and can detect as few as three mutation-bearing molecules in a single reaction. According to the report in The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics, this highly sensitive test has the potential to be personalized to recognize mutations unique to any individual cancer.

"For monitoring patient tumors, only a handful of blood tests are available which are limited to only several types of cancers. Nearly all cancer patients require monitoring by whole body imaging, which can be costly, complex, and time-consuming. In contrast, molecular tests like the one we have developed will enable patients to be monitored at every visit, and thus have the potential for quickly tracking cancer growth and spread. Moreover, the test's rapid turnaround and relatively low cost, especially compared to next-generation DNA sequencing, provide a potential opportunity for universal monitoring of more patients than is currently done," explained lead investigator Hanlee P. Ji, MD, Associate Professor in the Department of Medicine at Stanford University and Senior Associate Director of the Stanford Genome Technology Center.

The report describes the use of the test to analyze samples from six patients. Five patients were previously diagnosed with colorectal cancer and one with cholangiocarcinoma.

After generation of customized mutation detection assays, the researchers were able to identify tumor-derived circulating DNA from three out of six patients. In one patient, the assay was able to show the presence of three different mutations. The three patients, whose samples did not show elevated cancer DNA, were undergoing active treatment at the time of collection.

The single-color digital PCR test offers several advantages over other methods of circulating tumor DNA analysis, compared to next-generation targeted sequencing and fluorescent probe-based digital PCR assays. The main advantage is that the new technique does not rely on pre-amplification, which can introduce errors and biases.

"This test is simple enough to set up and analyze without extensive training, and therefore, it can be implemented by anyone, making it highly accessible to any laboratory. It has been truly motivating to work with a technology that will help transform the way that we monitor and treat individuals with cancer. I am excited to share our findings with the cancer research community," noted lead author and researcher Christina Wood Bouwens, of the Stanford Genome Technology Center and the Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does explain, after a very effusive quote about how broadly applicable this test may be, that the test was only examined in six patients who had only two types of cancers. Then it says, “the researchers were able to identify tumor-derived circulating DNA from three out of six patients.” So the study was extremely limited in scope. The release would have been better to call out this caveat explicitly instead of leaving it up to the reader to figure out. Other releases we have seen say things like, “This study was only conducted in six patients and would need to be repeated with a much larger group in order to make strong claims about its broad efficacy in cancer diagnosis and monitoring.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Ian Burkhart shouldn't be able to move his hands at all. The 24-year-old from Dublin, Ohio, was in an accident six years ago that left his arms and legs paralysed. But now, thanks to computer software that decodes his thoughts and sends the signal to his hands, he's been able to pick up small objects, swipe a credit card, and even play Guitar Hero – albeit in a science lab. This is the first time a person with paralysis has regained movement in their hands and individual fingers using signals from their brain. Details of the system that allows him to do this, developed by scientists at Ohio State University and Battelle Memorial Institute, are published in the journal Nature today. The study builds on previous work in which humans have been able to move computer cursors and robotic arms using their own brain signals, and a study in which monkeys with paralysed arms were able to move them again thanks to a similar intervention.

It was the summer after his freshman year of college when Burkhart lost the ability to move his arms and legs. "I was 19 years old, really independent, and I didn't think anything like this would happen in my life that would slow me down and set me back this much," Burkhart said during a press briefing. "I dove into a wave that then pushed me down into a sandbar – the water wasn't as deep as I thought. I was lucky to have friends with me who were able to pull me out of the water and get medical attention." The injury in his spinal cord means he doesn't have any movement below his elbow, so he is missing the fine motor movement in his hands that would allow him to grasp or pick up objects. Burkhart's thoughts and brain signals work in the same way as they did before the accident, but his spinal cord injury means they never reach his hand, leaving him unable to move it. He has some residual movement in his shoulders, and can use those working shoulder muscles to move his arms about. "That's how I do pretty much everything in my daily life when I'm not hooked up to the system," he says.

The system works by bypassing Burkhart's spinal cord injury. A device implanted in his brain records signals from neurons that fire when he thinks about a movement – picking up a cup, for example. This signal is passed to a computer that decodes it, and the resulting instruction is then sent to a sleeve he wears on his forearm that stimulates the muscles that move his wrist and fingers. In June 2014, in the early stages of the trial, Burkhart moved his hand again for the first time after his accident. "It was a flicker of hope, knowing that this was something that was working, knowing I will be able to use my hand again," he said. After three sessions a week for over a year, he is able to use the system to do things he couldn't do on his own, like pick up a mug and pour its contents into another container, swipe a credit card, and play Guitar Hero.

So far he's been able to make isolated finger movements and six different hand and wrist movements. To test how useful this would be in a normal situation, the scientists had Burkhart pick up a container, empty its contents into a jar, then pick up a stick and stir the contents of the jar. It was a struggle at first, but by the end of the trial he was able to complete the action three out of five times in a 10-minute period.

 The setup currently requires a 10–15-minute training period at the beginning of every session. Burkhart watches videos of different hand movements he's going to perform that day and thinks about the movements, so the computer learns what the brain signals for each movement looks like. "The machine is actually learning, and Ian is learning how to refine his thought patterns," Chad Bouton, lead author on the paper, said in a press briefing. "So the machine and the person are learning together, and after that 10–15-minute period there's a dramatic improvement, it's been really amazing to watch." "Initially, we'd do a short session and I'd feel completely mentally fatigued and exhausted," said Burkhart. "But just like anything, with more and more practice it's become easier."

"This technology is possible because there's about 50 years of basic neuroscience that has been looking at how signals in the brain encode information about movement," Dr Andrew Jackson, a neuroscientist at Newcastle University who was not involved with the work, told BuzzFeed News. "What we're seeing now is all of that basic research which was driven by purely scientific questions coming to fruition in terms of enabling new treatments, but there's still a lot we need to learn." There are still many challenges to be overcome to bring this work out of the lab and into the lives of the millions of people who are paralysed. "We have to be realistic about this, there's still quite a long way towards turning this into something that would be feasible for widespread use in large numbers of people," Jackson said. For starters, the device that records the brain signals will need to be much smaller so it's fully implanted under the paralysed person's skin. "One of the directions the field is moving towards," Jackson said, "is to develop implanted devices that can be positioned under the skin and communicate wirelessly or route signals to the muscles completely under the skin."

Our understanding of how brain signals change will also be crucial to making this technology usable on a large scale. "The recordings we get from these electrodes in the brain can be quite unstable from day to day," Jackson said. That's why the device requires training every time Burkhart uses it. "What we'd really like is a system that's plug and play and will work daily without needing to be recalibrated." That could come from better electrode designs or looking for different signals that are more stable. Dr Jonas Zimmerman, a neuroscientist at Brown University in the US, who was also not involved with the study, echoed Jackson's point. "Brain signals change from day to day (even hour to hour), the signals may be different depending on context (am I trying to lift a full or an empty glass, do I watch someone draw or do I want to draw myself), and brain signals change while we learn a new task," he told BuzzFeed news. "We need to understand a lot more about the brain before we will make really meaningful improvements in this direction. "It will be years until a paralyzed patient will be able to control neural prostheses independently from caregivers, but there is nothing that should make this improvement impossible."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We will give the story a Satisfactory rating here because it’s made clear that this is a study of one person. Readers who pay attention all the way to the end are indeed warned about how far this line of work is from producing a useful option for real-world use.
However, the story would have been better if–instead of boasting that the patient can play “Guitar Hero”–the headline and opening paragraphs had been clearer that he could produce a limited range of finger and hand motions in painstakingly prepared laboratory conditions that, rather than revealing a useful device, demonstrate that the goal of a useful device is probably not impossible someday.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Also, eteplirsen would be appropriate for only about 13 percent to 15 percent of Duchenne patients, those with the particular genetic mutation the drug is meant to counteract. However, a similar approach might work for some other mutations.

Duchenne, which affects as many as 15,000 Americans, mainly boys and young men, is the most severe common form of muscular dystrophy, a disease made more prominent by years of Jerry Lewis telethons. Those with the disease make barely any dystrophin, a protein necessary for muscles to function. Patients typically lose the ability to walk as teenagers and die by age 30.

While steroids, which reduce inflammation, can slow progression of the disease, they have undesirable side effects. Eteplirsen, which Sarepta says has shown no side effects so far, is vying with a similar drug being developed by GlaxoSmithKline to become the first medicine that works by directly countering the cause of the disease.

Eteplirsen could also be the first drug to reach the market for Sarepta since it was founded 32 years ago. It changed its name recently from AVI BioPharma to distance itself from its underachieving past.

Shares of Sarepta nearly tripled on Wednesday, closing at $44.93. And the stock had already roughly quadrupled since July, when Sarepta announced some interim results from the study.

The study measured how far the boys could walk in six minutes. Those who received the higher dose walked an average of 21 meters farther after 48 weeks of treatment than at the beginning of the trial, a gain of about 5 percent. The boys in the placebo group walked 68 fewer meters at the end than at the beginning, a decline of about 17 percent.

One possible reason for skepticism is that two of the boys on a lower dose of the drug rapidly lost the ability to walk, even though the level of dystrophin in their muscles increased substantially.

While the company excluded those boys from its analysis as outliers, the Food and Drug Administration might not do so. That could make it harder for the Sarepta to win approval for the drug based only on this small trial, something the company hopes to do.

“If you wait and require this company to do another two-year study, a lot of these boys are going to be in a wheelchair,” Christopher Garabedian, the Sarepta chief executive, said in an interview.

Patient groups may also put some pressure on the Food and Drug Administration to approve the drug quickly. But some also want Sarepta to make the drug available to more patients on a compassionate basis even before approval.

Ten-year-old Max Leclaire of Saxtons River, Vt., who has been receiving the highest dose in the trial, can now walk up stairs without having to pull himself up by the handrail, according to his mother, Jenn McNary. “He’s no longer riding the handicap bus to school,” she said.

But Ms. McNary said Sarepta had refused to provide the drug to Max’s 13-year-old brother, Austin, who could not be in the trial because he already could not walk.

Mr. Garabedian said Sarepta did not have the money or the manufacturing capacity to make the drug available outside of clinical trials. “That would be the quickest path to insolvency,” he said.

If eteplirsen gets to market, it would come nearly three decades after the 1986 discovery of the gene responsible for Duchenne. It would also represent a success, after decades of setbacks, for the technology eteplirsen uses, called antisense, which is a way of turning off specific genes.

Eteplirsen actually turns off just one part of the dystrophin gene, known as exon 51, which contains a mutation that in some patients stops production of dystrophin. By skipping over this exon, muscle cells can produce an imperfect form of dystrophin that nonetheless is at least partly functional.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provided the reader with the caveats necessary to put the information into context.  “There are many caveats. The trial had only 12 patients, with only four receiving the high dose and four the placebo, and the data has not been reviewed by experts. It is also unclear how long the effects of the drug would last…” One possible reason for skepticism is that two of the boys on a lower dose of the drug rapidly lost the ability to walk, even though the level of dystrophin in their muscles increased substantially.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
HEART DISEASE

Men with high blood pressure who have one or two drinks per day are less likely to have a heart attack, says a study in the current Annals of Internal Medicine. People with hypertension have traditionally been advised to stay away from alcohol because excessive drinking can increase blood pressure. An international team of researchers led by Dr. Kenneth Mukamal and Joline Beulens sought to find out how moderate drinking affects cardiovascular disease in people with high blood pressure. A group of 11,711 men with hypertension were surveyed about their drinking habits every four years from 1986 to 2002. The researchers found that people who drank moderate amounts of beer, wine, or liquor had fewer heart attacks, though their risk of death was not significantly different from that of the other subjects in the study.

BOTTOM LINE: Having one or two drinks a day may be beneficial for men with high blood pressure, but studies like these shouldn't be used to justify excessive drinking. "Men with hypertension who drink moderately and safely do not need to change their drinking habits," said Beulens, of the University Medical Center Utrecht in the Netherlands, who was the study's lead author.

CAUTIONS: The study included only male healthcare providers, so it might not be generalizable to a broader population. And, one of the study authors, Eric Rimm of the Harvard School of Public Health, has been sponsored by the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States to speak at academic conferences.

WHAT'S NEXT: Researchers said they want to see whether moderate drinking also benefits women with hypertension.

WHERE TO FIND IT: Annals of Internal Medicine, Jan 2.

Could negative stereotypes be self-fulfilling prophecies? Maryjane Wraga , associate professor of psychology at Smith College in Northampton, tested 54 women for spatial reasoning skills -- the ability to solve problems related to shape and measurement. Before the test, one group was exposed to a negative stereotype: They were told that women do not perform well at spatial reasoning. A second group received a positive message, and the control group received no message. The negative-message subjects made 14 percent more errors than the positive, with the control subjects falling in between. MRI measurements of brain activity in the subjects suggested that the difference was related to a surge in negative emotions. "It's the difference between a B and an A" on a test, says Wraga. Spatial reasoning skills are believed to be important in how people perform on standardized tests such as the SAT. A similar study by Wraga, soon to be published, finds men also perform worse under similar conditions. Overall, the results suggest that a change in societal messages could spur changes in actual performance. "It sounds corny, but 'accentuate the positive,' " Wraga says.

BOTTOM LINE: Exposure to negative stereotypes can actually cause people to perform more poorly.

CAUTIONS: The study looks only at spatial reasoning. Different activities -- such as speech or music -- may be affected differently by stereotypes. The forthcoming study on men doesn't include an MRI component needed for a more complete comparison.

WHAT'S NEXT: Wraga wants to study how long negative messages continue to impact performance after they are heard.

WHERE TO FIND IT: Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, Dec. 7, 2006.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the strength of the existing evidence and points out some of the limitations, for example, that the results may not be generalizable to a broader population. The story should have also mentioned that any study using self-reported intake of food or drink is always prone to error in how consumption is measured.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO --- Soon you can seek mental health advice on your smartphone as quickly as finding a good restaurant.

A novel suite of 13 speedy mini-apps called IntelliCare resulted in participants reporting significantly less depression and anxiety by using the apps on their smartphones up to four times a day, reports a new Northwestern Medicine study.

The apps offer exercises to de-stress, reduce self-criticism and worrying, methods to help your life feel more meaningful, mantras to highlight your strengths, strategies for a good night's sleep and more.

Most apps designed for mental health typically offer a single strategy to feel better or provide too many features that make them difficult to navigate. Users may get bored or overwhelmed and may stop using the apps after a few weeks.

But participants robustly used the IntelliCare interactive apps as many as four times daily -- or an average of 195 times -- for eight weeks of the study. They spent an average of one minute using each app, with longer times for apps with relaxation videos.

The 96 participants who completed the research study reported that they experienced about a 50 percent decrease in the severity of depressive and anxiety symptoms. The short-term study-related reductions are comparable to results expected in clinical practice using psychotherapy or with that seen using antidepressant medication.

The study will be published Jan. 5 in the Journal of Medical Internet Research.

"We designed these apps so they fit easily into people's lives and could be used as simply as apps to find a restaurant or directions," said lead study author David Mohr, professor of preventive medicine and director of the Center for Behavioral Intervention Technologies at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine.

"Some of the participants kept using them after the study because they felt that the apps helped them feel better," Mohr said. "There were many apps to try during the study, so there was a sense of novelty."

Participants had access to the 13 IntelliCare apps from Google Play and received eight weeks of coaching for the use of IntelliCare. Coaching included an initial phone call plus two or more text messages per week over the eight weeks. In the study, 105 participants were enrolled and 96 of them completed the study.

The preliminary study did not include a control arm, so it's possible that some people who enrolled in the trial would have improved anyway, partly because they may have been motivated to try something new, Mohr said. He now has launched a larger trial, recruiting 300 participants, with a control arm.

Some of the IntelliCare apps include:
• Daily Feats: designed to motivate you to add worthwhile and rewarding activities into your day to increase your overall satisfaction in life.
• Purple Chill: designed to help you unwind with audio recordings that guide you through exercises to de-stress and worry less.
• Slumber Time: designed to ease you into a good night's rest.
• My Mantra: designed to help you create motivating mantras to highlight your strengths and values.

"Using digital tools for mental health is emerging as an important part of our future," Mohr said. "These are designed to help the millions of people who want support but can't get to a therapist's office."

More than 20 percent of Americans have significant symptoms of depression or anxiety each year, but only around 20 percent of people with a mental health problem get adequate treatment.

The IntelliCare algorithm recommends new apps each week to keep the experience fresh, provide new opportunities for learning skills and avoid user boredom. Although the apps are not validated, each one was designed by Northwestern clinicians and based on validated techniques used by therapists.

IntelliCare is a national research study. Individuals can download the apps free with no financial obligation. But Northwestern researchers hope participants will provide confidential feedback, via four weekly questions, that will be used to further develop the system. The data will help the system make even better recommendations and provide more personalized treatment.

People also may enroll in a study in which they will be paid to provide even more feedback. Some also will have access to an IntelliCare coach via text messaging and phone calls, who are available to support them in using the apps.

"We now have evidence these approaches will likely work," Mohr said. "They are designed to teach many of the same skills therapists teach patients. Different apps are expected to work for different people. The goal is to find what's right for you."

Other Northwestern authors include Kate Tomasino, Emily Lattie, Hannah Palac, Mary J Kwasny, Kenneth Weingardt, Leland R Bardsley, Lauren Caccamo, Colleen Stiles-Shields and Stephen Schueller. Rebecca Rossom, a researcher with HealthPartners Institute, also was a study co-author.

The study was supported by grant R01 MH100482 from the National Institute of Mental Health of the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release notes that 96 of the 105 initial volunteers completed the study and that participants received coaching (including phone calls and texts) during the 8 week study. But it didn’t explain that maybe it was this human coaching, and not the apps per se, that was at least partly responsible for the benefits seen in the study. The researchers acknowledge in their manuscript that “we cannot disentangle the effects of the coaching and the apps.”
The release also could have done a better job of highlighting the limitations of such a short study. Will users get bored with the app and see their depression/anxiety return when they stop using it?
We’ll give credit to the release, however, for nicely describing a major weakness of the study. It states: “The preliminary study did not include a control arm, so it’s possible that some people who enrolled in the trial would have improved anyway, partly because they may have been motivated to try something new, Mohr said.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Like spicy foods? If so, science has some good news for you: Eating hot chili peppers may help you live longer.

A new study, published in PLoS ONE, found that consumption of hot red chili peppers was associated with a 13 percent lower risk of death.

The research is observational, so no cause and effect relationship can be established. Still, the authors say the study strengthens the growing body of evidence that spicy food may have protective health properties that can lead to a longer life.

For the study, researchers at the Larner College of Medicine at the University of Vermont analyzed data on more than 16,000 Americans using the National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey (NHANES). Participants were followed for an average of 18.9 years.

The researchers note that people who ate hot red chili peppers tended to be “younger, male, white, Mexican-American, married, and to smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol, and consume more vegetables and meats . . . had lower HDL-cholesterol, lower income, and less education,” in comparison to participants who did not consume red chili peppers.

Though the mechanism by which chili peppers could help delay death is not well understood, there are some theories.

Previous, mostly experimental research has suggested that spices and their bioactive ingredient, capsaicin, have anti-obesity, antioxidant, anti-inflammation and anti-cancer properties.

The authors say capsaicin also possesses antimicrobial properties that “may indirectly affect the host by altering the gut microbiota.”

The research corroborates a 2015 study conducted in China and published in the BMJ that found regular consumption of spicy food is associated with a lower risk of death.

But experts caution that this doesn’t mean everyone should pile on the spices at dinner time to improve their health and increase their longevity. People with gastrointestinal issues, for example, should hold off on the hot sauce.

“For those who are affected by digestive disorders such as a stomach ulcer, I would be cautious about eating spicy foods,” Lu Qi, of Harvard’s T. H. Chan School of Public Health and Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, and lead author of The BMJ study, told CBS News.

The authors suggest further research should investigate the benefits of other spices and the effects of certain chili pepper subtypes.

“Such evidence may lead to new insights into the relationships between diet and health, updated dietary recommendations, and the development of new therapies,” they write.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Despite the overoptimistic title, the story discusses limitations of the research clearly and early on. The study is described as observational and plainly says no cause and effect relationship can be established. It also mentions that there’s no good understanding of the mechanism by which red hot chili peppers might influence risk of death.
But with observational studies there are always caveats. The study also found an association between those who consumed more hot red chili peppers and gender, age, ethnicity, marriage status, smoking and alcohol consumption, certain diet preferences, lower HDL-cholesterol levels, and lowered income and education levels. The study might have focused on one of those variables instead of longevity.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers from the University of Copenhagen and humanitarian organizations have conducted a large study in Burkina Faso in West Africa treating more than 1600 children with acute malnutrition. The study, published Monday 11 September in the open access medical journal PLOS Medicine, showed that corn-soy porridge should be replaced with a lipid-based nutrient supplement (LNS), a fortified peanut butter. The results of the study can be used directly both in the treatment and prevention of acute malnutrition.

Globally, more than 50 million children are affected by acute malnutrition. Those with the most severe acute malnutrition have more than ten times increased mortality, and those surviving may have impaired development, compared to children without malnutrition. But this can be prevented if children are treated early, while they only have moderate acute malnutrition.

Christian Fabiansen, MD PhD and a team from the Department of Nutrition, Sports and Exercise at the University of Copenhagen conducted the study in collaboration with a PhD-student from the Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé in rural Northern Burkina Faso, where there was a high prevalence of acute malnutrition. Dr Fabiansen previously worked in humanitarian medical projects with Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), who also sponsored this work. The research was conducted in a malnutrition project run by the medical humanitarian organisation The Alliance for International Medical Action (ALIMA) and its Burkinabe partners Keoogo and SOS Médecins.

During the trial, 1609 small children with moderate acute malnutrition were given either LNS or corn-soy porridge for 12 weeks. The study found that children who received LNS experienced greater weight gain, and the large majority of the weight gain was healthy lean tissue.

Dr Fabiansen , the main author of the paper appearing in PLOS Medicine today, underscores the importance of the findings:

"Previous studies of nutritional supplements have mainly looked at the effect on weight gain. It has been a concern that LNS, with its very high fat content, would result mainly in weight gain composed of fat. But by using a method based measurement of heavy water in the child's body we have found that LNS mainly increase lean mass, that is muscles and organs, which are important for immune function, survival and development."

Novel standard for research in malnutrition may save lives

Professor Henrik Friis, the senior author on the paper, points to the importance of the collaboration between university researchers and humanitarian organizations:

"It has been a new way to conduct research, that we tested the effect of nutritional supplements used mainly by aid agencies, employing very advanced research methods in remote rural areas where humanitarian organization are working, and not at the university hospitals. The collaboration between researchers and humanitarian organizations means these findings can have immediate practical impact on field practice."

The General Director of the Danish section of MSF Jesper H. Brix notes:

"Acute malnutrition is still a major global health problem. So, I hope we can use the results to provide the best possible treatment for more vulnerable children. If we can treat children with moderate acute malnutrition with the scientifically proven most effective food aid product, and thereby prevent severe acute malnutrition, then many lives can be saved"

Dr Susan Shepherd, a paediatrician who heads ALIMA's Operational and Clinical Research, says:

"ALIMA is very proud of its participation in this study. Vulnerable children, no matter where they live, deserve the best medical and nutritional treatments available. Studies like Treatfood generate the evidence we need to make the best decisions with our patients. ALIMA is committed to developing more research partnerships in its humanitarian projects, because this is how we will raise the quality of medical practice for all."

University of Copenhagen, Doctors Without Borders and ALIMA have collaborated on the project Treatfood, which aims to improve products for children with acute malnutrition. The study was primarily funded by Danida, MSF-Denmark and MSF-Norway, and USAID via the World Food Programme.

The main Treatfood results are presented in the paper: Effectiveness of food supplements in increasing fat-free tissue accretion in children with moderate acute malnutrition: A randomised 2 × 2 × 3 factorial trial in Burkina Faso, published in the open access medical journal PLOS Medicine. Earlier peer-reviewed articles from the study have appeared in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, BMC Nutrition, and Appetite.

Malnutrition in children can be chronic or acute. In acute malnutrition children are thin relative to their height, or wasted. Approximately 8% or 50 mio children globally are affected by acute malnutrition. Of these, 2/3 have moderate and 1/3 severe acute malnutrition. Acute malnutrition is more life-threatening than chronic. In chronic malnutrition the children are short relative to their age, or stunted. More than 30% of children in the world have chronic malnutrition.

Previous research has focused on treatment of severe acute malnutrition. WHO has called for research to identify the most optimal foods for treatment of children with moderate acute malnutrition.

Phd Christian Fabiansen 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Telephone: +45 22440844 

Mail: chfa@nexs.ku.dk

Professor Henrik Friis 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Telephone: +45 26253968 

Mail: hfr@nexs.ku.dk

Kristian Levring Madsen 

Communication Manager 

Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen 

Telephone: +45 4048 1684 

Mail: kma@nexs.ku.dk
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Readers are told there were two arms of the study, the treatment lasted for 12 weeks, and children’s lean mass was assessed afterward. It would have been better if the news release mentioned that children were randomly assigned to treatment. Nevertheless, the basics for understanding how the study was conducted are provided.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - National guidelines help doctors decide how to treat high blood pressure. But tailoring those guidelines to better fit individuals could prevent many more heart attacks and strokes, say developers of a computer model that makes those calculations.

Their study, published Monday in the Annals of Internal Medicine, estimated the effects of using “individualized guidelines” to make decisions on treating high blood pressure.

It found that the tailored approach could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than the simpler, general recommendations used now.

Currently, U.S. guidelines recommend treatment if blood pressure rises above 140/90 mm Hg, or above 130/80 mm Hg if a person has diabetes or chronic kidney disease.

Doctors generally add their own judgment to that decision as well. If, for instance, a person has slightly elevated blood pressure but is otherwise at low risk for heart problems, then lifestyle changes might be enough.

But the new study looked at a more sophisticated way of estimating individual patients’ needs. Researchers used a computer-based “risk calculator” that took into account a person’s age, cholesterol levels, family history of heart disease and any diabetes diagnosis.

It also factored in what’s known about different types of patients’ responses to various blood pressure medications.

The researchers then used data from a long-term study of 15,800 Americans to estimate the effects of applying the individualized guidelines.

Overall, they found, the tailored method could prevent 43 percent more heart attacks and strokes than national guidelines, if healthcare costs were kept the same.

If, on the other hand, the number of heart attacks and strokes prevented were kept the same, the individualized guidelines would accomplish that result at a 67 percent cost savings versus the national guidelines.

The goal of using the risk calculator “is the same as the physician’s desire to take into account the ‘whole patient’ when discussing treatment options with patients,” said lead researcher Dr. David M. Eddy.

The problem with the old-fashioned way, he told Reuters Health in an email, is that there are many pieces of information about a patient to consider.

“It is impossible for the human brain to digest it all and estimate accurately the patient’s risks or how they would benefit from treatments,” he said.

According to Eddy, risk calculators like the one in the study could, eventually, help doctors give patients real numbers. A doctor might tell you, for example, what your risk is of developing diabetes in the next 20 years, and how much you could cut that risk if you lose a certain amount of weight (and keep it off).

Eddy is a founder of Archimedes, Inc., a San Francisco-based company that has developed a computer-based mathematical model to aid in healthcare decisions. The calculator used in this study is a simplified version of that model.

Eddy said that the calculator, or others like it, could be integrated into electronic health records. A patient’s information could be automatically fed to the calculator, and the results would then be displayed on a computer for the doctor and patient to discuss.

A researcher not involved in the work said it was a “nice study” that is a first step toward showing that tailored guidelines could have benefits.

“This shows that there might be better ways for physicians to choose who gets treated and who does not,” said Dr. Douglas K. Owens of the VA Palo Alto Health Care System in California, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

General guidelines, like those for treating high blood pressure, are kept fairly simple so they are easy to remember, Owens told Reuters Health in an interview. Doctors, ideally, then adapt those guidelines to individual patients’ situations.

However, Owens said, “it’s hard to do all of that in your head. This gives them a tool.”

Now the looming questions are how to implement risk calculators in doctors’ practices — and, Owens said, whether that benefits patients’ health in the real world.

“The general theme is that we can do better, and we may have an opportunity to improve patients’ health outcomes,” Owens said. “That’s the hope.”

He said he thinks electronic health records will be key to putting individualized guidelines into practice.

And right now, there is a way to go before most doctors will have those systems in place.

A recent government survey found that the percentage of U.S. doctors using electronic health records is on the rise, but still fairly low.

About one-quarter of surveyed doctors said they had “basic” electronic medical record systems in their offices. Only about 10 percent had a “fully functional” system that included extensive information on patients’ medical history.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did an adequate job explaining how the analysis was done.  And, through the words of an independent expert (author of an editorial accompanying the journal article), it injected some real-world cautions:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Note: A media teleconference with researchers and patients from Johns Hopkins and New York University will be held on Wednesday, Nov. 30, from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. ET. To participate, U.S.-based media may call 855-698-2663; international media should dial 011-646-754-2524. The access code is 48330192. Phone lines open at 10:50 a.m., and all media should place speakers on mute unless posing a question. Reporters wishing to ask a question should email their name and outlet to david.march@nyumc.org during the briefing so they may be placed in a queue; the moderator will call on individual media members to ask a question in the order names and outlets were received.

In a small double-blind study, Johns Hopkins researchers report that a substantial majority of people suffering cancer-related anxiety or depression found considerable relief for up to six months from a single large dose of psilocybin -- the active compound in hallucinogenic "magic mushrooms."

The researchers cautioned that the drug was given in tightly controlled conditions in the presence of two clinically trained monitors and said they do not recommend use of the compound outside of such a research or patient care setting.

The Johns Hopkins team released its study results, involving 51 adult patients, concurrently with researchers from New York University Langone Medical Center, who conducted a similarly designed study on 29 participants. Both studies are published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology on Dec. 1.

The Johns Hopkins group reported that psilocybin decreased clinician- and patient-rated depressed mood, anxiety and death anxiety, and increased quality of life, life meaning and optimism. Six months after the final session of treatment, about 80 percent of participants continued to show clinically significant decreases in depressed mood and anxiety, with about 60 percent showing symptom remission into the normal range. Eighty-three percent reported increases in well-being or life satisfaction. Some 67 percent of participants reported the experience as one of the top five meaningful experiences in their lives, and about 70 percent reported the experience as one of the top five spiritually significant lifetime events.

"The most interesting and remarkable finding is that a single dose of psilocybin, which lasts four to six hours, produced enduring decreases in depression and anxiety symptoms, and this may represent a fascinating new model for treating some psychiatric conditions," says Roland Griffiths, Ph.D., professor of behavioral biology in the Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and of Neuroscience at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. He notes that traditional psychotherapy offered to people with cancer, including behavioral therapy and antidepressants, can take weeks or even months, isn't always effective, and in the case of some drugs, such as benzodiazepines, may have addictive and other troubling side effects.

Griffiths says his team's new study grew out of a decade of research at Johns Hopkins on the effects of psilocybin in healthy volunteers, which found that psilocybin can consistently produce positive changes in mood, behavior and spirituality when administered to carefully screened and prepared participants. The study was designed to see if psilocybin could produce similar results in psychologically distressed cancer patients.

"A life-threatening cancer diagnosis can be psychologically challenging, with anxiety and depression as very common symptoms," says Griffiths. "People with this kind of existential anxiety often feel hopeless and are worried about the meaning of life and what happens upon death."

For the study, the investigators recruited 51 participants diagnosed with life-threatening cancers, most of which were recurrent or metastatic. They were chosen from a total of 566 individuals reached through flyers, web advertisements and physician referrals. Most participants had breast, upper digestive, GI, genitourinary or blood cancer, and each had been given a formal psychiatric diagnosis, including an anxiety or depressive disorder.

Half of the participants were female with an average age of 56. Ninety-two percent were white, 4 percent were African-American and 2 percent were Asian.

Each participant had two treatment sessions scheduled five weeks apart, one with a very low psilocybin dose (1 or3 milligrams per 70 kilograms) taken in a capsule and meant to act as a "control" placebo because the dose was too low to produce effects. In the other session, participants received a capsule with what is considered a moderate or high dose (22 or 30 milligrams per 70 kilograms).

To minimize expectancy effects, the participants and the staff members supervising the sessions were told that the participants would receive psilocybin on both sessions, but they did not know that all participants would receive one high and one low dose. Blood pressure and mood were monitored throughout the sessions. Two monitors aided participants during each session, encouraging them to lie down, wear an eye mask, listen to music through headphones and direct their attention on their inner experience. If anxiety or confusion arose, the monitors provided reassurance to the participants.

In addition to experiencing changes in visual perception, emotions and thinking, most participants reported experiences of psychological insight and often profound, deeply meaningful experiences of the interconnectedness of all people.

The researchers assessed each participant's mood, attitude about life, behaviors and spirituality with questionnaires and structured interviews before the first session, seven hours after taking the psilocybin, five weeks after each session and six months after the second session. Immediately after the sessions, participants completed questionnaires assessing changes in visual, auditory and body perceptions; feelings of transcendence; changes in mood; and more.

Structured clinical interviews, such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, and patient questionnaires, like the Beck Depression Inventory and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, assessed depression and anxiety. Other questionnaires assessed quality of life, death acceptance, meaningful existence, optimism and spirituality -- generally defined as a search for the meaning of life and a connection to something bigger than one's self. To measure the changes in attitudes, moods and behavior over time, the researchers administered a questionnaire that assessed negative or positive changes in attitudes about life, mood and behavior.

With regard to adverse effects, Griffiths says 15 percent of participants were nauseated or vomited, and one-third of participants experienced some psychological discomfort, such as anxiety or paranoia, after taking the higher dose. One-third of the participants had transient increases in blood pressure. A few participants reported headaches following the session.

"Before beginning the study, it wasn't clear to me that this treatment would be helpful, since cancer patients may experience profound hopelessness in response to their diagnosis, which is often followed by multiple surgeries and prolonged chemotherapy," says Griffiths. "I could imagine that cancer patients would receive psilocybin, look into the existential void and come out even more fearful. However, the positive changes in attitudes, moods and behavior that we documented in healthy volunteers were replicated in cancer patients."

Up to 40 percent of people with cancer suffer from a mood disorder, according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

Anticipating wide interest in the psilocybin research from scientists, clinicians and the public, the journal solicited 11 commentaries to be co-published with the study results written by luminaries in psychiatry, palliative care and drug regulation, including two past presidents of the American Psychiatric Association, a past president of the European College of Neuropsychopharmacology, the former deputy director of the U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the former head of the U.K. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Authority. In general, the commentaries were supportive of the research and of using these drugs in a clinical setting as tools for psychiatry.

Additional authors included Matthew Johnson, Michael Carducci, Annie Umbricht, William Richards, Brian Richards, Mary Cosimano and Margaret Klinedinst, all of The Johns Hopkins University.

The study was funded by grants from the Heffter Research Institute, the RiverStyx Foundation, William Linton, the Betsy Gordon Foundation, the McCormick family, the Fetzer Institute, George Goldsmith, Ekaterina Malievskaia and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (R01DA03889).
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does an exceptionally good job here, laying out the study design over the course of seven paragraphs. The description of the study was both detailed and accessible to non-experts. Nicely done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Exposing sleeping people to a series of short flashing lights at night might help them adjust more quickly to time zone changes, according to a new U.S. study.

In experiments, the technique – which is based on the way non-visual parts of the brain respond to light – was much more effective than sustained bright light similar to that from devices sometimes used to combat sleep disorders or seasonal depression.

“Jet lag itself is really a nuisance syndrome as it is self-resolving,” said senior author Jamie Zeitzer, assistant professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the Stanford University School of Medicine in California.

Zeitzer was on the committee that removed jet lag as a “disease” from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), the guide that psychiatrists use to diagnose mental illnesses.

“However, the treatments that are developed for jet lag can be used for less prevalent, though far more significant societal problems including delayed sleep in teens (in whom we have an ongoing clinical trial using the flash technique) and shift workers who try to flip between a night time schedule for work and a day time schedule for leisure,” he told Reuters Health by email.

The study included 39 people, 31 of whom were exposed to a series of two-millisecond light flashes with changing intervals while sleeping, and eight of whom were exposed to 60 minutes of continuous bright light.

A series of flashes similar to a camera flash delivered every 10 seconds over a 60-minute period delayed sleepiness by two hours, compared to a 36-minute delay for those exposed to continuous light for an hour, according to the results published in the Journal of Clinical Investigation.

“In essence, using the night before you traveled from California to N.Y. would move your circadian system two-thirds of the way there before you even left,” Zeitzer said.

Arriving in New York, you would be synced to the local time after one day, he said.

“The circadian clock is the central conductor of the many clocks that are found in nearly all tissues of your body,” Zeitzer said. “This clock remains synchronized with the external day through regular exposure to light.”

Nighttime flashes change the timing of the circadian clock, he said.

“For moving your system to a later time, such as would be necessary when traveling East-to-West, light during the first few hours of the night is ideal,” he said. “For moving your system to an earlier time, such as would be necessary when traveling West-to-East, light during the last few hours of the night is ideal.”

The night flashes require special technology and equipment, beyond just a smartphone, which are still in development, Zeitzer said.

In a previous study, the short flashes of light at night did not interrupt sleep or reduce its quality, he added.

“This is one of the real advantages of this system - you can change circadian timing while you sleep, without interfering with sleep,” he said.

Mistiming light therapy can make jet lag worse, cautioned Anna Wirz-Justice, professor emeritus at the Center for Chronobiology at the University of Basel in Switzerland, who was not part of the new study.

As for frequent flyers trying this themselves, it is “far too early – neither the methodology is available outside research, nor any guidance about safety, nor tests of simulated jet lag in an appropriate ‘realistic’ protocol,” Wirz-Justice told Reuters Health by email.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This report rates satisfactory on the quality of evidence by including cautionary advice from an outside observer saying that independent verification needs to happen: It is “far too early – neither the methodology is available [to] outside research, nor any guidance about safety, nor tests of simulated jet lag in an appropriate ‘realistic’ protocol,”  according to Anna Wirz-Justice.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Fennel extract, herbal tea and sugar water relieved colic in some infants better than a placebo, according to a new study that reviewed clinical trials of alternative remedies for colic.

But parents shouldn't get their hopes up too high. All of the trials reviewed had "major limitations," such as having too few patients, relying on parental reports of symptoms, or the study design (such as not being double-blinded).

"The notion that any form of complementary and alternative medicine is effective for infantile colic currently is not supported from the evidence from the included randomized clinical trials," the researchers from the United Kingdom wrote. "Additional replications are needed before firm conclusions can be drawn."

But because fennel extract, certain herbal teas and sugar water are generally safe, and because the research does suggest babies may benefit, pediatricians said they would feel comfortable recommending them to parents.

"It's reasonable for parents to consider those kinds of interventions for which there is some suggestion of benefit but no known risks," said Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York.

The study, published in the April print issue of Pediatrics, appears online March 28.

Colic usually starts when a baby is about three weeks old, said Dr. Ari Brown, a pediatrician in Austin, Texas, and author of the Expecting 411 book series. Colic is usually defined as excessive and inconsolable crying for at least three hours a day for more than three days a week over more than three weeks.

"It's miserable for both baby and the parents," Brown said. "And although we've been studying it for years, no one has figured out what the cause is, which makes it all the more difficult to treat."

In the United States, between 5 and 19 percent of infants are estimated to have colic, according to background information in the article.

Because pediatricians can't offer parents much help with it -- for the most part, babies grow out of colic in time -- desperate parents often turn to alternative or complementary treatments, according to the study.

In the review, the study authors searched various databases of medical research and chose 15 randomized clinical trials involving alternative treatments for colic. The studies were published between 1991 and 2008, came from 10 different countries and included a total of 944 children.

Several studies looked at spinal manipulation by a chiropractor. In three of those studies, parents reported their children cried significantly less afterwards. But those studies were small and flawed, so no conclusions can be made about the technique, according to the new review.

Three studies looked at herbal supplements. One found improvement in infants given fennel extract compared to infants given a placebo; another found that infants given a tea containing chamomile, vervain, licorice, fennel and balm-mint seemed to work; while a third found infants given a tea containing fennel, lemon balm and chamomile cried less than infants given a placebo.

Fennel, an intestinal "antispasmodic," may increase the speed at which food moves through the intestine, Brown said. This may help if the underlying cause of colic is cramping or discomfort due to an immature digestive tract, although that is just a theory, Brown added.

Two studies looked at giving babies solutions of sugar water, which some researchers believe has pain-killing properties. The parents of babies given sugar water reported significantly less crying. (If parents want to try it, they could deliver sugar water in a dropper, or put a small amount in a bottle, Adesman said.)

A study of probiotics, which are reputed to help digestion, found that 95 percent of infants given L. reuteria probiotics seemed to reduce their average crying time compared to 7 percent of babies given simethicone, which is marketed to relieve gas under the brand names Mylicon and PediaCare Infants' Gas Relief.

"This is pertinent given that simethicone is considered the best available and most commonly prescribed treatment for colic, although it previously has been shown to be no more effective than the placebo," according to the authors.

Brown said the strength of that finding suggests L. reuteria is worth further study.

One study found no difference in improvement of symptoms between infants whose parents were taught to do infant massage compared to infants put in a crib that vibrated. Nor did soy-enriched formula seem to help.

A small study of babies given reflexology showed some improvement, but there was no difference in whether the reflexology targeted the feet, which are considered to be therapeutic for colic, or other parts of the body.

This implies the improvement may "have more to do with the therapeutic effect of touch than the actual therapy itself," Dr. Edzard Ernst, of the department of complementary medicine at Peninsula Medical School, Universities of Exeter and Plymouth, in the United Kingdom, and colleagues wrote in the report.

The Nemours Foundation has more on colic.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a great job packing in a lot of information about the evidence in a tightly written story. For example, it starts off by saying, “In the review, the study authors searched various databases of medical research and chose 15 randomized clinical trials involving alternative treatments for colic. The studies were published between 1991 and 2008, came from 10 different countries and included a total of 944 children.” Then it says, “Several studies looked at spinal manipulation by a chiropractor. In three of those studies, parents reported their children cried significantly less afterwards. But those studies were small and flawed, so no conclusions can be made about the technique, according to the new review.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Minimally invasive surgery for a burst appendix appears to be more successful and less costly in the long run than the traditional operation, a new study hints.

Using the gentler technique, called laparoscopy, a surgeon makes small cuts in the abdomen before inserting a tiny camera inside, then performing the operation by watching a television monitor.

Doctors say this type of operation hurts patients less afterward than the conventional “open” method, which involves one long incision in the abdomen of up to 12 inches.

But experiments comparing the two kinds of procedure have yielded mixed outcomes, and some experts remain unconvinced that laparoscopy is worth its higher upfront cost.

The new study, in the Annals of Surgery, doesn’t settle that question. But it does suggest that laparoscopy could actually save thousands of dollars for some patients, when all costs — including physician fees, hospital fees and readmissions — are considered.

“You really want to look at the total cost, because that’s what society has to pay,” said Dr. Dmitry Oleynikov, who heads the Center for Advanced Surgical Technology at Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha and led the new study.

“Overall, this study shows benefit from laparoscopy on every aspect, including cost,” he told Reuters Health.

Appendix removals are one of the most common surgeries in the U.S., with some 750,000 procedures done every year, Oleynikov added.

With his colleagues, he looked back at some 40,000 such surgeries done at dozens of academic medical centers in the U.S. — roughly 14,000 open procedures and 26,000 laparoscopic ones.

For uncomplicated cases of appendicitis, in which the appendix is still intact, the tabs for the two surgeries came out about the same, at just over $7,800.

People who had the laparoscopic procedures also had lower death rates, at 0.07 percent versus 0.17 percent, fewer readmissions and a slightly shorter stay at the hospital.

When the appendix had burst, however, the open surgery racked up a considerably higher bill. On average, it cost $17,594, compared to $12,125 for the laparoscopic surgery.

Yet again, the patients who had laparoscopy fared much better than those who had conventional surgery.

“In healthy individuals, the death rate is very (small) for all groups of patients. But when you become sicker, laparoscopy is better,” said Oleynikov. “Substantial savings could be seen if open surgery is done in a laparoscopic fashion.”

But he acknowledged that the study has major limitations. First, it looks only at academic medical centers. And second, it’s not a randomized controlled trial, which means the patients being compared could be different in important ways, explaining at least part of the outcomes of the two types of surgery.

Indeed, those who had laparoscopy were younger and usually had less severe disease, which could have biased the results in favor of the minimally invasive procedure.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story quotes the lead researcher’s own caveats about limitations of the research: “he acknowledged that the study has major limitations. First, it looks only at academic medical centers. And second, it’s not a randomized controlled trial, which means the patients being compared could be different in important ways, explaining at least part of the outcomes of the two types of surgery.Indeed, those who had laparoscopy were younger and usually had less severe disease, which could have biased the results in favor of the minimally invasive procedure.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lauren Pestikas sits as she receives an infusion of the drug ketamine during a 45-minute session at an outpatient clinic in Chicago on July 25, 2018. Pestikas struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before starting ketamine treatments earlier in the year. (AP Photo/Teresa Crawford)

CHICAGO (AP) — It was launched decades ago as an anesthetic for animals and people, became a potent battlefield pain reliever in Vietnam and morphed into the trippy club drug Special K.

Now the chameleon drug ketamine is finding new life as an unapproved treatment for depression and suicidal behavior. Clinics have opened around the United States promising instant relief with their “unique” doses of ketamine in IVs, sprays or pills. And desperate patients are shelling out thousands of dollars for treatment often not covered by health insurance, with scant evidence on long-term benefits and risks.

Chicago preschool teacher Lauren Pestikas long struggled with depression and anxiety and made several suicide attempts before trying ketamine earlier this year.

The price tag so far is about $3,000, but “it’s worth every dime and penny,” said the 36-year-old.

Pestikas said she feels much better for a few weeks after each treatment, but the effects wear off and she scrambles to find a way to pay for another one.

For now, ketamine has not received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treating depression, though doctors can use it for that purpose.

Ketamine has been around since the 1960s and is widely used as an anesthesia drug during surgery because it doesn’t suppress breathing. Compared to opioids such as morphine, ketamine isn’t as addictive and doesn’t cause breathing problems. And some studies have shown that ketamine can ease symptoms within hours for the toughest cases.

Its potential effects on depression were discovered in animal experiments in the late 1980s and early 1990s showing that glutamate, a brain chemical messenger, might play a role in depression, and that drugs including ketamine that target the glutamate pathway might work as antidepressants.

Conventional antidepressants like Prozac target serotonin, a different chemical messenger, and typically take weeks to months to kick in — a lag that can cause severely depressed patients to sink deeper into despair.

Ketamine’s potential for almost immediate if temporary relief is what makes it so exciting, said Dr. Jennifer Vande Voort, a Mayo Clinic psychiatrist who has used ketamine to treat depression patients since February.

“We don’t have a lot of things that provide that kind of effect. What I worry about is that it gets so hyped up,” she said.

The strongest studies suggest it’s most useful and generally safe in providing short-term help for patients who have not benefited from antidepressants. That amounts to about one-third of the roughly 300 million people with depression worldwide.

“It truly has revolutionized the field,” changing scientists’ views on how depression affects the brain and showing that rapid relief is possible, said Yale University psychiatrist Dr. Gerard Sanacora, who has done research for or consulted with companies seeking to develop ketamine-based drugs.

But to become standard depression treatment, he said, much more needs to be known.

Last year, Sanacora co-authored an American Psychiatric Association task force review of ketamine treatment for mood disorders that noted the benefits but said “major gaps” remain in knowledge about long-term effectiveness and safety. Most studies have been small, done in research settings and not in the real world.

When delivered through an IV, ketamine can cause a rapid increase in heart rate and blood pressure that could be dangerous for some patients. Ketamine also can cause hallucinations that some patients find scary.

“There are some very real concerns,” Sanacora said. “We do know this drug can be abused, so we have to be very careful about how this is developed.”

Dr. Rahul Khare, an emergency medicine specialist in Chicago, first learned about ketamine’s other potential benefits a decade ago from a depressed and anxious patient he was preparing to sedate to fix a repeat dislocated shoulder.

“He said, ‘Doc, give me what I got last time. For about three weeks after I got it I felt so much better,’” Khare recalled.

Khare became intrigued and earlier this year began offering ketamine for severe depression at an outpatient clinic he opened a few years ago. He also joined the American Society for Ketamine Physicians, formed a year ago representing about 140 U.S. doctors, nurses, psychologists and others using ketamine for depression or other nonapproved uses.

There are about 150 U.S. ketamine clinics, compared with about 20 three years ago, said society co-founder Dr. Megan Oxley.

Khare said the burgeoning field “is like a new frontier” where doctors gather at meetings and compare notes. He has treated about 50 patients with depression including Pestikas. They’re typically desperate for relief after failing to respond to other antidepressants. Some have lost jobs and relationships because of severe depression, and most find that ketamine allows them to function, Khare said.

Typical treatment at his clinic involves six 45-minute sessions over about two weeks, costing $550 each. Some insurers will pay about half of that, covering Khare’s office visit cost. Patients can receive “booster” treatments. They must sign a four-page consent form that says benefits may not be long-lasting, lists potential side effects, and in bold letters states that the treatment is not government-approved.

At a recent session, Pestikas’s seventh, she leaned back on a reclining white examining-room chair as a nurse hooked her up to a heart and blood pressure monitor. She grimaced as a needle was slipped into the top of her left palm. Khare reached up with a syringe to inject a small dose of ketamine into an IV bag hanging above the chair, then dimmed the lights, pulled the window curtains and asked if she had questions and was feeling OK.

Pestikas listened to music on her iPhone and watched psychedelic videos. She said it was like “a controlled acid trip” with pleasant hallucinations. The trip ends soon after the IV is removed, but Pestikas said she feels calm and relaxed the rest of the day, and that the mood boost can last weeks.

Studies suggest that a single IV dose of ketamine far smaller than used for sedation or partying can help many patients gain relief within about four hours and lasting nearly a week or so.

Exactly how ketamine works is unclear, but one idea is that by elevating glutamate levels, ketamine helps nerve cells re-establish connections that were disabled by depression, said ketamine expert Dr. Carlos Zarate, chief of experimental therapies at the National Institute of Mental Health.

A small Stanford University study published in August suggested that ketamine may help relieve depression by activating the brain’s opioid receptors.

Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Allergan are among drug companies developing ketamine-like drugs for depression. Janssen leads the effort with its nasal spray esketamine. The company filed a new drug application in September.

Meanwhile, dozens of studies are underway seeking to answer some of the unknowns about ketamine including whether repeat IV treatments work better for depression and if there’s a way to zero in on which patients are most likely to benefit.

Until there are answers, Zarate of the mental health institute said ketamine should be a last-resort treatment for depression after other methods have failed.

The Associated Press Health & Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Department of Science Education. The AP is solely responsible for all content
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned “scant evidence on long-term benefits and risks,” the view that “much more needs to be known,” and an American Psychiatric Association review that noted “major gaps” in knowledge about ketamine’s long-term effectiveness and safety.
It also said “dozens of studies are underway seeking to answer some of the unknowns about ketamine including whether repeat IV treatments work better for depression and if there’s a way to zero in on which patients are most likely to benefit.”
The story also said the “strongest studies suggest it’s most useful and generally safe in providing short-term help for patients who have not benefited from antidepressants.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Men who filled prescriptions for erectile dysfunction drugs in the years following a heart attack had a substantially lower risk of dying or being hospitalized for heart failure than men who did not use these drugs, according to a study scheduled for presentation at the American College of Cardiology's 66th Annual Scientific Session.

The study, which retrospectively tracked more than 43,000 men for an average of 3.3 years, found that men prescribed phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitors--the type of erectile dysfunction drug sold under the names Viagra, Levitra, Cialis and others--after their first heart attack were 33 percent less likely to die from any cause. No survival benefit was seen among men taking alprostadil, another type of erectile dysfunction drug that works through a different mechanism.

"If you have an active sex life after a heart attack, it is probably safe to use PDE5 inhibitors," said Daniel Peter Andersson, MD, PhD, a postdoctoral researcher at Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm and the study's lead author. "This type of erectile dysfunction treatment is beneficial in terms of prognosis, and having an active sex life seems to be a marker for a decreased risk of death."

The research is based on a Swedish national database of health records that includes all hospitals in Sweden. Researchers analyzed the records of men age 80 years or younger who were hospitalized for a first heart attack between 2007 and 2013. Tracking the men for an average of 3.3 years following this first heart attack, they compared outcomes among those who subsequently filled a prescription for a PDE5 inhibitor or alprostadil to those who did not. Overall just over 7 percent of men were prescribed an erectile dysfunction drug, 92 percent of whom were prescribed a PDE5 inhibitor and 8 percent of whom were prescribed alprostadil.

After adjusting for cardiovascular risk factors including diabetes, heart failure and stroke, those taking PDE5 inhibitors were found to be markedly less likely to die than those taking alprostadil or no erectile dysfunction drugs. Filling more prescriptions for PDE5 inhibitors appeared to be associated with a greater benefit, although Andersson said that trend should be interpreted with caution because the study was not large enough for a definitive dose-response analysis.

In addition to a decreased mortality, men using PDE5 inhibitors or alprostadil were 40 percent less likely to be hospitalized for heart failure compared to those not taking any erectile dysfunction drugs.

Although the results provide evidence that PDE5 inhibitors may benefit heart health, the retrospective study design makes it impossible to ascertain direct cause and effect, Andersson noted. It is possible that using erectile dysfunction drugs simply indicates a more active sex life, which could itself contribute to, or be a marker of, a heart-healthy lifestyle overall.

"We think that if you have an active sex life it's probably an indicator of a healthy lifestyle, especially in the oldest quartile--those 70 to 80 years old," Andersson said. "From the perspective of a doctor, if a patient asks about erectile dysfunction drugs after a heart attack and has no contraindications for PDE5 inhibitors, based on these results you can feel safe about prescribing it."

Andersson said the results came as a surprise because erectile dysfunction is associated with an increased risk of heart disease in otherwise healthy men. However, previous studies have associated the use of PDE5 inhibitors with a decreased blood pressure in the left ventricle, which reduces the amount of work required to pump blood and therefore could help explain why the drugs might benefit people with heart failure. PDE5 inhibitors were initially developed to treat angina, a type of chest pain that results from constricted arteries.

The researchers also tracked the risk of a subsequent heart attack or cardiac revascularization procedure, such as angioplasty or coronary artery bypass but found the use of erectile dysfunction drugs had no effect on these outcomes.

A limitation of the study is that the researchers did not assess the effects of untreated erectile dysfunction, or conversely, the effect of having an active sex life without taking erectile dysfunction drugs. The researchers also were unable to account for socioeconomic status; as a next step, they are planning a larger study that will include more health records and complete information on marital status, educational level and disposable income. They are also pursuing a separate analysis of outcomes from erectile dysfunction drugs in men with Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes.

This study received funding from the Stockholm County Council and the Swedish Heart and Lung Foundation.

Andersson will present the study, "Association Between Erectile Dysfunction and Death or Cardiovascular Outcomes After Myocardial Infarction," on Friday, March 17, at 1:30 p.m. ET at Poster Hall C at the American College of Cardiology's 66th Annual Scientific Session in Washington. The meeting runs March 17-19.

The ACC's Annual Scientific Session, which in 2017 will be March 17-19 in Washington, brings together cardiologists and cardiovascular specialists from around the world to share the newest discoveries in treatment and prevention. Follow @ACCCardioEd, @ACCMediaCenter and #ACC17 for the latest news from the meeting.

The American College of Cardiology is a 52,000-member medical society that is the professional home for the entire cardiovascular care team. The mission of the College is to transform cardiovascular care and to improve heart health. The ACC leads in the formation of health policy, standards and guidelines. The College operates national registries to measure and improve care, offers cardiovascular accreditation to hospitals and institutions, provides professional medical education, disseminates cardiovascular research and bestows credentials upon cardiovascular specialists who meet stringent qualifications.

Andersson will be available to the media in an embargoed web briefing on Tuesday, March 7, 2017, at 2 p.m. ET. Eligible media should register for ACC.17 to receive access to the briefing.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release provides sufficient information on the study goals, design and outcomes. The readers is told the study was retrospective, and tracked more than 43,000 men for an average of 3.3 years.
The release includes several important caveats. It notes as a limitation that “researchers did not assess the effects of untreated erectile dysfunction, or conversely, the effect of having an active sex life without taking erectile dysfunction drugs.”
And it included an indirect reminder that observational studies do not prove cause and effect: “Although the results provide evidence that PDE5 inhibitors may benefit heart health, the retrospective study design makes it impossible to ascertain direct cause and effect.”  What was it about the retrospective study design that made it impossible to ascertain cause and effect? The fact that it’s observational.
It is possible that using erectile dysfunction drugs simply indicates a more active sex life, which could itself contribute to, or be a marker of, a heart-healthy lifestyle overall.
But the study did not demonstrate a reduced risk of myocardial infarction associated with ED drug use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 20 (HealthDay News)-- An experimental drug for treating Alzheimer's disease that previously showed troubling side effects may actually be safe in the long run, researchers report.

The keys to the safety of the drug, bapineuzumab, may be lowering the dose and not giving it to patients with ApoE4, a gene mutation linked to Alzheimer's, according to two studies scheduled for presentation Wednesday at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference on Alzheimer's Disease in Paris.

"The data from the open-label trial are encouraging. Patients were able to tolerate bapineuzumab for two to four additional years without the emergence of any new safety concerns," said Dr. Stephen Salloway, author of one of the studies. "This is important because we are conceptualizing this drug as a long-term treatment for Alzheimer's disease."

Encouraging does not translate into certainty, however, another expert pointed out.

"I think it is too early to tell from the data from this small Phase 2 safety trial," said Ian Murray, an assistant professor of neuroscience and experimental therapeutics at Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine in College Station. "We will have to wait for larger trials to comment on this as a potential therapy."

The studies were funded by Pfizer Inc. and Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy.

Although bapineuzumab has shown promise in certain Alzheimer's patients, other research found that patients taking a higher dose of the drug had an increased risk of brain inflammation from water retention. This resulted in headache, memory loss, hallucinations, reduced coordination or other symptoms. But no problems were seen with lower doses.

Bapineuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody, which binds to and might be able to eliminate beta amyloid peptide in the brains of people with Alzheimer's. Most experts believe that the build up of beta amyloid proteins, which accumulate as plaque, is responsible for Alzheimer's.

Salloway's study looked at the drug's safety in 194 Alzheimer's patients, most of whom had mild- to-moderate Alzheimer's and participated in a long-term (78 weeks or longer) study. Some of the participants were followed for four years or more.

Ninety-one percent of participants had side effects, about a quarter of which were attributable to bapineuzumab. Of these, 85 percent were mild or moderate.

The overall rate of vasogenic edema (water on the brain) was 9.3 percent, a number that decreased over time, said Salloway, a professor of neurology and psychiatry at Alpert Medical School of Brown University and director of the Butler Hospital Memory and Aging Program in Providence, R.I. The edema was symptomless in most cases, he said.

The other study, which involved looking at more than 2,000 MRI scans from 262 patients, found 36 cases of amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA) may have been linked to the bapineuzumab.

These imaging abnormalities may indicate inflammation of the brain caused by water retention.

But only 8 of those 36 cases involved symptoms, and they were more likely to be found in patients with APOE-e4 who were taking higher doses of the drug. The likelihood of these effects diminished with additional infusions of lower-dose bapineuzumab.

"There is a growing sense that VE [vasogenic edema] or ARIA [amyloid-related imaging abnormalities] is a manageable side effect and may actually be a sign that the drug is clearing amyloid from the brain and the blood vessels," said Salloway. "Treatment will require ongoing monitoring with MRI."

The researchers, who said monitoring of bapineuzumab will continue, are now awaiting the results of a larger Phase III trial on the drug.

Because this study was presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Alzheimer's Association has more on this condition.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: At the end of this story, it was reported that the results had only been presented at a meeting and therefore considered only as preliminary until they were reviewed.  In addition, the story indicated that the study reported on was an open-label trial.
But it doesn’t explain what open-label means – hardly a consumer-friendly term. Wanna do a poll on how many readers know what it means? (In an open-label trial, both the clinician and patient know what it is that they are taking; the potential impact of that on results should be obvious.)
Nonethless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt, largely on the back of one of the expert sources being quoted:  “it is too early to tell from the data from this small Phase 2 safety trial.”
(Although, again, do we expect that most readers know what a Phase 2 trial really means?)
Barely satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Post-operative cognitive dysfunction (POCD), a condition mostly observed in older patients following surgery under general anesthesia, is characterized by impaired memory and concentration. The impairment may be temporary or permanent and incapacitating.

The problem has become more frequent as the population ages and also as a growing number of older adults undergo surgical procedures made possible by more advanced medical technology. Data from the scientific literature suggest a rise in mortality from POCD in the first year after surgery under general anesthesia.

The good news, according to a Brazilian study published by the journal PLoS One, is that two relatively simple measures can help to reduce the incidence of POCD: administering a small dose of the anti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone immediately before an operation and avoiding profound anesthesia during the operation.

Opinions on the adequate depth of anesthesia and the risks of very profound anesthesia currently diverge. Excessively superficial anesthesia is known to incur a risk of patient recall of the procedure, which is undesirable.

"Our findings confirm recent evidence that the deeper the anesthesia-induced hypnosis, the higher the incidence of POCD. The literature points to a link with the systemic inflammatory response induced by surgical trauma, damaging the central nervous system. If so, the use of an anti-inflammatory drug may have a protective effect," said Maria José Carvalho Carmona, a professor of anesthesiology at the University of São Paulo's Medical School (FM-USP) and principal investigator for the study.

The researchers evaluated 140 patients aged between 60 and 87 who underwent surgery under propofol-induced general anesthesia at the Central Institute of Hospital das Clínicas, FM-USP's teaching hospital, in most cases for removal of gallstones.

Pre-operative assessment included a battery of tests to measure mental and cognitive status. Patients who failed to achieve a cutoff score were excluded. The remaining subjects were divided randomly into four groups. In the operating room, deep anesthesia typical of major surgical procedures was induced in the first and third groups, and more superficial anesthesia in the second and fourth. Only the third and fourth groups received dexamethasone.

The depth of anesthesia was monitored using bispectral index (BIS) technology, which processes electroencephalogram signals to measure drug-induced unconsciousness. The researchers classified a BIS of 35-45 as deep anesthesia and a BIS of 46-55 as superficial anesthesia.

In the fourth group (superficial anesthesia with dexamethasone), the incidence of POCD was 15.3% immediately after surgery, but after six months the pre-operative cognitive status was restored in all patients.

"The results reinforce recent evidence of the importance of avoiding deep anesthesia," Carmona said. "With regard to the use of dexamethasone, more research is needed to confirm our finding, preferably in multicenter trials, but there are strong indications that it can be beneficial in many cases."

The earliest trials with patients who developed POCD were performed after the 1950s. Before that, older patients were rarely subjected to major surgery, and significant research in this field has only been conducted for approximately 15-20 years.

"The causes of and risk factors for POCD are still being discussed," she said. "Little is said about rehabilitation or ways of helping patients recover pre-operative cognitive function."

One of the obstacles to reliable diagnosis and rehabilitation is a lack of practical and secure instruments for pre- and post-operative cognitive assessment. "The tests available today are either too time consuming or quick but unreliable," Carmona said. "This makes it hard to follow up on patients."
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release explains that “The researchers evaluated 140 patients aged between 60 and 87 who underwent surgery under propofol-induced general anesthesia at the Central Institute of Hospital das Clínicas, FM-USP’s teaching hospital, in most cases for removal of gallstones.” The release further explains that patients were divided into four groups (as we described above, under the Benefits section), and defines what constitutes “deep” anesthesia and “superficial” anesthesia. Those are all good things. However, the release would have been much stronger if it had done three things. First, it should have made clear that all of the surgeries were non-cardiac, non-neurological surgeries. Given how common these surgeries — particularly cardiac ones — are for older patients, this is an important point. Second, the release should have made it more clear that the benefits observed were based on one group (i.e., Group Four) of only 32 patients. This is a preliminary finding, and that needs to be stressed. Third, while the release tells readers that the anesthetic used was propofol, it doesn’t tell readers how common or widely-used this drug is as a surgical anesthetic. That would be valuable context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Spinal manipulation and home exercise are more effective at relieving neck pain in the long term than medications, according to new research.

People undergoing spinal manipulation therapy for neck pain also reported greater satisfaction than people receiving medication or doing home exercises.

"We found that there are some viable treatment options for neck pain," said Gert Bronfort, vice president of research at the Wolfe-Harris Center for Clinical Studies at Northwestern Health Sciences University in Bloomington, Minn.

"What we don't really know yet is how to individualize these treatments for each particular patient. All are probably still viable treatment options, but what we don't know is what each particular patient will need," Bronfort said, adding that it's possible a combination of treatments might be helpful, too.

Results of the study are published in the Jan. 3 issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine. Funding for the study was provided by the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.

Neck pain is an extremely common problem. About three-quarters of adults report having neck pain at some point in their lives, according to background information in the study. Neck pain is responsible for millions of health care visits each year, and it can have a negative impact on quality of life.

Spinal manipulation is one type of treatment that's offered for neck pain, and it can be administered by chiropractors, physical therapists, osteopaths and other health care providers, according to the study.

But, there isn't much evidence for treating neck pain with spinal manipulation. There also isn't a great deal of information on how effective medications or home exercise programs are for treating neck pain, the researchers noted.

Bronfort and colleagues thought that spinal manipulation might prove to be more effective than medications or home exercise therapy. To test their hypothesis, they recruited 272 people between the ages of 18 and 65 who had neck pain. Their neck pain had no known cause, such as a trauma or pinched nerve, and the patients been experiencing the pain for between two and 12 weeks when the study began.

The study volunteers were randomly selected for one of three treatment groups. One group received spinal manipulations over a 12-week period. Each individual was allowed to choose the number of spinal manipulations they felt they needed.

The second group received medications, both over the counter and prescription, depending on their needs. First-line medications included nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications or acetaminophen (Tylenol). If people didn't get relief from these drugs, narcotic pain medications and muscle relaxants were offered.

The third group was assigned two one-hour sessions of home exercise. The goal of the home-exercise program was to improve movement in the neck area. Participants were instructed to do the exercises six to eight times per day.

At the 12th week, 82 percent of people receiving spinal manipulation reported at least a 50 percent reduction in pain, compared with 69 percent of those on medication and 77 percent doing home exercises. Also at week 12, of people receiving spinal manipulation, 32 percent reported feeling a 100 percent reduction in pain, compared with 13 percent on medications and 30 percent doing home exercises.

At one year, 27 percent of those receiving spinal manipulation said they felt a 100 percent reduction in pain versus 17 percent of those on medications and 37 percent of those doing home exercises.

"For me, as an ER doctor, this study offers an interesting perspective," said Dr. Robert Glatter, an attending physician in emergency medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "It's a small study, but it found that home exercises and spinal manipulation were effective. So, should we be referring to physical therapists, osteopaths or chiropractors from the ER?"

"This study shows that basically neck pain will get better on its own," said Dr. Victor Khabie, chief of the departments of surgery and sports medicine at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y. "It would've been good if they had a no-treatment group, too," he added.

"Everyone heals differently. There are different pathways to healing, and whether you feel you're better off with chiropractic, home exercises or medications, this study shows that all three are basically just as effective. Whatever your pathway to healing, in about six to eight weeks, you should start to feel better," said Khabie.

He also noted that it's important for anyone receiving spinal manipulation to know that there are rare, but serious risks that can occur with neck manipulations.

All three experts said anyone experiencing neck pain needs to have it evaluated to make sure there isn't a serious or correctable cause of the pain. This is especially true if you've been in a car accident, or if you have any neurological symptoms, such as repeatedly dropping things, or if you have pain radiating down your arm.

Learn more about neck pain, its causes and treatment from the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story gives readers the important highlights of the study design and how the researchers measured effectiveness. It also includes a comment from an independent source that the trial would have been better if it had included a no-treatment group (in order to look for improvements that were due simply to the passage of time or a placebo effect).
The story could have pointed out that unlike major drug trials that use placebo pills there was no way to prevent patients from knowing which treatment they received, which means the researchers can’t be sure that the reports from patients weren’t partially influenced by their beliefs about how effective a treatment might be. For instance, it could be that people who got spinal manipulation from a professional (and paid for it) might tend to believe that the treatment was more effective than a set of exercises that they did themselves at home.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Bernat added that brain imaging promised to improve the diagnosis of unconscious states in certain patients, but that the prospect of imaging could also raise false hopes in cases like that of Terri Schiavo, the Florida woman who was removed from life support and died last year after a bitter national debate over patients’ rights.

Ms. Schiavo suffered far more profound brain damage than the woman in the study and was unresponsive for some 15 years, according to neurologists who examined her.

The journal that published the new paper, Science, promoted the finding in a news release, but added a “special note” citing the Schiavo case and warning that the finding “should not be used to generalize about all other patients in a vegetative state, particularly since each case may involve a different type of injury.”

The brain researchers, led by Adrian Owen at the Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit in Cambridge, England, performed scans on the patient’s brain five months after her accident. The imaging technique, called functional M.R.I., reveals changes in activity in specific brain regions. When the researchers spoke sentences to the patient, language areas in her brain spiked in the same way healthy volunteers’ did.

When presented with sentences containing ambiguous words, like “The creak came from a beam in the ceiling,” additional language processing areas also became active, as in normal brains. And when the researchers asked the woman to imagine playing tennis or walking through her house, they saw peaks of activity in the premotor cortex and other areas of her brain that mimicked those of healthy volunteers.

“If you put her scans together with the other 12 volunteers tested, you cannot tell which is the patient’s,” Dr. Owen said in an interview. Doctors from the University of Cambridge and the University of Liège in Belgium collaborated on the research.

Dr. Nicholas Schiff, a neuroscientist at Weill Cornell Medical College in New York, said that the study provided “knock-down, drag-out” evidence for mental awareness, but that it was not clear “whether we’ll see this in one out of 100 vegetative patients, or one out of 1,000, or ever again.”

In a more recent exam, more than 11 months after her injury, the patient exhibited a sign of responsiveness: she tracked with her eyes a small mirror, as it was moved slowly to her right, and could fixate on objects for more than five seconds, said Dr. Steven Laureys, a neurologist at the University of Liège and an author of the study. This means by definition that the young woman has transitioned from an unresponsive, vegetative state to a sometimes responsive condition known as a minimally conscious state, Dr. Laureys said in an interview. An estimated 100,000 Americans exist in this state of partial consciousness, and some of them eventually regain full awareness.

The chances that an unresponsive, brain-damaged patient will eventually emerge depend on the type of injury suffered, and on the length of time he or she has been unresponsive. Traumatic injuries to the head, often from car accidents, tend to sever brain cell connections and leave many neurons intact. About 50 percent of people with such injuries recover some awareness in the first year after the injury, studies find; very few do so afterward. By contrast, brains starved of oxygen — like that of Ms. Schiavo, whose heart stopped temporarily — often suffer a massive loss of neurons, leaving virtually nothing unharmed. Only 15 percent of people who suffer brain damage from oxygen deprivation recover some awareness within the first three months. Very few do after that, and a 1994 review of more than 700 vegetative patients found that none had done so after two years.

The imaging techniques used in the new study could help identify which patients are most likely to emerge — once the tests are studied in larger numbers of unconscious people, said Dr. Joseph Fins, chief of the medical ethics division of New York Presbyterian Hospital-Weill Cornell Medical Center.

Without this context, Dr. Fins said, the imaging tests could create some confusion, because like any medical tests they may occasionally go wrong, misidentifying patients as exhibiting consciousness or lacking it. “For now I think what this study does is to create another shade of gray in the understanding of gray matter,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the nature of the evidence. In several places, the story reminds the reader that the results should not be generalized to all vegetative patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a small, phase I clinical trial, Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center researchers say they show for the first time that the experimental drug guadecitabine (SGI-110) is safe in combination with the chemotherapy drug irinotecan and may overcome resistance to irinotecan in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Results of the study are expected to be presented April 17 at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Annual Meeting 2016 in New Orleans (abstract CT017).

Guadecitabine works to reverse a so-called epigenetic change in cancer cells known as methylation, which may alter genetic activity in cells in a way that can block the action of tumor-suppressing genes, pushing cells to become cancerous and resistant to therapy. By reversing this change in cancer cells, the drug restores cancer cells' vulnerability to drugs such as irinotecan.

The clinical trial included 22 patients with metastatic colorectal cancer who had been treated previously with irinotecan and whose disease was progressing. The patients were divided into four groups, each receiving different doses of guadecitabine in combination with irinotecan, over an average period of four months.

During the study, 15 patients had at least one imaging scan to retest the extent and location of their cancers -- with 12 patients experiencing stable disease -- for more than the four-month period, on average, and one patient experiencing a partial response to the treatment (measured as at least a 30 percent reduction in the size of the tumors.)

Although the study's main purpose was to test the safety rather than the effectiveness of guadecitabine doses, "we were very happy to see some patients who benefited from the combination of the therapies for many months to more than a year," says Nilofer Azad, M.D., professor of oncology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

The study also showed signs that guadecitabine reduced methylation among the cancer cells. "We did see that giving a higher dose of the drug seemed to produce a better methylation response among patients," says Valerie Lee, M.D., a fellow at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center. "However, it seemed that patients were responding at all levels of the drug."

Among the side effects of the combined treatment, 16 patients experienced neutropenia, a low count of the infection-fighting white blood cells called neutrophils; five patients with neutropenia had fevers; three patients became anemic; and two patients developed thrombocytopenia, a lowered count of blood-clotting platelets. Other side effects included diarrhea (three patients), fatigue (two patients) and dehydration (two patients). There was one death during the study, possibly resulting from febrile neutropenia caused by the treatment.

The current study was based on previous studies in the laboratory of Nita Ahuja, M.D., director of the Sarcoma and Peritoneal Surface Malignancy Program and professor of surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, which showed that guadecitabine limited the growth of colorectal cancer cell lines when combined with irinotecan, says Azad.

The drug combination is being tested in an ongoing phase II clinical trial (NCT01896856) in a larger group of metastatic colorectal cancer patients at multiple institutions to determine the effectiveness of the dual therapy compared with chemotherapy regimens that do not include guadecitabine, says Azad.

Scientists leading the new study will also look for biomarkers in patients that could help determine which of them are most likely to benefit from guadecitabine and irinotecan. Lee says the research team will measure the amount of methylation in patients' cells when they begin their treatment and the presence of genes associated with irinotecan resistance, among other possible biomarkers.

In 2015, there were more than 130,000 people in the U.S. diagnosed with colon cancers. Five-year survival rates among people with localized colon cancers are more than 90 percent, but they are only 20 percent in those with metastatic cancer.

Guadecitabine is an experimental drug that has not been approved for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. It is manufactured by Astex Pharmaceuticals, a supporter of the Johns Hopkins-led study. The research was also supported by the Van Andel Research Institute SU2C/AACR Epigenetics Dream Team.

Other scientists who contributed to the research include Judy Wang, Anup Sharma, Zachary Kerner, Stephen Baylin, Ellen Lilly, and Thomas Brown from Johns Hopkins; Anthony El Khoueiry from the University of Southern California; Henk Verheul and Elske Gootjes from Vrije Universiteit in the Netherlands; and Peter Jones from the Van Andel Research Institute.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a nice job here. The release sets the tone in its first sentence, which begins with: “In a small, phase I clinical trial…”. The release clearly explains the goals of the clinical trial, the number and type of patients involved, and the study design. The only thing that could have made things more clear would be if the release had told readers the size of the doses each of the four study groups received — and whether dose size was related to observed effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A daily vitamin D supplement may help young men enjoy more sick-free days during cold and flu season, a small study suggests.

Vitamin D has been the subject of much research of late, with studies linking low vitamin D levels in the blood to higher risks of type 1 diabetes and severe asthma attacks in children and, in adults, heart disease, certain cancers and depression.

But whether vitamin D is the reason for the excess risks — and whether taking supplements can curb those risks — has yet to be shown.

The body naturally synthesizes vitamin D when the skin is exposed to sunlight. Because rates of vitamin D insufficiency rise during the winter in many parts of the world, researchers have been interested in whether the vitamin might play a role in people’s susceptibility to colds, flu and other respiratory infections.

Some past research has indeed found that people with relatively lower vitamin D levels in their blood tend to have higher rates of respiratory infections than those with higher levels of the vitamin, said Dr. Ilkka Laaksi of the University of Tampere in Finland, the lead researcher on the new study.

Along with that evidence, recent lab research has shown that vitamin D may play an “important role” in the body’s immune defenses against respiratory pathogens, Laaksi wrote in an email to Reuters Health.

“However,” the researcher said, “there is a lack of clinical studies of the effect of vitamin D supplementation for preventing respiratory infections.”

For the current study, Laaksi’s team randomly assigned 164 male military recruits to take either 400 international units (IU) of vitamin D or inactive placebo pills every day for six months — from October to March, covering the months when people’s vitamin D stores typically decline and when respiratory infections typically peak.

At the end of the study, the researchers found no clear difference between the two groups in the average number of days missed from duty due to a respiratory infection — which included bronchitis, sinus infections, pneumonia, ear infections and sore throat.

On average, men who took vitamin D missed about two days from duty because of a respiratory infection, compared with three days in the placebo group. That difference was not significant in statistical terms.

However, men in the vitamin D group were more likely to have no days missed from work due to a respiratory illness.

Overall, 51 percent remained “healthy” throughout the six-month study, versus 36 percent of the placebo group, the researchers report.

The findings, Laaksi said, offer “some evidence” of a benefit from vitamin D against respiratory infections.

Still, the extent of the benefit was not clear. While recruits in the vitamin group were more likely to have no days missed from duty, they were no less likely to report having cold-like symptoms at some point during the study period.

Moreover, recent studies on the usefulness of vitamin D for warding off respiratory ills have come to conflicting conclusions.

A study of Japanese schoolchildren published earlier this year found that those given 1,200 IU of vitamin D each day during cold and flu season were less likely to contract influenza A. Of 167 children given the supplement, 18 developed the flu, compared with 31 of 167 children given placebo pills.

On the other hand, a recent study of 162 adults found that those who took 2,000 IU of vitamin D everyday for 12 weeks were no less likely to develop respiratory infections than those given placebo pills.

Laaksi said that larger clinical trials looking at different doses of vitamin D are still needed before the vitamin can be recommended for curbing the risk of respiratory infections.

In the U.S., health officials recommend that adults up to the age of 50 get 200 IU of vitamin D each day, while older adults should get 400 to 600 IU. The upper limit is currently set at 2,000 IU per day; higher intakes may raise the risks of side effects.

Symptoms of vitamin D toxicity are often vague and include nausea, vomiting, constipation, poor appetite and weight loss. Excessive vitamin D in the blood can also raise blood pressure or trigger heart rhythm abnormalities.

Some researchers believe that people need more vitamin D than is currently recommended, and that intakes above 2,000 IU per day are safe. However, exactly what the optimal vitamin D intake might be remains under debate.

Food sources of vitamin D include milk, breakfast cereals and orange juice fortified with vitamin D, as well as some fatty fish, like salmon and mackerel. Experts generally recommend vitamin pills for people who do not get enough of the vitamin from food.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



 
This rating is a close call. The story notes the limitations of the study of vitamin D and winter colds, including the fact that there was no statistically significant difference in the main outcome measure between the treatment and placebo groups, that the study was small, and that the extent of any benefit was not clear. The story also does a nice job of providing readers with some background, including results of other recent trials, as well as recommendations and opinions of health agencies and experts.
However, the cautionary notes in the body of the story are drowned out by the headline and the lead sentence that tout potential cold-fighting properties of vitamin D. Also, while the story says that 164 men took part in the trial, it fails to tell readers that 60 of them dropped out before the study was done and that the high number of drop-outs made it impossible for the researchers to determine if there was a statistically significant difference in absenteeism between the treatment and placebo groups.
 We’ve made our point about the headline and lead, so we won’t ding the story for that again in this criterion. But the grade could have gone either way for reasons noted. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At some doses, the medication lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, a drug approved to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, was effective compared with placebo in decreasing binge-eating (BE) days in patients with binge-eating disorder (BED), a public health problem associated symptoms of mental illness and obesity and for which there are no approved medications, according to a study published online by JAMA Psychiatry.

BED is characterized by recurrent episodes of excessive food consumption accompanied by a sense of loss of control and psychological distress. Cognitive behavioral therapy, as well as psychotherapy, can reduce BE behavior but implementation of these treatments has not been widespread. Consequently, many patients with BED are undertreated despite having functional impairments and difficulties in their social and personal lives. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not approved pharmacologic treatments for BED, according to background information in the study.

Susan L. McElroy, M.D., of the Research Institute, Lindner Center of HOPE, Mason, Ohio, and coauthors compared lisdexamfetamine with placebo in adults with moderate to severe BED in a randomized clinical trial from May 2011 through January 2012. The study included 259 and 255 adults with BED in safety and intention-to-treat analyses, respectively. The medication was administered in dosages of 30, 50 or 70 mg/day or placebo.

BE days per week decreased in the 50-mg/d and 70 mg/d treatment groups but not in the 30 mg/d treatment group compared with the placebo group, according to the study results. Results also indicate the percentage of patients who achieved four-week BE cessation was lower with the placebo group (21.3 percent) compared with the 50-mg/d (42.2 percent) and 70-mg/d (50 percent) treatment groups.

"In the primary analysis of this study of adults with moderate to severe BED, lisdexamfetamine dimesylate treatment with 50 and 70 mg/d, but not 30 mg/d, demonstrated a significant decrease (compared with placebo) in weekly BE days per week at week 11. Similarly, BE episodes decreased in the 50- and 70-mg/d treatment groups. The one-week BE episode response status was improved in the 50- and 70-mg/d treatment groups, and a greater proportion of participants achieved four-week cessation of BE episodes and global improvement of symptom severity with all lisdexamfetamine dosages. ... Confirmation of these findings in ongoing clinical trials may results in improved pharmacologic treatment for moderate to severe BED," the study concludes.

Editor's Note: Authors made conflict of interest disclosures. This study was supported by Shire Development, LLC, including funding to Scientific Communications & Information and Complete Healthcare Communications, Inc., for support in writing and editing the manuscript. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Media Advisory: To contact corresponding author Susan L. McElroy, M.D., call Jennifer Pierson at 513-536-0316 or email jennifer.pierson@lindnercenter.org
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We’ll rate this satisfactory with some reservations. The description of evidence is good in that the release notes it is a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. A limitation not mentioned is the short duration of the trial. In addition, there’s no discussion of the fact that patients with depression were excluded from the study. Since depression and binge eating are commonly found together, this limits how broadly we can apply the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An app called Natural Cycles has become the first to be classified as a medical device for use as contraception.



Natural Cycles uses a woman's body temperature and menstrual cycle data to tell her when she is fertile. On fertile days, users must abstain from sex or use other protection such as condoms to prevent pregnancy. The app was approved as a class IIb medical device by Tüv Süd, a notified body in Sweden where it is based.

But sexual health organisations are warning that being classed as a medical device does not guarantee that the app will effectively prevent pregnancy. Sexual health charity the FPA, Fertility UK, and the Faculty of Sexual and Reproductive Health of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists are jointly calling for more large-scale independent trials to ensure that evidence for such apps is on a par with other rigorously tested methods of contraception.

Natural Cycles is one of numerous apps that help women practise a method of contraception called natural family planning, also known as the fertility awareness method.



Natural family planning involves monitoring your body for signs of ovulation, like an increase in your temperature, or a change in cervical mucus.

"The thing about the female egg is that it only lives for about 24 hours. So if you could reliably know when you've ovulated as a woman, and then you give that egg two or three days to die, any time after that in the cycle you will not get pregnant because there's no egg to fertilise," Dr Susan Walker, a senior lecturer in sexual health at Anglia Ruskin University, told BuzzFeed News.



Taking your temperature is what sets Natural Cycles and other apps like it apart from standard period-tracking apps. Without temperature information an app can can guess at your ovulation day based on your average cycle length, but can't be sure when you actually have ovulated, and so you can't use it as a reliable form of birth control.

You don't actually need an app to practise natural family planning – although it does cut down on paperwork. Even so, the FPA advises that natural family planning is most effective if you’re taught how to do it by a specialist teacher, and you monitor all three fertility indicators – temperature, menstrual cycle length, and cervical secretions.

But natural family planning is not for everyone. For starters, it can only protect against pregnancy, not STIs.

And if you're considering ditching the Pill because remembering to take it each day is too much effort, you probably won't like having to remember to take your temperature every morning.

"You really have to commit to it, whether you're doing it the traditional way or you're using an app. You have to take your temperature every morning and record that, because without all that data it's not really any use to you," Bekki Burbidge, head of communications at the FPA, told BuzzFeed News. "It's not a method that's going to suit everybody."

But for women like Natural Cycles co-founder Dr Elina Berglund, who want an alternative to hormonal contraception, it's an option worth pursuing. Along with her husband and co-founder Dr Raoul Scherwitzl, Berglund created the algorithm used in the app for personal use, before deciding it was something she should share with the rest of the world.

"When it comes to contraception it's all about choice. It's not like one solution will fit all women," said Berglund.

"Our typical user is in a stable relationship a few years before wanting to have kids. At first she starts to use the app to prevent pregnancy, and when she's ready [to get pregnant] she switches to plan, and usually she gets pregnant quite quickly, because the app already knows her body and cycle."



To use the app, you need a monthly or yearly subscription, and a thermometer that you have to use to take your temperature each morning before you get out of bed.



The app then tells you if you're likely to be fertile or not that day. And if the app gives you a "red day" – meaning you could be fertile – you have to abstain from sex, or use another method of protection such as condoms.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This take on the natural family method via an app form of contraception was well articulated, including the potential bias of relying on a study conducted by the company that makes the app. A second drawback was the study’s design, which the writer appropriately identifies as “retrospective,” and goes on to cite a general critique of this design, quoting info from the UK’s National Health System. The story also includes a quote from an outside expert on the need for independent evaluation of the product.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
You don’t need to go to a doctor in person for lifestyle counseling that can lower your blood pressure. Online lifestyle counseling works well, too, according to research presented Saturday at the American College of Cardiology’s 66th Annual Scientific Session and Expo in Washington.

Systolic blood pressure — the higher number in blood pressure readings — declined more for participants in the study who received Web-based lifestyle counseling than for those who were part of a Web-based control intervention, the study found. Over the 12 month period, systolic blood pressure of people in the Web-based lifestyle counseling group decreased by 10 mmHg, while it decreased by 6 mmHg for the other group.

The study also measured changes in risk scores of developing heart disease and stroke in the next 10 years, diastolic blood pressure, dietary changes, smoking cessation, cholesterol levels excluding the good cholesterol (HDL) and pulse pressure, which is the difference between the higher and lower (diastolic) numbers on the blood pressure reading.

Results showed some gender-based disparities. Women in the treatment group had an average diastolic blood pressure reduction of 6 mmHg while men in the same group had an average 4 mmHg reduction.

“The electronic counseling (e-Counseling) intervention had an effect similar to that of adding an additional blood-pressure-lowering medication,” said Robert P. Nolan, the lead author of the study, a senior scientist at the Peter Munk Cardiac Center at the University Health Network and an associate professor at the University of Toronto.

The randomized, double-blind study included 264 participants with an average age of 58, of whom 58 percent were women. The participants were divided into two groups, one of which received weekly emails with generic information about healthy living that is good for the heart and for reducing high blood pressure, and the other group received weekly emails with links to interactive tools and online multimedia, such as videos of people diagnosed with high blood pressure who made lifestyle changes. These tools were carefully chosen to increase in knowledge about and motivation to maintain a heart-healthy lifestyle.

“In the e-Counseling intervention we tried to replicate the experience of going through face-to-face lifestyle counseling for a year,” Nolan said.

High blood pressure affects 1 in every 3 adults in the United States, according to a fact sheet by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In 2013, high blood pressure was the major cause behind 360,000 deaths in the United States. Reduction in high blood pressure has added health benefits because it can potentially reduce the likelihood of heart attacks, strokes, chronic heart failure and kidney disease.

Engaging patients in such a way could be a very powerful tool in promoting behavioral change, Nolan said.

“I am so happy to see this on the agenda for three main reasons. In part, most of the studies here today show what to do — not how to achieve it,” said Eric Peterson, a professor at Duke University School of Medicine and an associate editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association, during the conference. “Secondly, we only look at the trade-off between efficacy and safety, but your study is looking more at efficacy and effectiveness and practicality, issues that are also very important. And finally, this is a very real world study.”

The study was received well by the audience. “No one should die of hypertension. The study is very useful in telling and confirming that we should talk to the patients, no matter how we do it,” said Bernard Wong, a cardiologist based in Hong Kong.

One of the caveats of the study was that participants were highly motivated people looking for ways to cope with and decrease their blood pressure. Participants were also largely white and well-educated, with most having a postsecondary education, so the results of the study might not be generalize well to other groups.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provides adequate details for readers to discern the quality of evidence. This paragraph in particular is helpful:
The randomized, double-blind study included 264 participants with an average age of 58, of whom 58 percent were women. The participants were divided into two groups, one of which received weekly emails with generic information about healthy living that is good for the heart and for reducing high blood pressure, and the other group received weekly emails with links to interactive tools and online multimedia, such as videos of people diagnosed with high blood pressure who made lifestyle changes. These tools were carefully chosen to increase in knowledge about and motivation to maintain a heart-healthy lifestyle.
We were also impressed to see a discussion on the limitations of the research:
“One of the caveats of the study was that participants were highly motivated people looking for ways to cope with and decrease their blood pressure. Participants were also largely white and well-educated, with most having a postsecondary education, so the results of the study might not be generalize well to other groups.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings add to confusion over whether taking aspirin, ibuprofen or related painkillers reduces the risk of developing melanoma.

Animal experiments have suggested that the class of painkillers known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) could play a role in preventing melanoma, but a large 2008 study failed to find any evidence to support this possibility.

Now, a smaller study that asked people with melanoma and those without the disease to recall their use of NSAIDs has found that taking these drugs - particularly aspirin - at least once a week for more than 5 years may have offered some protection against the deadly disease.

The findings are interesting, but should not lead people to conclude that popping a few painkillers will reduce their risk of skin cancer, cautioned Dr. Maryam Asgari of Kaiser Permanente Northern California and the University of California San Francisco, who co-authored the 2008 study.

NSAIDs - which include aspirin, naproxen (marketed as Aleve), and ibuprofen (Advil) — have side effects, she noted, such as stomach bleeding. People with a family history of melanoma are better off wearing sunscreen and getting regular skin checks from a dermatologist, Asgari recommended.

“I think it’s just too early” to say NSAIDs offer any protection, she said. “I think the jury is still out.”

There’s reason to hope NSAIDs might offer some protection against this type of cancer, however - earlier this year, a review found that people who use painkillers such as ibuprofen on a regular basis may be less likely to get bladder cancer. Other research has consistently supported the benefits of NSAIDs in preventing colorectal cancer, and provided some evidence they may work for breast, esophagus, and stomach cancers, as well.

Melanoma is the most lethal form of skin cancer, killing almost 9,000 people in the U.S. last year, according to the National Cancer Institute.

To investigate whether NSAIDs offer any protection, Dr. Clara Curiel-Lewandrowski of Harvard Medical School and the University of Arizona asked 400 people diagnosed with melanoma and 600 similar people without the disease to recall their use of the painkillers.

The researchers found that people without cancer had a longer history of taking NSAIDs than people who eventually developed melanoma. Specifically, more than 40 percent of people who were cancer-free said they’d been taking NSAIDs at least once per week for more than 5 years, versus only 28 percent of those who developed melanoma. Overall, regular use of NSAIDs for more than 5 years appeared to reduce the risk of developing cancer by more than 40 percent, the authors report in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology.

Unfortunately, the technique — comparing people with melanoma to those without - is fraught with potential problems, said Asgari. For one, you have to get the comparison right, she noted; there’s always a concern that people without cancer who agree to participate in the study may be more health conscious to begin with, and it’s this that protects them from cancer, not their use of NSAIDs. “Did you somehow get a biased sample of people, and is that why you’re seeing this difference?”

Her 2008 study analyzed data from nearly 64,000 people who were melanoma-free at the beginning of the investigation, then followed them for a few years to see who developed the disease. She and her colleagues found no evidence that taking NSAIDs had any effect on risk of developing the deadly skin cancer.

As a result, “I wouldn’t recommend (taking NSAIDs to reduce melanoma) just based on this” new study, Asgari noted.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story includes this evaluation by an expert:  “Unfortunately, the technique — comparing people with melanoma to those without – is fraught with potential problems, said Asgari. For one, you have to get the comparison right, she noted; there’s always a concern that people without cancer who agree to participate in the study may be more health conscious to begin with, and it’s this that protects them from cancer, not their use of NSAIDs. “Did you somehow get a biased sample of people, and is that why you’re seeing this difference?”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — DURHAM, N.C. -- Patients suffering from noninfectious uveitis, a group of diseases that causes eye inflammation, can get effective treatment from a corticosteroid alternative that has previously been approved for treatment of arthritis and Crohn’s disease, according to a study led by a Duke Health researcher.

The Food & Drug Administration recently approved the additional use of adalimumab (sold as Humira) for patients with noninfectious uveitis. Corticosteroids have traditionally been the only FDA-approved treatment for these diseases, although some doctors had prescribed adalimumab off-label.

The FDA’s approval is limited to treatment of the three types of noninfectious uveitis that pose the greatest threat of vision loss. Glenn Jaffe, M.D., a professor in the Department of Ophthalmology at Duke University School of Medicine, said adalimumab works to treat uveitis by targeting a protein that is thought to promote inflammation. Jaffe led one of two clinical studies that formed the basis of the FDA’s approval and was senior author of the study appearing Sept. 8 in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM).

“Patients may have many unwanted side effects when taking steroids long-term, as many uveitis patients do,” Jaffe said. “The goal of these studies was to determine whether there was an alternative that could replace or minimize the use of steroids. The studies also looked at whether an alternative would be better tolerated or more effective, yet still safe.”

The study consisted of 217 adults who had active, non-infectious intermediate or posterior uveitis, or panuveitis. Participants were randomly assigned to a group that received either adalimumab or a placebo at the start of the trial and every two weeks thereafter. All participants also initially received standard doses of the corticosteroid prednisone, and continued to receive it in diminishing doses over the course of 15 weeks.

Jaffe and colleagues then analyzed patients’ time to treatment failure, or how soon they saw a recurrence or worsening of one or more of four signs of inflammation: new areas of inflammation in the back of the eye, reduced visual clarity, more inflammatory cells in the front of the eye, or more cloudiness of the gel that fills the eye. Jaffe said the study focused on time to treatment failure because delaying or preventing inflammation is the key to successful treatment.

“It is the active inflammation, caused by the body’s immune system reacting against itself, that can potentially permanently decrease the patient’s vision and cause unwanted symptoms, such as eye pain and floaters in the field of vision,” he said. “The hope is that by delaying or eliminating recurrences, the symptoms will be minimized or eliminated.”

The researchers found that median time to treatment failure was 24 weeks in the adalimumab group and 13 weeks in the placebo group. Patients in the adalimumab group were also significantly less likely to experience treatment failure during the duration of the study (80 weeks) and they were at lower risk of treatment failure due to each of the four signs.

Jaffe said the study’s results are significant not only because they indicate adalimumab delays treatment failure, but also because the investigation considered several signs as causes for treatment failure.

“Using these multiple, possible endpoints was something unique to this study,” Jaffe said. “Since each of these signs can be associated with different types of uveitis, the study’s results broaden the applicability of treatment for patients.”

The study authors note, however, that patients in the adalimumab group reported serious adverse effects, such as respiratory tract infections and allergic reactions, more frequently than those in the placebo group.

In addition to Jaffe, co-authors include Andrew D. Dick, Antoine P. Brézin, Quan Dong Nguyen, Jennifer E. Thorne, Philippe Kestelyn, Talin Barisani-Asenbauer, Pablo Franco, Arnd Heiligenhaus, David Scales, David S. Chu, Anne Camez, Nisha V. Kwatra, Alexandra P. Song, Martina Kron, Samir Tari, and Eric B. Suhler.

AbbVie, the pharmaceutical company that manufactures and markets adalimumab as Humira, sponsored the study. Dr. Jaffe served as a consultant for AbbVie, and other study authors also report financial relationships with the company. Further author disclosures are available in the study’s manuscript.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is perhaps the greatest strength of the release. It not only clearly explains the reasons for the drug trial and the metrics of measurement, but also the activity through which the drug might work.
The report involves a randomized controlled trial, so a strong evidence level is expected, and the release did note the industry sponsorship. It’s well known that studies sponsored by industry report favorable results more frequently, which makes some sense, in that companies wouldn’t test drugs they didn’t have strong preliminary evidence for. But it’s also possible that industry sponsorship can bias the conduct and reporting of such studies to make a positive outcome more likely.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Medicine That Blunts The Buzz Of Alcohol Can Help Drinkers Cut Back

If you drink more alcohol than you want to or should, you're not alone. A nationwide survey by the National Institutes of Health found that 28 percent of adults in the U.S. are heavy drinkers or drink more than is recommended.

Yet, most heavy drinkers don't get the help they need.

"The biggest problem we have in the field is that less than 10 percent of individuals with an alcohol use disorder get any treatment whatsoever," says George Koob, director of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.

Part of the challenge, researchers say, is that many drinkers don't realize that a medicine long used to help people addicted to opioids quit their drug habit can help alcoholics and other heavy drinkers cut back, too.

"I thought my only option was AA," John tells NPR. We've agreed to use only his middle name; disclosing his trouble with alcohol publicly, he says, would jeopardize his business.

He's a 47-year-old professional who says he started out as a social drinker — a few beers with his softball team after a game. But he sank into a deep depression after several deaths in his family, and sought "solace in the bottle," he says.

"I wanted to numb my thoughts," says John.

He'd often start with hard liquor in the morning, John says, and it wasn't uncommon to have eight drinks or more before the end of the day.

He worked from home, so he was able to mask the problem for a while. But eventually his wife confronted him.

"She had come home and I was rushing to hide a glass and she was furious with me," he recalls. "Just absolutely furious."

He went to see Paula DeSanto, a therapist and director of Minnesota Alternatives, in Spring Lake Park, Minn. The center provides outpatient mental health and substance use treatment services.

"I would say John's story is not unique," DeSanto tells us. "A lot of people are reluctant."

Sometimes, traditional treatments — such as residential rehab or a 12-step program like Alcoholics Anonymous — "can [lead to] a significant disruption in their lives," she explains. "There's stigma, shame and embarrassment."

DeSanto suggested a different approach to John. To help work through the loss and grief he was feeling, counseling can help, she told him. She also recommended he try naltrexone, a prescription drug.

"Naltrexone is an effective medication for the treatment of alcohol use disorders," says Koob. He points to a recent meta-analysis published in the journal Addiction that concluded that naltrexone helped reduce heavy drinking and cravings for alcohol.

The analysis included data from 64 clinical trials in which people were given either the medication or a placebo pill to test the effectiveness of the treatment. The analysis also found that another drug, acamprosate, is effective at helping people who have already stopped drinking to maintain abstinence, perhaps partly by easing the physical and emotional cravings experienced by heavy drinkers who quit.

So, how does naltrexone work? The drug seems to curb the euphoric and sedative effects of opiates in the brain. Alcohol is known to activate some of the same receptors in the brain that opioids do, and studies find that by tempering the pleasure from alcohol, naltrexone can help people drink less.

"It blunts the effects of alcohol," says Koob. "People [who use naltrexone] will say they have a drink, and it's not doing much for them."

That was exactly John's experience. After taking the naltrexone pill, he didn't get the buzz he was used to getting, so didn't want to keep drinking. "I actually didn't feel the alcohol's effects," he says. "It was startling."

It's now been about five months since he started taking the medication. He has not stopped drinking completely, but says he has cut way back.

"This is helping me," John says. "I can go out with friends and not worry that I'm going to end up inebriated or sloppy."

According to the findings of a recent review, both naltrexone and acamprosate, are safe, cost-effective and efficacious. But they are substantially underused, according to the review.

Many physicians are "unaware that there are medications to treat alcohol use disorders," says Koob. His institute is stepping up efforts to work with the medical community on that front, he says, and is also touting Rethinking Drinking, a website aimed at consumers that offers the latest research-based information on a range of treatment options.

Any health care provider who is licensed to prescribe medicine can prescribe naltrexone — not just mental health professionals or addiction specialists. As as long ago as 1997, a published study showed that treatment of alcohol dependence with naltrexone by primary care doctors can be effective; follow-up research has confirmed that the primary care approach not only works, but makes treatment much more accessible.

According to the NIAAA, "patients can now receive effective alcohol treatment from their primary care doctors or mental health practitioners by combining the newer medications with a series of brief office visits for support."

Naltrexone is certainly not a cure-all, researchers say. And it won't help everyone who has a drinking problem — especially if the disorder is severe.

"I use these medications as an adjunct to therapy, and group [sessions] and 12-step meetings" says Dr. Jeffrey Hsu, a psychiatrist at Johns Hopkins University who is certified in addiction medicine. He says that when used alone the medicines are only modestly effective.

But there's good evidence that the combination of counseling and drugs such as naltrexone can help people cut back on drinking, or move toward abstinence.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We get a sense that there is quite a bit of medical evidence on this drug, such as a meta-analysis of 64 clinical trials, and that the bigger issue is how, in spite of this, many providers feel it’s underutilized. This claim too is backed up by evidence presented in the story.
However, we wish that the story hadn’t focused exclusively on the story one of patient who was helped by the drug, when the evidence shows that most patients don’t derive the same benefits. Presenting a wider range of experiences would have been more useful for readers.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, April 20, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have developed a blood test that they say could help physicians predict whether pregnant women will deliver their babies prematurely.

The test isn't ready for prime time, however, and it's not foolproof: a study found that it misses some premature births and incorrectly predicts others.

Still, the test "should be an important tool for an obstetrician who currently has no clue" if premature birth is a possibility until it happens, said Brigham Young University (BYU) chemistry professor Steven W. Graves.

Physicians will "be able to use a simple blood test and then know that this woman is at increased risk or reduced risk of a preterm birth," said Graves, whose laboratory performed the research in the study.

About 10 percent of births are premature, and the rate rises to 30 percent among women who have already had a baby prematurely, Graves said. Premature birth can lead to a long list of medical problems and puts babies at risk of dying.

In the new study, the researchers examined blood samples from 80 women who went on to have normal births and 80 who had premature births. They tried to find signs in the blood that indicate what kind of birth the women would have.

The researchers developed a screening method that looked for so-called peptide biomarkers in the blood that -- in tandem with several other proteins -- predicted 80 percent to 90 percent of the premature births at 28 weeks of gestation. The false positive rate -- referring to tests that wrongly indicated premature birth -- was 20 percent.

The test wasn't as effective at 24 weeks of gestation.

"This may simply indicate that some of the causes for preterm birth may not pre-exist before the pregnancy," Graves said. "Most probably don't, but develop or become apparent as the pregnancy progresses. The closer to the preterm birth, the more likely you are to have significant changes in the physiology of the woman that is observed in the blood."

The test may cost $150 to $250, Graves said. It would require several years to go through the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval process. BYU and the University of Utah have a patent on the test and have licensed it.

Even if the test is found to indicate that a birth will be premature, physicians would have limited options. One option is to provide drugs that dampen the immune system so the baby's lungs develop faster, said Dr. Jennifer Wu, an obstetrician-gynecologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

Wu said the study results are promising, but more research is needed to confirm that the test is reliable. "If you are going to be alarming a patient by saying that she may have premature delivery, you want to make sure that's truly the case."

The study appears in the May issue of the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology.

For more about premature birth, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We’ll give it a satisfactory score, but because very high in the story it stated that “The test isn’t ready for prime time, however, and it’s not foolproof: a study found that it misses some premature births and incorrectly predicts others.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MAYWOOD, IL - Robotic surgery is as effective as traditional open surgery in treating bladder cancer, according to a landmark study published in the journal Lancet.

Three Loyola Medicine urologists, Marcus Quek, MD, Gopal Gupta, MD, and Alex Gorbonos, MD, are co-authors of the study. First author is Dipen Parekh, MD, of the University of Miami.

Loyola is among 15 centers that participated in the nationwide trial of 350 patients, who were randomly assigned to undergo robotic surgery or open surgery to remove cancerous bladders.

After two years, there was no significant difference between the two groups in survival without disease progression. Robotic surgery was associated with less blood loss and shorter hospital stays, but longer surgeries. There were no significant differences in complication rates or in patients' quality of life. The study is called RAZOR (randomized open versus robotic cystectomy trial) and was funded by the National Cancer Institute.

A robotic system allows a surgeon to perform operations through a few small incisions. Movements by the surgeon's hand or wrist are translated into highly precise movements of the surgical instruments. Every maneuver is directed by the surgeon, in real time, as the surgeon views a magnified, 3D, high-definition image of the surgical site.

Since robotic surgery was introduced in 2000, it has spread rapidly and has been used in about four million surgeries worldwide. But apart from the RAZOR trial, there have been no prospective, randomized multicenter trials to assess how robotic surgery compares to open surgery in cancer survival.

The RAZOR trial found that two years after surgery, 72.3 percent of patients in the robotic surgery group were alive, with no disease progression and essentially cured, compared with 71.6 percent in the open surgery group. Sixty-seven percent of robotic surgery patients experienced adverse effects such as urinary tract infections and intestinal obstructions, compared with 69 percent in the open surgery group.

Robotic surgery patients stayed a median of six days in the hospital, compared with seven days in the open surgery group. Robotic surgery patients lost less than half as much blood as open surgery patients, but spent more time in the operating room (seven hours, eight minutes compared with six hours, one minute).

Researchers wrote that the findings "underscore the need for further high-quality trials to assess surgical innovation before this surgical technique is widely adopted in clinical practice."

Dr. Gupta added that the study provides evidence demonstrating that the robotic approach performs at least as well as the open approach. "It is important to conduct these trials before widespread adoption of technology, as has been the case with robotic prostatectomy (removal of the prostate)," he said.

The study is titled "Robot-assisted radical cystectomy versus open radical cystectomy in patients with bladder cancer (RAZOR): an open-label, randomized, phase 3, non-inferiority trial."

Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men, but it is less common in women. The American Cancer Society estimates this year there will be about 81,000 new cases in the United States, and about 17,000 people will die of the disease.

The standard surgical treatment of invasive bladder cancer is a radical cystectomy (removal of the bladder). Three main techniques are used to replace the bladder: construct a new bladder (neobladder) from the patient's intestine; place a pouch inside the body to act as an artificial bladder; or place a bag outside the body to collect urine. Loyola Medicine offers both open and robotic radical cystectomy and all three bladder replacement techniques. There are pros and cons to each surgical technique, and Loyola physicians help patients decide which option best fits their lifestyle and health status.

Loyola Medicine is nationally recognized for its expertise in diagnosing and treating a broad range of urologic conditions and providing integrated services for optimal patient care. Loyola's department of urology is ranked 39th in the country by U.S. News and World Report.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: In a way, the release is satisfactory and yet maddeningly unsatisfactory. It tells readers that the study was a randomly controlled trial with 350 patients, but it buries the most important point: that the ability of these researchers to do this sort of rigorous trial comparing robot-assisted surgery with open techniques highlights how few such trials are done. Deep in the release, the researchers are quoted as saying the findings “underscore the need for further high-quality trials to assess surgical innovation before this surgical technique is widely adopted in clinical practice” and further that “It is important to conduct these trials before widespread adoption of technology, as has been the case with robotic prostatectomy (removal of the prostate).” The quality of the evidence should have been the lead.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The test has the potential to help curb overtreatment in cancer care.

A new genetic test to gauge the aggressiveness of prostate cancer may help tens of thousands of men each year decide whether they need to treat their cancer right away or can safely monitor it.

The new test, which goes on sale Wednesday, joins another one that recently came on the market. Both analyze multiple genes in a biopsy sample and give a score for aggressiveness, similar to tests used now for certain breast and colon cancers.

Doctors say tests like these have the potential to curb a major problem in cancer care — overtreatment. Prostate tumors usually grow so slowly they will never threaten a man's life, but some prove fatal and there is no reliable way now to tell which ones will. Treatment with surgery, radiation or hormone blockers isn't needed in most cases and can cause impotence or incontinence, yet most men are afraid to skip it.

"We're not giving patients enough information to make their decision," said Dr. Peter Carroll, chairman of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. "You can shop for a toaster" better than for prostate treatment, he said.

A study he led of the newest test — the Oncotype DX Genomic Prostate Score — is set for discussion Wednesday at an American Urological Association meeting in San Diego.

The results suggest the test could triple the number of men thought to be at such low risk for aggressive disease that monitoring is a clearly safe option. Conversely, the test also suggested some tumors were more aggressive than doctors had believed.

Independent experts say such a test is desperately needed but that it's unclear how much information this one adds or whether it will be enough to persuade men with low-risk tumors to forgo treatment, and treat it only if it gets worse. Only 10 percent who are candidates for monitoring choose it now.

"The question is, what's the magnitude of difference that would change the patient's mind?" said Dr. Bruce Roth, a cancer specialist at Washington University in St. Louis.

One man may view a 15 percent chance that his tumor is aggressive as low risk "but someone else might say, 'Oh my God, let's set the surgery up tomorrow,'" he said. "I don't think it's a slam dunk."

Also unknown: Will insurers pay for the expensive test without evidence it leads to better care or saves lives?

The newest test was developed by Genomic Health Inc., which has sold a similar one for breast cancer since 2004. Doctors at first were leery of it until studies in more groups of women proved its value, and the same may happen with the prostate test, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, the American Cancer Society's deputy chief medical officer.

The company will charge $3,820 for the prostate test and says it can save money by avoiding costlier, unnecessary treatment. Another test for assessing prostate cancer risk that came out last summer — Prolaris by Myriad Genetics Inc. — sells for $3,400.

Both companies can sell the tests without Food and Drug Administration approval under separate rules that govern lab diagnostics. Myriad Genetics has published nine studies on Prolaris involving more than 3,000 patients. Genomic Health has not published any results on the prostate test, another thing that makes doctors wary. Yet it has a track record from its breast cancer test.

About 240,000 men in the U.S. are diagnosed with prostate cancer each year, and about half are classified as low risk using current methods. Doctors now base risk estimates on factors such as a man's age and how aggressive cells look from biopsies that give 12 to 14 tissue samples. But tumors often are spread out and vary from one spot to the other.

"Unless you can be sure your biopsy has hit the most aggressive part that's in the prostate, you can't be sure" how accurate your risk estimate is, explained Dr. Eric Klein, chief of urology at the Cleveland Clinic, who led early development of the Oncotype prostate cancer test.

For one study, researchers used prostates removed from 440 men. They measured the activity of hundreds of genes thought to be involved in whether the cancer spread beyond the prostate or proved fatal. A second study of biopsies from 167 patients narrowed it down to 81 genes, and researchers picked 17 that seemed to predict aggressiveness no matter the location in the tumor.

A third study used single needle-biopsy samples from 395 UCSF patients scheduled to have their prostates removed. The gene test accurately predicted the aggressiveness of their cancer once doctors were able to see the whole prostate after surgery.

Using one current method, 37 of the 395 men would have been called very low risk and good candidates for monitoring. Adding the gene test put 100 men into that category, said another study leader, Dr. Matthew Cooperberg of UCSF. The gene test shifted about half of the men into either a lower or a higher risk category.

"It went both ways — that was the remarkable thing. In any category of risk it added independent information compared to the standard criteria we use today," Carroll said. "More work needs to be done, but, in my opinion, this is a very good start."

However, Dr. Kevin McVary, chairman of urology at Southern Illinois University School of Medicine and a spokesman for the Urological Association, said the test must be validated in more men before it can be widely used.

"It's not there yet," he said.

UCSF just got a federal grant to see how men choose treatments and whether this test might sway them.

"We throw all these numbers at them. Are they really going to make a better decision?" Cooperberg said.

Dean Smith, 60, a retired marketing executive from Mill Valley, Calif., is following his doctor's advice to monitor the cancer he was diagnosed with in March. He said a gene test may have made him more comfortable with that decision.

At least six of his friends suffered side effects ranging from urinary leakage to inability to have sex after having their prostates removed.

"I would suspect that having cancer and having to live with it would be very difficult for them," but it doesn't bother him, Smith said. "I will die from something other than prostate cancer, I guarantee you."

Copyright 2013 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story carefully explained:
Independent experts say such a test is desperately needed but that it’s unclear how much information this one adds or whether it will be enough to persuade men with low-risk tumors to forgo treatment, and treat it only if it gets worse.
…
Genomic Health has not published any results on the prostate test, another thing that makes doctors wary.
…
Dr. Kevin McVary, chairman of urology at Southern Illinois University School of Medicine and a spokesman for the Urological Association, said the test must be validated in more men before it can be widely used.
“It’s not there yet,” he said.
But wouldn’t it be most helpful to report what the sensitivity and specificity of the test was?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study has found that it is possible to find a large number of "silent" cancers in the lungs of heavy smokers by periodically screening them with CAT scans. When the tumors are then surgically removed, most people live five years or more, in striking contrast to patients whose cancers are found only after they experience symptoms.

The study of nearly 32,000 people in eight countries boosts hope that early detection by CAT scans may reduce the death toll of lung cancer, much as mammography has done for breast cancer. But while the research clearly shows that the interval between diagnosis and death was longer in screened patients, it does not definitively show they lived longer -- a subtle difference with significant public health consequences.

Lung cancer kills about 162,000 Americans a year and is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women. Only 15 percent of people with the disease survive five years from the time it is diagnosed.

What it will take to prove that CAT scans are either useful or a waste of time and money is a matter of great controversy.

Some people, including many treatment advocates, think there is enough evidence to urge all heavy smokers to have routine CAT scans. Others, including researchers and policymakers in the government, say it is a question that will not be settled for five or six years, when other studies are complete.

The new research, which appears in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, seems destined to heat up that argument.

"I think it provides valuable information on many things. What it doesn't do is prove that you can reduce the number of people who will die from lung cancer," said Gary J. Kelloff, an oncologist at the National Cancer Institute.

Laurie Fenton, president of the Lung Cancer Alliance, an advocacy group headquartered in Washington, said: "We think this is a breakthrough for lung cancer. I think we have enough data to move forward and apply this to a high-risk population."

In 1994, the study, called the International Early Lung Cancer Action Program, began screening smokers and former smokers, as well as a few nonsmokers exposed to radon, beryllium and other cancer-causing substances.

In all, 31,567 people were screened. In the ensuing years, about 27,000 more scans were done, with some people having them annually. All were "spiral" or "helical" CAT scans in which the machine films the entire chest in the time that a person can hold a single breath.

About 13 percent of the baseline scans and 5 percent of the later ones found abnormalities. Many of these lump-shaped masses were watched with further scans to see whether they grew; others were examined with other imaging devices. Ultimately, 535 were biopsied to see if they were lung cancer -- and 484 were.

Of that group, 85 percent had small tumors that had not spread. Such early lung cancers can usually be cured; the problem is that they are usually found at that "asymptomatic stage" only by chance when someone has a CAT scan or chest X-ray for an unrelated reason.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the design of the current study and, very appropriately, points out the limitations – that is, lack of controls and the use of 10-year survival as an outcome instead of mortality. These are very important caveats.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Every month, some 50 percent of women suffer from monthly period-related pain. And there's not a whole lot they can do beyond trying to blunt it with pain-relieving pills or oral contraceptives.

Whoopi Goldberg recently stepped in with a new line of medical marijuana–based edibles and bath products (of questionable effectiveness) aimed at this underserved market.

Now there's Livia, a medical device that's being marketed as the "off switch for menstrual pain."

Here's how it works: Users simply attach two electrodes to the areas on their abdomen that hurt and switch on the colorful, palm-size gadget. According to Livia's makers, the device immediately sends nerve-stimulating electric pulses through the two electrodes, and poof! — the pain is gone.

Livia has received rave reviews in international women's magazines like Cosmopolitan and Glamour, and more than 3,000 crowdfunders from around the world have put upward of $284,000 into Livia's Indiegogo campaign. For now, it's only possible to preorder the device (at a cost of $85) and wait six months for it to ship.

As far as gadgetry for women's health goes, this one is novel. But does Livia actually work? There's no good way to evaluate that right now, since Livia's makers haven't made the findings of their studies on the device's effects public.

But there's some reason for optimism: The device is basically a repackaging of another (cheaper) technology that has already been proven to help women who suffer with their monthly cycles.

To learn more about Livia, I reached out to Chen Nachum, the company's founder and CEO. He explained that the key to the device is TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation), those electronic nerve stimulators you've probably seen in strip malls that hook up to the body to treat neck or back pain. (They're also available on the internet's strip mall, Amazon.)

TENS devices are generally thought to work through the "pain-gate theory" of pain. "The idea is the nerve system cannot work with two types of signals at the same time," Nachum explained, "so what Livia does is transmit frequency to the nerve system that it is very similar to the body's frequency, but it's not something the body knows."

When the frequency from the device hits the brain faster than the pain, the brain takes that signal first and is distracted from the menstrual aches, the company claims.

So far, Nachum said they have tested the device on 163 women in two different trials — and more than 80 percent experienced relief with the device. The company is currently working on another study, which will include about 60 women. 



Based on these studies, Nachum is trying to get Food and Drug Administration approval to market Livia as a menstrual pain reliever.

Jen Gunter, an OB-GYN and pain medicine specialist, noted that the idea of using TENS for menstrual pain is actually very sound. In fact, there's enough research that the Cochrane Collaboration was able to put together a review of the evidence. Its conclusion: "High-frequency nerve stimulation may help relieve painful menstrual cramps."

In an email, Gunter said she frequently prescribes high-frequency TENS (pulses between 50 and 120 hertz at a low intensity) to treat patients who suffer through their periods: "I have done so for more than 15 years. Prescribed one this morning in fact." They really help some women, she added.

The benefit here is that, unlike anti-inflammatories and oral contraceptives, TENS is a non-drug intervention, and according to the Cochrane Review, there's research that suggests women even take fewer pain relievers when using these devices.

Gunter's main question about Livia is whether it will be significantly different from the already available and effective TENS devices, which usually cost around $35. "Nothing [the CEO] has disclosed makes Livia sound like anything other than a TENS unit," she wrote. "So I guess it's an expensive, pink TENS unit?" 



(The company says the device would retail at $149, about the cost of four TENS units. But this assumes Livia will take off enough to justify retailing.)



Gunter also wondered whether Livia will be high frequency enough to be helpful. As that Cochrane review found, low-frequency TENS don't seem to do much to cut pain for women.



When I asked Nachum about the device's frequency, he said, "We can't share this information at this point."



And while he claims that Livia is more effective at treating period pain than the cheaper, already available TENS units (he said "its frequency and wave shape are unique and optimized especially for relieving menstrual pain"), without publicly available studies comparing the two, all we have to go on is his word. (The Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists wouldn't comment on Livia because no studies on it have been published.)



For now, Gunter pointed out, the TENS units that are already available can help women — and raising awareness about that might be Livia's biggest benefit.

"If [Livia] gets more women to know about TENS, then great," she said. "[B]ut to call it something new or different seems disingenuous, unless of course they have published ... data that says otherwise."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story makes it clear that there is essentially no published information available on how the device manufacturer tested the device in women (eg, randomized/ blinded or not, what pain measures were used, etc). And it comments critically on this lack of published data. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking fish oil may help prevent full-blown psychotic illness in at-risk adolescents and young adults, a study released today hints.

These at-risk individuals may have weak or transient psychotic symptoms, and already show schizophrenia-like brain changes, Dr. G. Paul Amminger of The University of Melbourne in Australia, a researcher on the study, told Reuters Health. But while psychiatrists now know how to identify these individuals, he added, they don’t know what to do with them. “At the moment there’s no state-of-the-art guideline (on) how to treat those people.”

Prescribing antipsychotic medications may be helpful, Amminger added, but these medications have serious side effects, and can also be stigmatizing. “For young people they don’t want to commit themselves to a treatment which they might need to take for the next five to ten years,” he said. Furthermore, only about a third of people at high risk for psychotic disorders will go on to develop full-fledged mental illness in a given year.

There’s considerable evidence that abnormal fatty acid metabolism may contribute to the development of schizophrenia, Amminger and his team note in the Archives of General Psychiatry. To investigate whether omega-3 fatty acids might help prevent psychotic illness, they randomly assigned 81 at-risk individuals, 13 to 25 years old, to take 1.2 grams a day of omega-3s in fish oil capsule form or a placebo for 12 weeks and then followed them for another 40 weeks.

The researchers included people who met at least one of the following three criteria: having low-level psychotic symptoms; having transient psychotic symptoms; or having a schizophrenia-like personality disorder or a close relative with schizophrenia, along with a sharp decline in mental function within the past year.

Seventy-six of the 81 study participants, or 94 percent, completed the trial, Amminger noted, which underscores the safety and tolerability of fish oil.

At one year, 5 percent of the study participants taking omega-3s had developed a psychotic disorder (2 of 41 people), compared to 28 percent of those on placebo (11 of 40). People taking fish oil also showed significant reductions in their psychotic symptoms and improvements in function, while they were at no greater risk of adverse effects than people taking placebo capsules.

The effect of fish oil capsules, Amminger noted, was similar to that seen in two trials of antipsychotic drugs in at-risk individuals.

There are a number of mechanisms through which omega-3s could protect the brain, Amminger said; they are a major component of brain cells. They are also key to the proper function of two brain chemical signaling systems, dopamine and serotonin, which have been implicated in schizophrenia. Fish oil also boosts levels of glutathione, an antioxidant that protects the brain against oxidative stress.

Trials of medications for treating mental illness typically don’t include people younger than 18, Amminger noted, while starting minors on these medications is “always very difficult, and always quite controversial.”

But if future research bears out the current findings, he added, fish oil promises to offer a safe way to help prevent psychosis in at-risk people, and could also potentially be used to prevent or delay the onset of chronic depression, bipolar illness, and substance abuse disorder — all of which are far more common than psychotic illness.

He and his colleagues are now planning a multicenter trial of fish oil for the prevention of psychotic illness in 320 at-risk people.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This study does a very good job of providing the reader with providing the reader with detailed methods and results of the research study.  The study also does a good job at explaining a potential biologic mechanism by which fish oil/omega-3 PUFAs might protect the brain. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is such a radical change in thought that it’s been hard for many people to get their heads around it,” said Dr. Monica Morrow, chief of the breast service at Sloan-Kettering and an author of the study, which is being published Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association. The paid for the study.

Doctors and patients alike find it easy to accept more cancer treatment on the basis of a study, Dr. Morrow said, but get scared when the data favor less treatment.

The new findings are part of a trend to move away from radical surgery for breast cancer. Rates of , removal of the whole breast, began declining in the 1980s after studies found that for many patients, survival rates after and radiation were just as good as those after mastectomy.

The trend reflects an evolving understanding of breast cancer. In decades past, there was a belief that surgery could “get it all” — eradicate the cancer before it could spread to organs and bones. But research has found that breast cancer can begin to spread early, even when are small, leaving microscopic traces of the disease after surgery.

The modern approach is to cut out obvious tumors — because lumps big enough to detect may be too dense for drugs and radiation to destroy — and to use radiation and chemotherapy to wipe out microscopic disease in other places.

But doctors have continued to think that even microscopic disease in the lymph nodes should be cut out to improve the odds of survival. And until recently, they counted cancerous lymph nodes to gauge the severity of the disease and choose chemotherapy. But now the number is not so often used to determine drug treatment, doctors say. What matters more is whether the disease has reached any nodes at all. If any are positive, the disease could become deadly. Chemotherapy is recommended, and the drugs are the same, no matter how many nodes are involved.

The new results do not apply to all patients, only to women whose disease and treatment meet the criteria in the study.

The tumors were early, at clinical stage T1 or T2, meaning less than two inches across. Biopsies of one or two armpit nodes had found cancer, but the nodes were not enlarged enough to be felt during an exam, and the cancer had not spread anywhere else. The women had lumpectomies, and most also had radiation to the entire breast, and chemotherapy or hormone-blocking drugs, or both.

The study, at 115 medical centers, included 891 patients. Their median age was in the mid-50s, and they were followed for a median of 6.3 years.

After the initial node , the women were assigned at random to have 10 or more additional nodes removed, or to leave the nodes alone. In 27 percent of the women who had additional nodes removed, those nodes were cancerous. But over time, the two groups had no difference in survival: more than 90 percent survived at least five years. Recurrence rates in the armpit were also similar, less than 1 percent. If breast cancer is going to recur under the arm, it tends to do so early, so the follow-up period was long enough, the researchers said.

One potential weakness in the study is that there was not complete follow-up information on 166 women, about equal numbers from each group. The researchers said that did not affect the results. A statistician who was not part of the study said the missing information should have been discussed further, but probably did not have an important impact.

It is not known whether the findings also apply to women who do not have radiation and chemotherapy, or to those who have only part of the breast irradiated. Nor is it known whether the findings could be applied to other types of cancer.

The results mean that women like those in the study will still have to have at least one removed, to look for cancer and decide whether they will need more treatment. But taking out just one or a few nodes should be enough.

Dr. Armando E. Giuliano, the lead author of the study and the chief of surgical oncology at the Cancer Institute at St. John’s Health Center in , Calif., said: “It shouldn’t come as a big surprise, but it will. It’s hard for us as surgeons and medical oncologists and radiation oncologists to accept that you don’t have to remove the nodes in the armpit.”

Dr. Grant W. Carlson, a professor of surgery at the Winship Cancer Institute at , and the author of an editorial accompanying the study, said that by routinely taking out many nodes, “I have a feeling we’ve been doing a lot of harm.”

Indeed, women in the study who had the nodes taken out were far more likely (70 percent versus 25 percent) to have complications like infections, abnormal sensations and fluid collecting in the armpit. They were also more likely to have lymphedema.

But Dr. Carlson said that some of his colleagues, even after hearing the new study results, still thought the nodes should be removed.

“The dogma is strong,” he said. “It’s a little frustrating.”

Eventually, he said, genetic testing of breast tumors might be enough to determine the need for treatment, and eliminate the need for many node biopsies.

Two other breast surgeons not involved with the study said they would take it seriously.

Dr. Elisa R. Port, the chief of breast surgery at in Manhattan, said: “It’s a big deal in the world of breast cancer. It’s definitely practice-changing.”

Dr. Alison Estabrook, the chief of the comprehensive breast center at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt hospital in New York said surgeons had long been awaiting the results.

“In the past, surgeons thought our role was to get out all the cancer,” Dr. Estabrook said. “Now he’s saying we don’t really have to do that.”

But both Dr. Estabrook and Dr. Port said they would still have to make judgment calls during surgery and remove lymph nodes that looked or felt suspicious.

The new research grew out of efforts in the 1990s to minimize lymph node surgery in the armpit, called axillary dissection. Surgeons developed a technique called sentinel node biopsy, in which they injected a dye into the breast and then removed just one or a few nodes that the dye reached first, on the theory that if the was spreading, cancer cells would show up in those nodes. If there was no cancer, no more nodes were taken. But if there were cancer cells, the surgeon would cut out more nodes.

Although the technique spared many women, many others with positive nodes still had extensive cutting in the armpit, and suffered from side effects.

“Women really dread the axillary dissection,” Dr. Giuliano said. “They fear lymphedema. There’s numbness, , and some have limitation of motion. There are a fair number of serious complications. Women know it.”

After armpit surgery, 20 percent to 30 percent of women develop lymphedema, Dr. Port said, and radiation may increase the rate to 40 percent to 50 percent. Physical therapy can help, but there is no cure.

The complications — and the fact that there was no proof that removing the nodes prolonged survival — inspired Dr. Giuliano to compare women with and without axillary dissection. Some doctors objected. They were so sure cancerous nodes had to come out that they said the study was unethical and would endanger women.

“Some prominent institutions wouldn’t even take part in it,” Dr. Giuliano said, though he declined to name them. “They’re very supportive now. We don’t want to hurt their feelings. They’ve seen the light.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is where the story really outperformed some of the competition covering the same news. It placed the study into the broader context of a movement in cancer care away from surgeries that don’t provide a clear benefit, and it also explained the study design and the limitations of the study in several ways. “The study, at 115 medical centers, included 891 patients. Their median age was in the mid-50s, and they were followed for a median of 6.3 years. … One potential weakness in the study is that there was not complete follow-up information on 166 women, about equal numbers from each group. The researchers said that did not affect the results. A statistician who was not part of the study said the missing information should have been discussed further, but probably did not have an important impact. It is not known whether the findings also apply to women who do not have radiation and chemotherapy, or to those who have only part of the breast irradiated. Nor is it known whether the findings could be applied to other types of cancer.” It was too bad that it did not mention limitations in terms of lack of enrollment. The targeted enrollment was 1900. There also was an imbalance in the randomization that should have been mentioned.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 25, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Needles beat pills for treating hot flashes in breast cancer survivors, according to a new trial that compared acupuncture, "sham" acupuncture, the medication gabapentin and a placebo pill.

Interestingly, sham acupuncture came in second place for effectiveness, the researchers said.

Furthermore, the effects of acupuncture were "significant and enduring for hot flashes while gabapentin's effect only happened when a patient was taking the medication," said study first author Dr. Jun Mao, an associate professor of family medicine and community health at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.

The study was published Aug. 24 in the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

Mao and his colleagues tested the treatments in 120 women who were breast cancer survivors. The women were enduring hot flashes at least twice a day.

Thirty women each received real acupuncture that also included a bit of an electric buzz or the inactive placebo pill, 32 women got sham acupuncture, and 28 women received gabapentin (Neurontin). The drug is typically used to treat seizures and nerve pain.

The women documented their hot flashes in diaries, noting frequency and severity, for 8 weeks of treatment, and then continued to keep track of their hot flashes up to 24 weeks total. The investigators used a hot flash score to see how much frequency and severity changed from when the study started to what the women reported at 8, 12 and 24 weeks.

Acupuncture had the greatest effect on overall hot flash scores at 8 weeks, when all interventions ended, followed by sham acupuncture and then gabapentin. At 24 weeks, 16 weeks after treatments ended, acupuncture was still associated with the greatest reduction in hot flashes. But even those who had sham acupuncture or placebo pills had steeper drops in hot flash scores at 24 weeks than those who took gabapentin.

"The placebo effects for both acupuncture and drugs are quite intriguing, as they both seem to persist over time," Mao said. "The magnitude of the placebo effect for acupuncture is bigger than for the drug."

The results with the sham acupuncture, which bested gabapentin, suggest that "there is more than a placebo effect with the sham acupuncture," said Dr. Gary Deng, interim chief of the integrative medicine service at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City. "There is a component of behavior of doing a sham procedure, so it psychologically may trigger a different kind of reaction from patients versus taking the placebo pill."

Deng pointed out that clinicians have come to realize that the placebo effect is very important in treatment. "In fact, in clinical practice, every doctor uses it all of the time," he said. "The so-called bedside manner or communication with patients -- all of these enhance the effect of the patients feeling they're getting something."

No one is quite sure why placebos work for some people and not for others, said Deng. "It's like psychotherapy," he added. "Why does it work for some people and not others?" He suggested that differences in anatomy and genetics might be possible explanations, but said "there is a fertile field for further research."

Some patients might wonder if acupuncture that's helpful for hot flashes among breast cancer patients might be helpful for the hot flashes associated with natural menopause. But Mao pointed out that hot flashes in breast cancer patients are more common, more severe and longer lasting than menopausal hot flashes.

However, Deng said that both might have similar causes related to lower estrogen levels. "Breast cancer survivors have hot flashes because of hormonal repression," he said. Menopause also is linked to declining estrogen levels.

One big distinction between the two populations, though, is that breast cancer survivors do not have the option of hormone replacement therapy open to them because those hormones are linked to breast cancer. Some women undergoing natural menopause still might have that option available. For this reason, most studies of acupuncture for hot flashes have focused on breast cancer survivors, Deng explained.

But should a woman undergoing natural menopause try acupuncture for hot flashes?

"For patients suffering symptoms, they can look for all kinds of possible solutions and are better off talking to their doctor to find out what's most appropriate for them," Deng said.

Visit the U.S. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health for more on acupuncture.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story includes a very detailed and interesting discussion of the placebo effect and its potential impact on the results. And because there was sufficient detail about what was compared to what, what kind of women were involved in the study, and how long they were studied, the story deserves a Satisfactory rating here, although more detail in a few areas would have been welcome. There were only about 30 women in each arm of the trial and was this enough to see statistically-significant differences in the hot flash scores or not?  This aspect of the study isn’t addressed, although the paper itself cautions, “Our trial was not powered to examine the efficacy of acupuncture or gabapentin,” and that “Without a no-treatment group, the responses cannot be separated from that of natural history or regression to the mean.” Some explanation of that caveat would have been useful. More specifics on what exactly constituted acupuncture and sham acupuncture would have been helpful as well (“sham” acupuncture means non-penetrating needles put in spots not used for real acupuncture).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EWING, N.J., March 14, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Nasdaq: CPXX) today announced positive results from the Phase 3 trial of VYXEOS™ (cytarabine: daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection (also known as CPX-351) in patients with high-risk (secondary) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) compared to the standard of care regimen of cytarabine and daunorubicin known as 7+3. The trial met its primary endpoint demonstrating a statistically significant improvement in overall survival. Data will be submitted for presentation at the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2016 Annual Meeting.

The median overall survival for patients treated with VYXEOS in the study was 9.56 months compared to 5.95 months for patients receiving 7+3, representing a 3.61 month improvement in favor of VYXEOS. The hazard ratio (HR) was 0.69 (p=0.005) which represents a 31 percent reduction in the risk of death versus 7+3. The percentage of patients alive 12 months after randomization was 41.5% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 27.6% on the 7+3 arm. The percentage of patients alive 24 months after randomization was 31.1% on the VYXEOS arm compared to 12.3% on the 7+3 arm.

"The overall survival advantage seen with CPX-351 compared to 7+3, along with a superior response rate and no increase in serious toxicity indicates that we'll likely have a new standard of care for treating older patients with secondary AML," said Jeffrey E. Lancet, M.D., senior member and chief of the Leukemia/Myelodysplasia Program at Moffitt Cancer Center and the principal investigator for the study. "This represents a major step forward for a very difficult-to-treat patient population."

VYXEOS also demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in induction response rate (CR+CRi of 47.7% versus 33.3%; p=0.016) and this significance was maintained for the analysis of CR alone (CR of 37.3% versus 25.6%, p=0.040).

Sixty-day all-cause mortality was 13.7% versus 21.2%, in favor of patients treated with VYXEOS.

No substantial difference in Grade 3 or higher adverse events was observed between VYXEOS and 7+3. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, hematologic adverse events were similar for overall infections, febrile neutropenia, and bleeding events. In the intent-to-treat population, Grade 3 or higher, non-hematologic adverse events were similar across all organ systems, including cardiac, gastrointestinal, general systems, metabolic disorders, musculoskeletal, nervous system, respiratory, skin and renal.

"These findings confirm that VYXEOS provides the first opportunity we've had in decades to extend survival for patients with high-risk AML," added Gail Roboz, M.D., Professor of Medicine and Director of the Leukemia Program at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University and the New York-Presbyterian Hospital in New York. "Also, more patients in remission means more who are eligible for potentially curative therapy."

Based on these results the company expects to submit a New Drug Application (NDA) for VYXEOS with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) later this year and submit a Marketing Authorization Application (MAA) with the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the first quarter of 2017.

"The successful outcome of this Phase 3 trial represents an important advance for AML patients, their families and clinicians," said Scott Jackson, Chief Executive Officer of Celator Pharmaceuticals. "It also marks a major milestone for Celator, for VYXEOS, and for our CombiPlex® platform. We offer our sincere thanks to the patients and investigators who participated in this study and we will work closely with regulatory authorities to make this new treatment available to the AML community as soon as possible."

The clinical trial was conducted in partnership with The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society® (LLS) through its Therapy Acceleration Program (TAP), which has supported the clinical development of VYXEOS beginning in Phase 2.

Celator will host a conference call and live audio webcast on Tuesday, March 15, 2016 at 8:00am EDT to discuss the results of the Phase 3 trial. To participate in the conference call, please dial 877-303-6316 (domestic) or 650-521-5176 (international) and refer to conference ID 71930208. The live webcast of the call can be accessed in the Investors section of Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. An archived webcast will be available on Celator's website beginning approximately two hours after the event.

VYXEOS (cytarabine:daunorubicin) Liposome for Injection, also known as CPX-351, is a nano-scale co-formulation of cytarabine and daunorubicin at a synergistic 5:1 molar ration. VYXEOS represents a novel approach to developing combinations of drugs in which molar ratios of two drugs with synergistic anti-tumor activity are encapsulated in a nano-scale liposome in order to maintain the desired ratio following administration. VYXEOS was granted orphan drug status by the FDA and the European Commission for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). VYXEOS was also granted Fast Track designation for the treatment of elderly patients with secondary AML. In addition to the Phase 3 trial, Celator published results from two randomized, controlled, Phase 2 trials with VYXEOS. The first trial was conducted in newly diagnosed elderly AML patients and the second trial was conducted in patients with AML in first relapse.

The randomized, controlled, Phase 3 trial (Protocol NCT01696084), enrolled 309 patients at 39 sites in the United States and Canada, and compared VYXEOS to the conventional cytarabine and daunorubicin treatment regimen (commonly referred to as 7+3) as first-line therapy in older (60-75 years of age) patients with high-risk (secondary) AML. Patients were stratified for age (60 to 69 and 70 to 75 years of age) and AML type; treatment-related AML, AML with documented history of MDS with prior treatment with hypomethylating agent therapy, AML with documented history of MDS without prior hypomethlyating agent therapy, AML with a documented history of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMMoL), and de novo AML with a karyotype characteristic of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).

Patients were randomized 1:1 to receive either VYXEOS or 7+3. Patients could receive one or two inductions, and responding patients could receive one or two consolidations. First induction for VYXEOS was 100u/m2; days 1, 3, and 5 by 90-minute infusion and for the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 7 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1, 2, and 3 (7+3). Second induction for VYXEOS-treated patients was 100u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Only patients with documented CR or CRi were eligible to receive chemotherapy consolidation. Consolidation for VYXEOS-treated patients was 65u/m2 on days 1 and 3 and the control arm was cytarabine 100mg/m2/day by continuous infusion for 5 days and daunorubicin 60mg/m2 on days 1 and 2 (5+2).

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a rapidly progressing cancer of the blood characterized by the uncontrolled proliferation of immature blast cells in the bone marrow. AML is generally a disease of older adults, and the median age of a patient diagnosed with AML is about 67 years. The American Cancer Society estimates that there will be 19,950 new cases of AML and 10,430 deaths from AML in the U.S. in 2016. In Europe the number of new cases is estimated to be 18,000 and in Japan the number is 5,500. The Company estimates that nearly 70 percent of AML patients are over the age of 60, and approximately 75 percent are intermediate or high risk. Furthermore, approximately half of those patients are considered suitable for intensive treatment.

Even with current treatment, overall survival for AML is poor. In patients over 60 years of age, the 5 year survival rate is less than 10%. In high-risk (secondary) AML, overall survival is lower, resulting in an acute need for new treatment options for these patients.

Celator Pharmaceuticals, Inc., with locations in Ewing, N.J., and Vancouver, B.C., is an oncology-focused biopharmaceutical company that is transforming the science of combination therapy, and developing products to improve patient outcomes in cancer. Celator's proprietary technology platform, CombiPlex®, enables the rational design and rapid evaluation of optimized combinations of anti-cancer drugs, incorporating traditional chemotherapies as well as molecularly targeted agents to deliver enhanced anti-cancer activity. CombiPlex addresses several fundamental shortcomings of conventional combination regimens, as well as the challenges inherent in combination drug development, by identifying the most effective synergistic molar ratio of the drugs being combined in vitro, and fixing this ratio in a nano-scale drug delivery complex to maintain the optimized combination after administration and ensuring exposure of this ratio to the tumor. Celator's pipeline includes the lead product, VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), a nano-scale liposomal formulation of cytarabine:daunorubicin being studied for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia; CPX-1, a nano-scale liposomal formulation of irinotecan:floxuridine studied in colorectal cancer; and a preclinical stage product candidate, CPX-8, a hydrophobic docetaxel prodrug nanoparticle formulation. The Company is advancing its CombiPlex platform and broadening its application to include molecularly targeted therapies. The Company is seeking research and development collaborations with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies where its proprietary technology may provide benefit.

For more information, please visit Celator's website at www.celatorpharma.com. Information on ongoing trials is available at www.clinicaltrials.gov.

To the extent that statements contained in this press release are not descriptions of historical facts regarding Celator, they are forward-looking statements reflecting the current beliefs and expectations of management made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as "may," "will," "expect," "anticipate," "estimate," "intend," and similar expressions (as well as other words or expressions referencing future events, conditions or circumstances) are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements contained in this press release include, among others, statements regarding the safety, potential efficacy, therapeutic potential, and commercial potential of VYXEOS™ (also known as CPX-351), our expectations regarding the timing of our regulatory filings, our expectations regarding our research and development programs and advancing our CombiPlex platform and the potential to establish research and development collaborations applying our proprietary technologies with other biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies. Forward-looking statements in this release involve substantial risks and uncertainties that could cause our development programs, future results, or achievements to differ significantly from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, the uncertainties inherent in the conduct of clinical studies, whether clinical study results obtained to date will be predictive of future results, whether the final results of our clinical studies will be supportive of regulatory approval to market VYXEOS and other matters that could affect the commercial potential of our drug candidates. Celator undertakes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements. For a further description of the risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from those expressed in these forward-looking statements, as well as risks relating to the business of the company in general, see Celator's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, subsequent reports on Form 10-Q and 8-K, and other filings by the company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release gives us a solid overview of the study design with this statement: “The randomized, controlled, Phase 3 trial (Protocol NCT01696084), enrolled 309 patients at 39 sites in the United States and Canada, and compared VYXEOS to the conventional cytarabine and daunorubicin treatment regimen (commonly referred to as 7+3) as first-line therapy in older (60-75 years of age) patients with high-risk (secondary) AML.”
What would have helped is knowing the numbers of patients in each arm (this information was not conveyed) and the extent to which there were dropouts or others who didn’t complete the study. The trial notes that it employed an Intention-to-Treat analysis which can involve missing data because sometimes patients withdraw due to the adverse effects of the intervention. If that happens you don’t know how those patients fared.  Are we sure these results reported complete outcome data for all randomized trial participants?  No, we’re not, and that omission can reduce the quality of the evidence. What we don’t know about the intention to treat analysis is whether they had the outcome event of survival or death recorded for each patient. Patients lost to follow up in whom no outcome was measured would be left out of this type of analysis. We do know that the study is not blinded and we can’t make any decision on potential for bias if we don’t know how and by whom the measurements were made.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“This is the first time we have been able to regenerate a cornea in humans,” researcher May Griffith, PhD, of the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and the University of Ottawa tells WebMD. “We are still in the prototype stage, but this shows that regenerating a human cornea is possible.”

Two years after having the corneas implanted, six of the 10 patients had improved vision . Nine of the 10 experienced cell and nerve regeneration, meaning that corneal cells and nerves grew into the implant.

In a newly released study, investigators from Canada and Sweden reported results from the first 10 people in the world treated with the biosynthetic corneas.

Aug. 25, 2010 -- Corneas made in the lab using genetically engineered human collagen could restore sight to millions of visually impaired people waiting for transplants from human donors, researchers say.

Too Few Corneas Available

Acting as the window to the eye, the cornea is made up largely of water and the fibrous protein collagen.

Worldwide, more than 10 million people have impaired vision or blindness as a result of corneal damage, but only a small fraction ever receive transplants from cadaver donors.

A shortage of human donor tissue coupled with the threat of graft rejection from donor corneal transplants has driven the search for other ways of treating corneal damage. Although synthetic corneal replacements made from plastic are available, they have many drawbacks and are considered an option for only a small percentage of people.

It has been 10 years since Griffith and colleagues first reported the development of a material with the potential to grow healthy new tissue in people with damaged corneas.

To make the material, the researchers placed a human gene that regulates the natural production of collagen into specially programmed yeast cells. They then molded the resulting material into the shape of a cornea.

After several years of testing in her lab, Griffith began collaborating with Swedish eye surgeon Per Fagerholm of Linkoping University, who implanted the engineered collagen corneas into the 10 patients in Sweden.

None of the patients experienced graft rejection or required long-term immune suppression -- two potential side effects with human donor corneal transplants. The corneas were sensitive to touch and produced normal tears.

The results were published in the journal Science Translational Medicine. The research was primarily funded by grants from the Canadian Stem Cell Network, the Swedish Research Council, and the Marie Curie International Fellowship. The human collagen used to develop the corneas was provided by biotechnology company FibroGen Inc.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Between the researcher’s own assessment and the outside commentary, it is made clear that this study is small and preliminary and in need of further research. This is the one of two of the stories reviewed to note that these results were obtained after two years of monitoring these patients. That gives readers both a sense of the significance of their improvements and the difficulty of this type of research. The story could have pointed out some of the specific limitations of the study design, including the fact that the study did not actually compare this type of transplant with any other kind of transplant or therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Despite recent debate about how well antidepressants really work in people with only mild or moderate depression, a new analysis of drug studies suggests they may have some benefit across the board.

Researchers found that more patients taking Prozac or Effexor had a substantial improvement in their symptoms than those taking a drug-free placebo pill, regardless of how severe those symptoms were to begin with.

“The idea that unless you’re very, very ill, you’re not going to benefit from treatment does not appear to stand up” when looking closely, said the study’s lead author, Robert Gibbons, from the University of Chicago.

Still, not everyone in the studies improved — on average, about five people had to be treated with one of the drugs for one person to feel better, and the benefits seemed to be diminished among some of the oldest patients.

What’s more, one researcher not involved in the study said its findings still don’t mean the drugs are any better than non-drug methods of treating depression, such as talk therapy and being more physically active.

For their analysis, Gibbons and his colleagues looked at outcomes for each individual patient in published and unpublished trials testing the effects of six weeks of treatment with antidepressants versus placebo pills. Most of those trials were funded and run by the pharmaceutical companies that manufacture Prozac and Effexor — Eli Lilly and Wyeth, respectively.

They included 12 studies of Prozac in adults and four each in elderly patients and youth, as well as 21 trials of immediate- or extended-release Effexor in adults. About 9,000 participants were included.

More adults and kids taking Prozac, known generically as fluoxetine, had at least a 50 percent improvement in scores on depression tests after six weeks compared to those assigned to take a placebo pill.

Fifty-five percent of adults on Prozac responded to treatment, compared to 34 percent in the placebo group. In youth, 30 percent on Prozac had significant symptom improvement, compared to just six percent of the comparisons.

The benefits were seen regardless of how severe patients’ symptoms were before starting treatment.

However, in the elderly the differences between the treatment and placebo groups were much smaller, and the researchers calculated that 17 older patients would have to be treated with Prozac for one to gain from it.

“Clearly the efficacy of antidepressants is age-dependent, (and) largest, most interestingly, in youth, which I don’t think would be the mainstream view in psychiatry,” Gibbons told Reuters Health.

The findings, he added, “raise other questions that need to be followed up (including), what’s going on in the elderly?”

Both types of Effexor, or venlafaxine, also seemed to help adults with mild to severe depression, with slightly more patients responding to the immediate-release dose.

Some of the study’s authors have testified for or received funding from drug companies, though the report itself was funded by national health agencies.

The researchers said they couldn’t be sure there would be similar improvements with other types of antidepressants — especially given the more limited data in kids and the elderly — or that the longer-term benefits would be as clear.

One recent study suggested that up to a fifth of patients on the antidepressant Cymbalta (duloxetine) might actually benefit more from placebo pills (see Reuters Health story of December 9, 2011.)

Irving Kirsch, who studies antidepressants and placebos at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said the new report didn’t make him more optimistic about the drugs.

If five or more patients need to be treated with an antidepressant for one to substantially improve, most don’t get much out of it, he pointed out.

“More than 80 percent of the patients are not getting a significant benefit from the drug — either they’re not getting better or they would get the same benefit with placebo,” he told Reuters Health.

“There are alternative treatments for depression that also produce about the same symptom reduction as the drugs do, but without the risk of side effects,” Kirsch added, including psychotherapy and exercise.

Still, Gibbons said that the improvement in symptoms for the average patient wasn’t insignificant.

“Definitely it doesn’t look like antidepressants are placebos,” he concluded.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Several of the limitations of the meta-analysis were mentioned in the story.
Of course, one key limitation in such cases is how they selected studies for the analyses (ones already available to them from the National Institute of Mental Health and from drug companies).  This may not bias the results but may bias the interpretation (the authors say they only know these effects for prozac/effexor and can’t comment on other drugs; that could possibly lead a reader to incorrectly conclude that only prozac/effexor are shown to be effective.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
University of Miami cardiologists last week reported success in a small, preliminary human clinical trial of a new stem cell therapy they hope some day will routinely mend human hearts and reduce the need for lifelong medication, even for transplants.

“That's the Holy Grail, the quest the whole field has been pursuing for close to a decade, and this is evidence we're on the right track,” said Dr. Joshua Hare, director of the University of Miami Medical School's Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute. He's lead author of the study that appears in Thursday's peer-reviewed Circulation Research: Journal of the American Heart Association.

Max Eaton, the 68-year-old direct-buy franchise owner who was patient No.1 in the eight-person trial, said Wednesday he's thankful he was part of the trial, adding that he had just completed a 2.8-mile, 41-minute walk around his neighborhood in Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Fla.

“I feel very grateful,” he said. “Almost certainly, I would be deceased or in much worse shape had I not had the opportunity to be in this program.”

Hare stressed that the current trial is only a small, run-up phase of extensive testing that will take up to five years and involve dozens of hospitals and hundreds of patients before winning U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval for routine use.

The trial was primarily about the safety of the procedure, and all eight patients came through without significant side effects, he said. The procedure also reduced the size of hearts swollen by previous heart attacks, a condition called cardiomyopathy or simply heart failure.

The reduction was up to 25 percent, while current therapies including medication and pacemakers typically reduce the size by only about 5 percent, he said. The reduction in swelling increases the heart's ability to pump blood, he said. By implication, it almost certainly improves the patient's health, although that was not directly measured in the small, early study.

In the study, stem cells were taken from the patient's own bone marrow and injected by catheter into scar tissue in the patient's heart caused by an earlier heart attack. It worked in patients such as Eaton, whose heart attack was 11 years ago, Hare said. The hope was that the immature adult stem cells would turn into heart muscle, replacing the scar tissue.

The study shed new light on a question of prime interest to cardiologists: whether the injected stem cells actually transformed themselves into heart muscle, or improved heart function in some other way.

Some of the stem cells did become heart muscle, Hare said; they also triggered the heart to produce more of its own stem cells which became new heart muscle as well, he said.

The next step is two more near-term studies. The first, which started in 2009, is a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 60 patients designed further to test the safety of the procedure, but primarily its efficacy, or how well it works.

Another study about to get underway will see whether bone marrow from a donor can work as well as the patient's own bone marrow.

Later, researchers will conduct a study involving 50 to 100 hospitals and many hundreds of patients aimed at winning final FDA approval.

Eaton's part of the testing is finished. He says he's glad he took part, even though it hasn't quite turned him into an Olympic runner.

“I still get chest pains at times. It depends on the time of year. I had my heart attack 11 years ago in the fall. That's when I get them,” he said.

But he adds: “I'm not ready to go. I'll keep going as long as I can enjoy what's to be enjoyed.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We always appreciate it when the lead of the story makes the small size of a study clear. This one described the study as “a small, preliminary human clinical trial.” It also does a nice job of describing the clinical trial phases that a drug or treatment must undergo before it can receive approval by the FDA.  However, the story could have provided more information about the study participants, particularly that they were all men with a mean age of 57 years.  

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lynden, WA - August 24, 2017 - Initial findings from several studies - including both human subjects and animals - on the potential health benefits of red raspberries were presented earlier this year at the 2017 Experimental Biology conference in Chicago. Participants in short-term human trials experienced an improvement in glucose control and increased satiety, while longer-term animal trials revealed promising effects on the gut microbiota after red raspberry intake. The observations from animal and in vitro studies provided insights that support future hypotheses for red raspberry research exploring potential beneficial effects on pathways related to reducing inflammation, obesity, and type 2 diabetes risk.

"We are excited about this new flurry of studies, which builds on previously published research aimed to better understand the potential health benefits of red raspberries," said Tom Krugman, Executive Director of the National Processed Raspberry Council (NPRC). "Our Council is committed to delivering the highest quality nutrition and health science that consumers can use to make informed choices when aiming for a healthy diet."

While additional research, particularly in humans, is warranted, preliminary evidence from these studies suggests that the actions of essential nutrients, fiber, and polyphenolic phytochemicals found in red raspberries may play a role in supporting key metabolic functions, including anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative and metabolic stabilizing activity. While this emerging research is promising, and contributes to the overall understanding of the health benefits of red raspberries, conclusions cannot be drawn at this time.

In this human trial, investigators from the Center for Nutrition Research at the Illinois Institute of Technology looked at two study groups: obese individuals with impaired fasting glucose and hyperinsulinemia (PreDM) and healthy weight individuals with normo-glycemia and insulinemia. Participants experienced a significant reduction in postprandial glucose when 2 cups (250g) of red raspberries were consumed with meals compared to no raspberries. The glucose lowering was accompanied with less insulin suggesting improved insulin sensitivity in individuals with pre-diabetes and insulin resistance.

* Xiao, D. Huang, Y. Park, E. Edirisinghe, I. and Burton-Freeman, B. Red Raspberries and Insulin Action: Understanding the Role of Red Raspberry Consumption on Postprandial Metabolic Indices. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 973.9. http://bit.

In a secondary objective of the blood sugar control study, researchers found that subjects in the PreDM group who reported the highest level of hunger at baseline experienced greater satiety after the control meal compared to raspberry containing meals (p<0.05). In contrast, the healthy weight participants experienced significantly greater hunger suppression and wanted to eat less after a breakfast containing 2 cups (250g) of red raspberries compared to a calorie-matched control meal without raspberries. Because this study was limited to three meals, further research is needed to determine the factors that influenced outcomes.

* Huang, L. Xiao, D. Park, E. Edirisinghe, I. and Burton-Freeman, B. The Effect of Red Raspberry on Satiety. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 794.8. http://bit.

In an eight-week pilot study, researchers from the Institute for Food Safety and Health from the Illinois Institute of Technology examined the impact of consumption of red raspberry purée or fructo-oligosaccharide on the gut microbiota and the subsequent bioavailability of red raspberry polyphenols in healthy volunteers. Consumption of the red raspberry puree and the fructo-oligiosaccharide for 4 weeks resulted in decreased Firmicutes and increased Bacteroidetes, which was more pronounced after red raspberry intake. Additionally, a type of bacteria called Akkermansia that has been associated with metabolic health was increased during red raspberry intake only. These preliminary results are promising. Further research is needed to support the hypothesis that the consumption of raspberry puree may change the composition of the gut microbiota.

* Zhang, X. Sandhu, A. Schill, K. Edirisinghe, I. and Burton-Freeman, B. The Reciprocal Interactions between Red Raspberry Polyphenols and Gut Microbiome Composition: Preliminary Findings. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 965.29. http://bit.

Dr. Giuliana Noratto and colleagues of the Department of Food and Nutrition Science at Texas A&M University studied if dietary supplementation with red raspberries could modulate the fecal microbiota of obese mice with diabetes and dyslipidemia. In this animal study, raspberry supplementation was associated with higher levels of Lachnospiraceae - a family of bacteria that can be depleted during diseases of the intestinal tract, such as inflammatory bowel disease. These findings provide a basis for formulating hypotheses for conducting additional studies, particularly in human trials.

* Noratto, G. Garcia-Mazcorro, J. Chew, B. and Mertens-Talcott, S. Dietary Supplementation with Raspberry Whole Fruit Modifies the Relative Abundance of Fecal Microbial Communities in Obese Diabetic (db/db) Mice. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 965.19. http://bit.

In an animal study, mice fed 5% freeze dried raspberry for 12 weeks, showed signs of improved insulin resistance and reduced inflammation in skeletal muscle while consuming a high-fat diet. These data corroborate a short-term study in humans reported by Xiao and colleagues at the same meeting supporting further work in humans to provide additional insight into these findings.

* Min Du, Tiande Zou, Bo Wang, Xingwei Liang, and Mei-Jun Zhu. Raspberry intake reduces skeletal muscle lipid accumulation and improves insulin sensitivity in mice fed high fat diet. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 972.19. http://bit.

A research team from the University of Michigan studied the potential biologically active properties of red raspberries with in vitro assays including antioxidant and anti-inflammatory capacities. Follow-up research explored the potential relationship between feeding freeze-dried whole raspberry powder and cardiometabolic risk in obesity prone rats. Red raspberries were found to upregulate the expression of specific cardiac-protective molecular proteins (myocardial adiponectin, its receptor 2, and apolipoprotein E). Rats fed the red raspberries also experienced altered nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase mRNA, a protein associated with multiple functions in conditions related to obesity and type 2 diabetes. More research is needed to determine if compounds in red raspberries play a role in human cardiometabolic pathways.

* Kirakosyan, A. Seymour, EM. Gutierrez, E. and Bolling, S. Associations of Dietary Intakes of Red Raspberry Fruits with Risk of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 973.4. http://bit.

In a mouse model, red raspberry supplementation of 5% dry feed weight was found to suppress inflammation and facilitate epithelium repair compared to mice with induced colitis (inflammation of the colon) and fed a standard chow diet. These observations are not conclusive, and further research is needed to determine if red raspberry supplementation supports epithelial function in humans.

* Bibi, S. Du, M. Kang, Y. Sun, X. Xue, Y. Soussa Moraes, LF. and Zhu, M. Dietary Red Raspberry Enhances Intestinal Epithelium Repair in Chronic Colitis. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 972.19. http://bit.

Anthocyanin profiles among common processed forms of raspberries (frozen, juice concentrate, seeded puree, and seedless puree) on the U.S. market were investigated. Thirty-four samples - both domestic and imported - were reviewed. Seven individual anthocyanins were identified in the samples. While anthocyanin profiles varied slightly, contents varied considerably. This may reflect differences in varieties, origins, processing methods among other influential factors.

* Wu, X. Sun, J. Ahuja, J. Haytowitz, DB. Burton-Freeman, B. Chen, P. Pehrsson, PR. Anthocyanin profiles and contents in processed raspberries on the U.S. market. The FASEB Journal, April 2017, vol. 31 no. 1 Supplement 454.6. http://bit.

Created in 2013, the National Processed Raspberry Council (NPRC) represents the processed raspberry industry and is supported by assessments from both domestic producers and importers. NPRC's mission is to conduct nutrition research and promote the health benefits of processed raspberries. The NPRC is responsible for marketing processed raspberries in the U.S. and is committed to promoting the growth of the entire industry. Processed raspberries are frozen at the peak of ripeness to lock in flavor and nutrition. Visit redrazz.org for more information, and follow us on our social media channels:
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: In the introduction and in the study summaries, the release did a good job of using conservative language and emphasizing that some of the trials were inconclusive or preliminary. 
We especially applaud their frankness in this sentence of the release: “While this emerging research is promising, and contributes to the overall understanding of the health benefits of red raspberries, conclusions cannot be drawn at this time.”
The news release did well to distinguish between trials that were done in humans and in mice, and in once instance it pointed out that a study had only taken place over the course of three meals. Though they should have included numbers and data, their inclusion of the study limitations here were helpful. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
She could continue taking the 13 pills a day she needed to control her Parkinson's disease, along with dealing with the side effects. Or she could allow doctors to implant two long, thin electrodes deep into her brain, along with an electrical generator about the size of an iPod in her chest.

In August 2007, Wolter, 63, underwent the surgery at Froedtert Hospital in Wauwatosa, and her life has improved dramatically.

A study released online Tuesday concluded that so-called deep brain stimulation was substantially more effective in treating Parkinson's than the best drug therapy, but it also carried a much greater risk of serious adverse side effects.

The results come at time when a growing number of people are reaching their late 50s and early 60s, when they are most likely to be diagnosed with the disease, which affects between 500,000 and 1.5 million Americans.

"We are on the verge of an epidemic," said Erwin Montgomery, a professor of neurology at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison.

The six-month study, which involved 255 people, found that those who underwent surgery had 4.6 more hours each day of good control of their symptoms than those who got the best drug therapy.

"That's huge," said lead author Fran Weaver, a researcher with the Hines VA Hospital in Hines, Ill.

She said the best drugs provide only one to two hours of added improvement, or "on time."

Those who got the therapy also had significantly more improvement in other measures of symptoms, according to the study that will appear today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

However, they were 3.8 times more likely to experience a serious adverse event, such as an infection, falls, nervous system or psychiatric disorders, or a problem with the device. Forty-nine of the deep brain stimulation patients, or 40%, had 82 serious adverse events, compared with 11% of the drug patients, who had 19 serious adverse events.

Weaver said 99% of the adverse events were resolved within six months, including some cases in which an infection required the removal of the generator from the chest.

There also was one death related to the surgery involving a patient who had bleeding in the brain, went into a coma and died several days later, she said.

Deep brain stimulation also is expensive. At Froedtert Hospital the procedure costs about $120,000, an amount that generally is covered by Medicare and private insurance.

The hospital has done about 300 of the procedures since 2005, said Brad Hiner, an associate professor of neurology at the Medical College of Wisconsin and neurologic director of the hospital's deep brain stimulation program.

"This (the JAMA study) is the largest, most complete and thorough analysis of deep brain stimulation to date," Hiner said.

Some neurologists remain unconvinced about the benefits of the therapy.

"You are doing something pretty invasive," said Paul Nausieda, director of the Regional Parkinson's Center at Aurora Sinai Medical Center in Milwaukee. "It's got too many downside issues."

Nausieda said much of the benefit found in the study could be due to a placebo effect.

Beyond that, doctors need to do a better job of optimizing drug therapy, he said, noting that there are thousands of potential combinations of drugs that can be used to control symptoms.

Nausieda said that of the more than 5,000 Parkinson's patients he has seen, only about 100 were candidates for deep brain stimulation.

"It's certainly not a breakthrough," he said.

Still, deep brain stimulation and several other potential therapies in the growing field of neurostimulation have created a buzz in the medical community.

Clinical trials involving different forms of neurostimulation are looking into its effectiveness in treating a range of disorders, including epilepsy, depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and tinnitus, although doctors acknowledge they don't know how the treatments actually work.

In a sense it's a field of science that works backward: Stimulation is applied to the brain, some people get better, and doctors try to figure out why.

"We haven't the foggiest notion," said UW's Montgomery. "(But) we used aspirin long before we knew how it worked. God watches out for fools and little children. We are blessed that we have this therapy."

The problem with deep brain stimulation is that many doctors are not aware of its benefits or don't know how to determine the appropriate patients based on risks vs. potential benefits, he said.

Up to 15% of Parkinson's patients are good candidates for the therapy, but only 2% get it, he said.

Deep brain stimulation is not an option for the 20% to 30% of Parkinson's patients who also have dementia, said Hiner, of Froedtert Hospital.

He said the best candidates are those whose medications are not working well or are causing too many side effects.

Wolter, who lives in Oconomowoc, fit that profile well. She was diagnosed with the disease in 1997 after she developed a slight limp.

She was put on an increasing number of medications, which eventually caused side effects.

At times, she said, she felt incredibly fidgety.

"I'd take my pills and feel good for a while, but I never knew when they would wear off," she said. "I don't know what was worse: the medications or the disease."

She said she worried about having the surgery, but it got to the point where she felt as though she had run out of options.

In the nearly year and a half since having the surgery, her condition has improved substantially, she said.

Her medication use has dropped dramatically and "my body has calmed down," she said. "I can do what everybody does."

In April she went to Disney World with her two daughters and grandchildren and was able to walk around the park.

The study was paid for by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and Medtronic, the company that makes the device used in the study.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news article is based on a randomized controlled trial published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. 
The study is fairly small and some key outcomes, including the most dramatic, are based on self-reports. It was only six months long, and the efficacy of the treatment over time is still unknown. 
The story should have reported these caveats. On balance, however, the story earns a "satisfactory" rating under the "evidence" criterion.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Treating stroke patients who have lost control and awareness of one side of their body with magnetic stimulation to the brain may improve their symptoms, researchers said today.

In a new, small study published in the journal Neurology, patients who were given quick bursts of stimulation over a couple of weeks improved by about 20 percent on tests of vision and attention, while those who got a fake stimulation treatment didn’t improve significantly.

But researchers said it’s still unclear what types of patients might benefit from the treatment and by how much.

About half of people who have a stroke end up with difficulty processing or reacting to things on one side of their body, most often on the left side after a stroke in the right side of the brain, said Dr. Anna Barrett, director of stroke rehabilitation research at the Kessler Foundation in West Orange, New Jersey, who wasn’t involved in the new study. That post-stroke condition is known as neglect.

“People that have that tend to do much worse in their eventual recovery,” Barrett said. “They’re less likely to become completely independent.”

Most of those patients can improve with therapy and exercises, she said, but the process is often slow, and keeping people in the hospital during it is costly.

She said that because of that, the new findings are “promising,” but added that brain stimulation is still an experimental technique, and not ready to be used as part of normal stroke rehabilitation.

For the study, Italian researchers randomly assigned 20 patients with neglect to get real or fake magnetic stimulation in ten sessions over two weeks, in addition to their conventional rehab program. The treatment involved an electromagnetic coil placed over the left side of the brain that transmitted pulses of electrical currents.

Similar types of stimulation treatment are used in some patients with depression or during spinal surgery, according to Barrett. The device costs about $50,000.

Nine people in each group completed all the treatment sessions.

Before treatment, right after and another two weeks later, stroke patients were given tests to measure their visual-spatial skills, as well as attention and concentration. Those including drawing and shape-copying tests, as well as menu reading and map navigating tasks.

Patients in both groups started out with an average mark of about 170 on the tests, which are scored from 0 to 227 combined.

The “real” magnetic stimulation group improved by about 16 percent right after the treatment and 23 percent at the later time point, while there was no significant benefit seen in patients given the fake stimulation.

The researchers said that it’s not clear what the amount of improvement they observed would mean for patients in their daily lives.

But, lead author Dr. Giacomo Koch said, “What we found is that the improvement was more marked in those patients that were more impaired.”

Koch, from the Santa Lucia Foundation in Rome, told Reuters Health he thinks those patients with more severe problems would likely see a benefit outside of just test results.

He said that larger studies at multiple treatment sites are needed to determine how helpful magnetic stimulation can be in stroke recovery. But he was optimistic about the treatment’s future.

“I think in a few years this could become another tool that could be used systematically in the neurorehabilitation wards,” Koch said. He added that the treatment isn’t painful, and only takes a few minutes for each session.

Close to 800,000 people in the U.S. suffer a stroke each year, mostly older adults. For those with neglect, doctors typically prescribe cognitive rehabilitation, in which therapists teach skills and help the patient become more aware of the affected side of the body.

Barrett, also from the University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, said that she wonders whether stimulation could help patients achieve the goals that are most important to regaining independence after a stroke, such as using the bathroom.

It’s also not clear if the treatment might help most neglect patients, or if the findings only apply to certain groups, she told Reuters Health.

The ideal option might end up being a combination treatment that involves stimulation in certain patients and other therapies that address a range of skills important for regaining function, Barrett added. But, she said, “That all remains to be investigated.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Although the story describes features of the study that reduce the potential for biased results (e.g. randomization, inclusion of a placebo control group that received fake magnetic stimulation), we thought it could have lingered a bit longer on the limitations of such a very small study that included only 20 people (only 9 of which actually received a full course of TMS treatment). Nevertheless, the story delivers the correct take-home message when it says, “larger studies at multiple treatment sites are needed to determine how helpful magnetic stimulation can be in stroke recovery.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Among older adults with an unstable ankle fracture, the use of a modified casting technique known as close contact casting (a molded below-knee cast with minimal padding) resulted in similar functional outcomes at 6 months compared with surgery, and with fewer wound complications and reduced intervention costs, according to a study appearing in the October 11 issue of JAMA.

The number of older adults sustaining ankle fractures is increasing. Treatment of unstable fractures is either surgical or nonsurgical (using externally applied casts). Neither method yields an entirely satisfactory outcome in older adults. Traditional casting techniques are associated with poor fracture alignment and healing, as well as plaster-related sores. Surgery is often complicated by poor implant fixation (bone healing), wound problems, and infection. A modified casting technique has been developed, close contact casting, which uses minimal padding compared with traditional casting and achieves fracture reduction by distributing contact pressure by close anatomic fit.

Keith Willett, M.B.B.S., F.R.C.S., of the University of Oxford, United Kingdom, and colleagues randomly assigned 620 adults older than 60 years with acute, unstable ankle fracture to surgery (n = 309) or casting (n = 311). Casts were applied in the operating room under general or spinal anesthesia by a trained surgeon.

Among the 620 adults (average age, 71 years; 74 percent women) who were randomized, 96 percent completed the study. Nearly all participants (93 percent) received assigned treatment; 52 of 275 (19 percent) who initially received casting later converted to surgery. At 6 months, casting resulted in measures of ankle function equivalent to that with surgery. Infection and wound breakdown were more common with surgery (10 percent vs 1 percent), as were additional operating room procedures (6 percent vs 1 percent).

Radiologic malunion (abnormal healing of a fracture) was more common in the casting group (15 percent vs 3 percent for surgery). Casting required less operating room time compared with surgery. There were no significant differences in other secondary outcomes: quality of life, pain, ankle motion, mobility, and patient satisfaction.

"Close contact casting was delivered successfully for most participants, substantially reducing the number of patients requiring invasive surgical procedures at the outset and additional operations during a 6-month period," the authors write.

The researchers add that close contact casting may be an appropriate treatment for older adults with unstable ankle fracture.

Editor's Note: Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

"The results reported by Willett et al demonstrate that most unstable ankle fractures in older patients can be treated with a cast without the need for surgery," writes David W. Sanders, M.D., M.Sc., F.R.C.S.C., of Western University, London, Ontario, Canada, in an accompanying editorial.

"However, many patients who were initially treated by casting subsequently required repeat casting or surgery. Further studies are needed to help identify which patients will not benefit from casting. Although close contact casting may be unfamiliar to some orthopedic surgeons, it can avoid surgery for older patients with ankle fractures, yet result in equivalent functional outcomes. This technique is worth considering when treating this challenging clinical problem."

Editor's Note: The author has completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.

To place an electronic embedded link to these articles in your story These links will be live at the embargo time: http://jama. http://jama.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This large randomized study with high rates of completion suggests a high quality of evidence, all noted in the news release.
The release would have been better if it had noted that the outcome was blinded, a very important marker of quality as it is likely to reduce the risk of bias.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, June 14, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Not only do cooler heads prevail, they might also sleep better, according to researchers who say they have developed a cooling cap that, when worn during sleeptime, may help treat insomnia.

Previous research has shown that the brains of people with insomnia are "hyperaroused" and have a higher brain metabolism in the frontal lobes, which helps explain why they have trouble drifting off to sleep and staying asleep, said study co-author Dr. Daniel Buysse, a professor of psychiatry and clinical and translational science at University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

To help the brain cool down, researchers outfitted 12 primary insomnia patients with a temperature-controlled cap that has cool water flowing through it and recruited 12 healthy controls matched for age and gender. ("Primary insomnia" means that medical problems, medicines, or other substances have been ruled out as a cause of sleep difficulties. The more common type of insomnia is "secondary insomnia," in which medical issues or medications contribute.)

Of the patients with insomnia, the average age was 45 and nine were women. Participants slept for two nights in a sleep lab with no cap; two nights with the cap set at a "neutral" temperature (about 86 degrees Fahrenheit); two nights at a moderately cool temperature (72 degrees Fahrenheit); and two nights with the coolest temperature (57 degrees Fahrenheit).

While the participants slept, researchers monitored their brain electrical activity, eye movements (to determine if someone was in REM, or rapid eye movement sleep) and jaw muscle tone (during REM, the muscles go slack due to 'sleep paralysis').

In this preliminary study, about three-quarters of those with insomnia said the cap helped them sleep better when the water temperature was about 57 degrees Fahrenheit.

At higher temperatures -- 72 and 86 degrees -- patients reported no benefit, according to the study presented Monday at SLEEP 2011, the Associated Professional Sleep Societies meeting in Minneapolis.

While wearing the cooling cap, it took insomnia patients an average of 13 minutes to fall asleep and they spent 89 percent of their time in bed actually sleeping, about the same as controls who didn't have insomnia (the latter group averaged 16 minutes to fall asleep and 89 percent of the time in bed sleeping) .

The cooling cap was, however, associated with an increased amount of slow-wave sleep -- or the deepest, restorative portion of sleep, the researchers reported.

"What we wanted to find out was: 'Would cooling the surface of the brain of insomnia patients result in lower metabolism and improved sleep? The basic answer in this preliminary study, is yes, it seems to work, and it works in two ways," said Buysse. "It does reduce brain metabolism in the frontal lobes, and it improves sleep."

Dr. William Kohler, medical director of the Florida Sleep Institute, said the concept was exciting and worth further research in larger studies that include body temperature measurements and brain imaging tests.

"The theoretical concept is correct, in that we do know from many previous studies that as the body core temperature cools, our sleep improves, and with warming of the core temperature, we have more restless sleep," Kohler said.

Chronic insomnia -- which the American Academy of Sleep Medicine attributes to about one out of every 10 Americans -- can be difficult to treat. Medications can help, although many people complain of side effects, Kohler said. The most effective treatment is cognitive behavior therapy, which involves changes such as avoiding cigarettes, alcohol and caffeine before bed, and getting plenty of bright light in the morning but turning off the TV, computer and dimming the lights during a wind-down period, among other techniques for improving "sleep hygiene."

"It's in the brain where the chemical changes are occurring that lead to sleep," he said.

The cap is not yet available to consumers, although the lead researcher, Dr. Eric Nofzinger, has plans to bring it to market, Buysse said.

Because this study was extremely small and presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal and confirmed in larger studies.

Buysee said there shouldn't be any safety issues. If people get too cold, they would likely just wake up and take the cap off, he said.

The U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute has more on insomnia.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Very appropriate reminder at the very end of the story: “Because this study was extremely small and presented at a medical meeting, the data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal and confirmed in larger studies.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) The headlines about football players and chronic traumatic encephalopathy - commonly known as CTE - seem endless. The most recent diagnosis of the neurodegenerative brain disease was given to former New England Patriot Aaron Hernandez. But one of the biggest obstacles in understanding CTE has been the inability to diagnose it in the living. New research released Tuesday may make that possible. Published in the journal PLOS One, researchers have found a protein that can be a marker of this devastating disease.

"This is something new," said Dr. Ann McKee , a neuropathologist and senior author of the studyMcKee has performed many of the high profile diagnoses of CTE among former pro-football players and is director of the Boston University CTE Center.

An early step in the right direction

McKee also cautioned that this is still early research. "The next step -- is repeating, validating our findings, and seeing if we can detect it in blood, and of course doing it in living subjects. These are critical next steps," she said.

CTE causes Alzheimer's-like symptoms, including memory loss, confusion, aggression, rage and, at times, suicidal behavior. It is believed to result from repeated trauma to the head, which causes a buildup of the abnormal protein tau which clumps in the brain.

In this new study, researchers found an increased amount of the protein CCL11 in patients previously diagnosed with CTE. CCL11 is a protein commonly associated with inflammation, a process which McKee said can be a trigger for the disease. "Inflammation is normally a very helpful response in the brain, but when it goes on and persists for a long time, and gets out of control -- that's what we think happens in CTE," said McKee.

More exposure to football increases likeliness of CCL11

The paper evaluated the brains of 23 deceased football players with CTE, and compared them to the brains of 50 deceased people diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and the brains of 18 deceased non-athletes. When compared to the brains without CTE, researchers found those brains with CTE had significantly higher amounts of CCL11, even when compared to those brains with Alzheimer's, another degenerative brain disease. Furthermore, they found that the more years someone played football, the higher amount of the protein. However, contrary to the popularly held belief that a greater number of concussions are linked to CTE , no connection was found between levels of CCL11 and reported number of concussions. In addition, the number of reported concussions tend to be an unreliable indicator in general, because they are usually self reported.

Although there are different stages of the disease that indicate how far it has progressed, this study was unable to determine any connections between levels of CCL11 and severity of CTE.

"The findings of this study are the early steps toward identifying CTE during life. Once we can successfully diagnose CTE in living individuals, we will be much closer to discovering treatments for those who suffer from it," said McKee.

"It is a good step forward but I will be very conservative about the interpretations of the possible application to diagnosis," said Dr. Bennet Omalu, the neuropathologist credited with making the first diagnosis of CTE among professional football players. Omalu found traces of the disease in the brain of legendary Pittsburgh Steelers player and pro Hall of Famer Mike Webster in 2002.

While Omalu was cautiously optimistic about the development, he also noted that CCL11 isn't unique to the brain disease. "This is an inflammatory marker that may be non-specific and may not be diagnostic of CTE," he said.

While it is hoped that this will be one avenue to help detect the disease in the living, McKee believes that it will just be one part of a larger process. "This may be one of the abnormalities [of the disease], but it may take 2-3 to be useful to diagnose CTE," said McKee.

110 of 111 former NFL players found with CTE

A recent analysis by BU found evidence of CTE in 110 of 111 brains of former NFL players. However, there is a potential bias in that study, as relatives of these players may have submitted their brains for diagnosis due to clinical symptoms noticed while the players were alive.

CTE has been detected in veterans, as well as players of other contact sports; however, it has become most associated with football. Along with Hernandez, CTE has been diagnosed in San Diego Charger and Hall of Famer Junior Seau, as well as the Philadelphia Eagles' Kevin Turner and the Oakland Raiders' Ken Stabler, to name a few.

In 2015, a federal judge approved a class-action lawsuit settlement between the NFL and thousands of former players who accused the league of hiding the dangers of concussions and repeated head trauma. The agreement provides up to $5 million per retired player for serious medical conditions associated with repeated head trauma.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story discusses the number of people involved in the study, their different conditions, and why each group is relevant. However, the story would have been stronger if it had noted that the samples used in the study were from the brain and cerebrospinal fluid of individuals. That would better explain why researchers don’t know if the relevant protein can be found in the blood. As it is, the story tells readers that higher levels of CCL11 were found — but not where. The story also makes it clear that there’s a lot more work that needs to be done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An injection of Botox works about as well as a surgically implanted device to help women with very severe incontinence, researchers reported Tuesday.

It’s good news for women with severe urge incontinence, who can choose between treatments based on preference, said Dr. Cindy Amundsen of Duke University, who led the study.

“What we have learned from the study is the treatments are both good and it will just help inform physicians and patients who are trying to make a decision between these two therapies,” Amundsen said.

“We are actually not surprised that there isn’t a big difference between the two because both therapies are effective at relaxing the overactive bladder muscles.”

Women can choose between a surgical procedure, which is more expensive at first, versus regular Botox injections, which are less costly and less invasive but which could add up over time, Amundsen said.

The team studied women with severe incontinence who could not be helped with drugs or other treatments. The women in the study had to suffer at least six episodes of incontinence over three days.

The Botox injections freed 20 percent of the women in the study of incontinence, compared to 4 percent who had a nerve stimulator implant, Amundesen and colleagues reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

“Forty-six percent in the onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) group and 26 percent in the sacral neuromodulation group had at least a 75 percent reduction in the number of episodes of urgency incontinence,” they added.

Incontinence may sound funny, but it’s no joke, the researchers said.

“The prevalence of this disruptive condition is common and increases with age, from 17 percent of women older than 45 years to 27 percent older than 75 years in the United States,” they wrote.

And, according to the National Institutes of Health, between 25 percent and 45 percent of all women have some degree of urinary incontinence.

“Women experience urinary incontinence twice as often as men,” the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, part of the NIH, says on its website.

“Pregnancy, childbirth, menopause, and the structure of the female urinary tract account for this difference.”

The researchers at nine medical centers did a head to head comparison of a single Botox injection to the implanted medical device, assigning 381 women to randomly get one or the other treatment. The women were asked to keep diaries for six months.

Both treatments calm down the nerves responsible for signaling the bladder to empty.

On average, both treatments cut the number of “accidents” – Botox by almost four times a day and the nerve stimulator by about three times a day.

But both groups of women reported equal satisfaction, and more women in the Botox group got urinary tract infections – 35 percent versus 11 percent in the surgery group. Amundsen said it’s not clear why but her team is studyingthis to find out.

They’re also studying the cost difference. Most women who get either treatment have insurance that pays, Amundsen said.

Incontinence is embarrassing and troubling to men and women alike, who are often unwilling to even tell a doctor. They end up staying close to home and avoiding travel, shopping and visits.

There are different types of incontinence. This study covered urge incontinence, but there’s also stress incontinence, which is caused by pressure on the bladder.

Overflow incontinence is caused when the bladder never really empties. That can be a problem for men with enlarged prostates.

Doctors usually try to start people off with lifestyle treatment, such as weight loss, drinking less caffeine and alcohol, and avoiding lifting heavy objects. Exercises to strengthen the pelvic floor muscles can help, as can “bladder training” to accustom the body to urinating at regular times.

Medications can help as well, although they often have unpleasant side effects such as extremely dry mouth.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a decent job of explaining that the study, stating it was “a head to head comparison of a single Botox injection to the implanted medical device, assigning 381 women to randomly get one or the other treatment. The women were asked to keep diaries for six months.” We’re also told that the women had to have about 6 accidents over three days to be included in the study, and that other more standard treatments didn’t help.
The headline is also accurate, in terms of what the study found, and it doesn’t overplay the results. In looking at the study, however, we’ll note how we were struck by two things. First, the patients’ reported impression of improvement in bladder leakage and function failed to pass a test of statistical significance, which undermines the story’s claim that “both groups of women reported equal satisfaction.” Second, the closing lines of the study point out how the treatment “resulted in a small daily improvement in episodes that although statistically significant is of uncertain clinical importance.” This should have been explained to readers, along with details on what this means when researchers draw this conclusion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Noah Hano has no trouble pulling his daughter in a sled now, but it would have been impossible a year ago. His back pain was excrutiating,reports.

"It got to the point where I was absolutely desperate. I would go in the yard, spend five minutes in the yard raking leaves and have to sit down or lay down," Noah says.

Susan Filskov can still remember the pain she felt after hurting her back shoveling snow five years ago.

"It is just miserable. It is just like a numbing pain that doesn't go away," Susan says.

Both Susan and Noah went to see a leading back surgeon, Dr. James Weinstein, of Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center. Both got the same diagnosis: herniated discs.

What causes the disc to herniate in the first place?

"The disc is made up of mostly water, and it get tears in it. If you get a tear in your tire, or your car, you would get a bulge," Dr. Weinstein explains.

The herniated disc, or bulge, can press on the nerves in the spine, causing pain. Some people can tolerate the pain with physical therapy, medications and steroid injections. But others choose surgery to remove that bulge that causes the pain.

In an effort to determine which approach is best, Dr. Weinstein's launched a major study of over 1,200 patients with back pain. He says he thinks that sometimes people are too quick with surgery. "I think that it be important for people to have good information," he adds.

Whether you have surgery often depends on where you live and what doctor you see. Earlier studies show that a patient is 20 times more likely to have surgery in Idaho Falls, Missoula and Mason City, as compared to Newark, Bangor and Terre Haute.

"It is so interesting that geography is destiny," Dr. Weinstein says. "It's not rational."

But no matter where you live, surgery is not necessarily the best or only option. In fact, Dr. Weinstein's findings, released today in the Journal of the American Medical Association, conclude that surgery is only slightly more effective in some cases than a non-surgical approach.

"We basically found that people who had very significant symptoms, that surgery, in fact, was better," Dr. Weinstein says. "However what was really interesting is that patients who decided not to have surgery who could wait also did very well."

Critics claim Weinstein's studies are flawed because some patients, like Susan, decided to have surgery, even though she had been in the group that wasn't going to be operated on. The operation was a success and she's been pain-free for four years. As for Noah, he did just as well by exercising and taking a wait and see approach.

The study was so controversial, Dr. Weinstein says, because "I guess some of my colleagues were worried that I might find the wrong thing. I am not sure."

He says his intent was not to put some orthopedic surgeons out of business.

"That was never the intent," Dr. Weinstein explains. "It was just to find the truth for patients."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story at least attempts to describe the study and to explain the controversy over the large numbers of cross-overs, or people in the study who were initially designated to non-operative care who opted to have surgery (or vice versa). We'll give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Novartis is considering trying so-called risk-sharing with some health plans, meaning it might charge more if the drug really does keep people out of the hospital and less if it doesn’t. But such talks, while encouraging, are still in the early stages, a Novartis spokesman said.

Timothy Anderson, pharmaceutical analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, said in a recent note that Entresto was “likely to become a mega-brand over time” but that the initial uptake was “likely to be on the slower side given the entrenched nature of off-patent ACE inhibitors.” He said it was highly unusual that there were no major competitors for Entresto on the way, giving it a “long runway.”

In a clinical trial with more than 8,400 participants, patients were randomly assigned to take either Entresto or enalapril, an ACE inhibitor. Patients in both groups of the study could also take other drugs, such as beta blockers, as their doctors saw fit.

After about 27 months, 21.8 percent of those taking Entresto had either died from cardiovascular causes or had been hospitalized for worsening heart failure, compared with 26.5 percent for those taking enalapril. That represented a relative risk reduction of 20 percent using a measure known as the hazard ratio.

Novartis said that about 2.2 million Americans would be eligible for the drug, which was approved for patients with so-called Class II to Class IV chronic heart failure with so-called reduced ejection fraction. Novartis is sponsoring another study to see if the drug is effective for those with preserved ejection fraction, which accounts for half of heart failure cases.

The F.D.A. said that the main side effects were low blood pressure, high blood potassium levels and kidney impairment. It said there were also cases of angioedema, an allergic reaction that usually results in swelling of the lips or face but can be life threatening if swelling interferes with breathing. Blacks and those with a previous history of the condition were at increased risk, it said.

Entresto is a combination of two drugs, one of which is valsartan, the active ingredient in the blockbuster drug that Novartis sells as Diovan but which now faces generic competition. The other ingredient, sacubitril, inhibits an enzyme known as neprilysin, a new mechanism of action for a heart failure drug.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a nice job of describing the study in concise terms, noting the total number of participants, the study design, the length of the study, and the endpoints that were evaluated.
The discussion is Satisfactory, although we might have wished for a few more details and to have those details included higher up in the story — to complement the reporting on benefits. For example, it’s not until the very end of the story that we learn that drug is a combination pill that in fact includes another angiotensin II receptor blocker that’s already widely available. In addition, many readers will have trouble determining which kinds of heart failure patients may benefit from the drug. The story says Entresto has been approved for patients with “so-called Class II to Class IV chronic heart failure with so-called reduced ejection fraction.” Many readers — including many heart patients and their loved ones — will likely have no idea what this language means. We know this was a business story and that investors and analysts might know these terms. But many online readers will find the story as we found it – in a general search – not by a business-news-only-filtered search.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Middle-aged women may find some relief from hot flashes and other menopause problems with soy supplements, according to Chinese researchers.

They found daily supplements of soy germ isoflavones reduced the sudden sweats more than inactive placebo pills after six months.

But a U.S. expert wasn’t convinced by the results, which run counter to other published studies.

“The majority of them are showing no benefit,” said William W. Wong, a nutrition researcher at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston who wasn’t involved in the new work.

The new study, published in the journal Menopause, is based on 90 Chinese women. A third of them received placebo pills made of starch, while the rest took soy germ isoflavones, either 84 or 126 milligrams a day.

They all kept diaries of their hot flashes and filled out questionnaires about various problems tied to menopause, including hot flashes, sweating, insomnia, tiredness and headache.

At six months, their Kupperman scores — a measure of symptom severity that ranges from 0 to 63 — had dropped by more than 40 percent from an initial value of about 25 in the soy groups.

The number of hot flashes also fell from about 20 a week to less than 10.

While the same pattern was seen in the placebo group, it was less pronounced. Their symptom score dropped by 29 percent and the number of hot flashes by 35 percent, according to Dr. Yan-bin Ye of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou.

The work was supported by Frutarom Netherlands, which also donated the supplements.

Wong cautioned that the new study was small and that the women involved only had few hot flashes. He said it was “hard to believe” that soy would have an effect on these women.

In one of his own studies, Wong found no effect on soy germ isoflavones among women who took the supplements for two years.

The standard drug treatment for stubborn menopause symptoms is hormone replacement therapy. But doctors and women have become increasingly wary of that option because of serious side effects such as increased risk for heart attack, stroke and breast cancer.

“It is something they need to gauge, is it worth the risk?” Wong told Reuters Health.

He generally recommends exercise and an active lifestyle to women who feel bothered by menopause.

Soy supplements also have side effects such as nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the National Institutes of Health. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

Wong said that in Asia, women tend to think of menopause problems as a natural part of life — not a medical problem.

“There is a major cultural difference in how we deal with menopause symptoms,” he mused.

The new study didn’t find significant hormone changes in women who took soy supplements, and Wong said the compounds are probably safe for women.

“Consuming soy is not bad for them,” Wong noted, “but it might be a waste of money if you don’t see any benefit.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did highlight the sample size was small and the number of hot flashes reported by the women in the study was low.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Patients with atrial fibrillation (AF), a rapid irregular heartbeat caused by pooling blood in the heart which can lead to heart failure and stroke, are often treated with an ablation, a minimally invasive procedure used to remove the tissue which causes the pooled blood. Following this procedure, patients are often prescribed long-term, daily oral anticoagulation medications -- also known as blood thinners. However, a new study shows the use of novel anticoagulants for AF prescribed on an "as-needed basis" guided by diligent pulse monitoring, can be a safe and effective alternative to lowering overall risk of stroke. Researchers from the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania presented their findings today at the Heart Rhythm Society's 37th Annual Scientific Session in San Francisco.

Oral anticoagulation therapy is recommended in patients with infrequent AF and high risk of stroke, however, prolonged use of blood thinners is associated with a higher bleeding risk. To determine an alternate but effective therapy, the researchers enrolled 100 patients age 45-78 with significant stroke risk and coupled with diligent pulse monitoring -- manually or by using a smartphone - twice a day with "as needed" anticoagulants for the treatment of AF. Patients were provided with novel oral anticoagulants and were instructed to start taking the medication if they suspected or detected an AF episode lasting longer than one hour.

"This kind of approach to anticoagulation therapy requires an open line of communication between the patient and the care team, and calls for a specific type of patient. We call them "highly motivated patients," said lead author Monica Pammer, PA-C, a physician assistant in Electrophysiology at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. "These are patients who were actively seeking, preparing for and are committed to the alternate treatment method, and who are informed about how to diligently and effectively monitor their pulse throughout the day."

Researchers followed the participates for approximately 23 months, during which time 28 patients started taking the blood thinner at least once for a suspected or detected AF episode, and only 10 patients transitioned back to chronic oral anticoagulation therapy for recurrent AF. No patients experienced a stroke or transient ischemic attack - also called a mini-stroke -- and there was only one mild bleeding incident that required medical attention.

"It is extremely common for patients with AF to seek treatment that does not involve the use of chronic oral anticoagulants therapy, as there are other risks associated with their long term use," said co-author Francis E. Marchlinski, MD, FHRS, director of Electrophysiology for the University of Pennsylvania Health System and Richard T. and Angela Clark President's Distinguished Professor in the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. "The goal of this study was to find a safe and effected treatment option, and our initial results support 'as-needed' blood thinners and pulse monitoring as the alternative."

All patients enrolled had no AF recurrences during an extended period of telemetry monitoring before the study began, and were willing and able to check their pulses manually or by a smartphone-enabled device twice a day. Of these patients, 84 had been ablated, sixteen were being treated with drug therapy, and three had implanted devices that served as a quality control check.

"While this is an observational study with a relatively small patient sample, further research is certainly needed to better understand alternate treatment options," said Pammer. "And, we stress that 'as-needed' blood thinners should not be considered unless the patient qualifies as highly motivated."

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania (founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The researchers didn’t exaggerate the value of the study or extrapolate it to other patients over longer periods of time.  We also give them credit for mentioning at the end of the release that this was an observational study with a small sample size and that these results need to be verified. However, there isn’t much description about what was done which leaves readers with unanswered questions. Which drugs were used? How accurate was the patient’s monitoring? Are we sure that the 28 episodes were AF?  What did they do when they identified an episode? How long were they supposed to take the medicine for when they had an episode? How compliant were they? Was there any attempt to verify compliance?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Scientists have discovered that a commonly prescribed dementia drug could hold the key to helping prevent debilitating falls for people with Parkinson's.

The research, published today in The Lancet Neurology (1), shows people with Parkinson's who were given the oral drug rivastigmine were 45% less likely to fall and were considerably steadier when walking, compared to those on the placebo.

Parkinson's affects 127,000 people in the UK and approximately seven million worldwide. 70% of people with Parkinson's will fall at least once a year, with over a third experiencing falls repeatedly, resulting in fractures, broken bones and hospital admissions (2).

Parkinson's UK Research Fellow Dr Emily Henderson and principal researcher on the study, based at the University of Bristol, said:

"With the degeneration of dopamine producing nerve cells, people with Parkinson's often have issues with unsteadiness when walking. As part of the condition, they also have lower levels of acetylcholine, a chemical which helps us to concentrate - making it extremely difficult to pay attention to walking.

"We already know that rivastigmine works to treat dementia by preventing the breakdown of acetylcholine, however our study shows for the first time that it can also improve regularity of walking, speed, and balance. This is a real breakthrough in reducing the risk of falls for people with Parkinson's."

Dr Henderson and her team at the University of Bristol studied 130 people with Parkinson's who had fallen in the past year. Half the group were given rivastigmine capsules and the other half a placebo for an eight month period.

Dr Arthur Roach, Director of Research at Parkinson's UK, which funded the study said:

"People affected by Parkinson's, their carers, and health and social care professionals have said that preventing falls and improving balance is the biggest unmet need for people living with the condition, other than finding a cure.

"Things that may be simple to us, such as walking upstairs or getting up in the middle of the night to get a glass of water, or go to the toilet, are much harder and more dangerous when you could easily fall. You risk breaking bones and then needing an emergency hospital admission.

"This trial shows that there may be drugs already available, being used for other purposes, that can be tested to help treat Parkinson's. This takes us a step closer to improving the quality of life and finding better treatments for people with Parkinson's."

Caroline Maxwell from Northamptonshire, a participant on the study, who was diagnosed with Parkinson's 13 years ago said:

"A few years ago, I had a bad fall while carrying my sewing machine across the room, leaving me in hospital for a week and really denting my confidence.

"I'm at the stage where I would walk much better with a replacement joint, but because I fall so frequently my surgeon is reluctant to operate. Falling on my replacement hip would put in an even worse situation than what I'm in now.

"By potentially finding a treatment that helps to prevent falls, I'd be able to get a replacement hip and have the confidence to go shopping on my own, without having to constantly rely on the goodness of strangers to pick me up when I fell."

For more information on Parkinson's UK research, and to donate, visit parkinsons.org.uk/research.

1. Rivastigmine for gait stability in patients with Parkinson's disease (ReSPonD): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Henderson E J et al. Lancet Neurology. January 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00389-0. 

2. Recurrent Falls in Parkinson 's disease: A Systematic Review. Allen N E et al. Parkinson's Disease. 2013 

3. Priority setting partnership to identify the top 10 research priorities for the management of Parkinson's disease. Deane, K H O et al. BMJ Open. December 2014. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-006434 

4. Dr Emily Henderson, Dr Arthur Roach and Caroline Maxwell are available for interview on request

Every hour, someone in the UK is told they have Parkinson's.

It affects 127,000 people in the UK - which is around one in 500 of the population.

Parkinson's is a degenerative neurological condition, for which there currently is no cure. The main symptoms of the condition are tremor, slowness of movement and rigidity.

Parkinson's UK is the UK's leading charity supporting those with the condition. Its mission is to find a cure and improve life for everyone affected by Parkinson's through cutting edge research, information, support and campaigning.

For advice, information and support, visit http://www. or call our free, confidential helpline on 0808 800 0303.

More information about the University of Bristol's School of Social and Community Medicine can be found at http://www.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The study is described as a randomized trial involving only Parkinson’s patients that had taken a fall within the past year. Half the group was given rivastigmine and half were given placebo over eight months. The researchers would have been better served if the news release had noted that the study was randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled — the highest level of rigor in clinical trials.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Doctors have long debated the effectiveness of a relatively new class of blood pressure medicines known as angiotensin receptor blockers, or ARBs. Since they came on the market in 2000, they have been widely used by patients -- but usually only as a second-line therapy when older drugs had failed to work or when their side effects had become intolerable.

Now a large new analysis involving 250,000 patients shows that these medications may be as effective and safe as their older cousins, the angiotensin converting enzyme, or ACE inhibitors.

Sripal Bangalore, an associate professor of cardiology at NYU Langone Medical Center who is lead author of the new study, said in an interview that the previous studies comparing the two may have been misinterpreted due to what he called a "generation gap" in participants and changes in their health care and lifestyle choices.

The idea that ACE inhibitors are more effective than ARBs was based on comparing studies on ACE inhibitors going as far back as the 1980s and into the 1990s with newer studies on ARBs in the 2000s.

These studies appeared to show a larger difference between ACE inhibitors and placebos versus ARBs and placebos. Most significantly, research showed a significant effect in reducing the risk of death with ACE inhibitors but not with ARBS. That led many doctors and standards groups to conclude that ACE inhibitors were more effective than ARBs.

But some doctors and researchers were puzzled by the fact that in head-to-head comparisons between the two classes of drugs they appeared to equally safe and effective. If there really was such a big difference between the medications, why didn't it show up in these types of studies?

That inconsistency created a confusing split in the medical community. Most guidelines set forth by the major medical groups suggest starting a patient with an ACE inhibitor first, but the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC) considers ACE inhibitors and ARBs to be equal.

Bangalore noticed that one assumption made in comparing the placebo trials -- that the patients in the group were about the same -- was incorrect. During that time period there was a remarkable shift in cardiovascular health care in America -- with a greater emphasis on not smoking, more statin use for cholesterol, better management of diabetes, lower targets for blood pressure.

"The patients in the '80s and '90s were a higher-risk group than those in the 2000s," Bangalore explained. "If your risk is higher it's easier to show a benefit. If your risk is lower it's harder to show a benefit."

The new analysis, published in Mayo Clinic Proceedings on Monday, involves a second look at 106 randomized trials with 254,301 patients that took place after 2000 and shows that during this time period patient outcomes on the two medications were remarkably similar. The one difference they found was that ARBs tend to be better tolerated by patients, meaning that they have fewer side effects or result in fewer adverse events. ACE inhibitors are poorly tolerated by many patients because they can produce a bothersome dry cough, and some end up stopping medication as a result.

Bangalore said this is critically important because "compliance is big issue with our patients."

"With hypertension they are on these medications for decades, and it's important to choose one that will be the most tolerable," he said.

The other piece of good news regarding the medications is that ACE inhibitors, as well as many ARBs, are now generic -- meaning that the cost difference is minimal.

The study was limited to patients who did not have heart failure, and because it involved a retrospective analysis of trials it was unable to control for differences in the design or data gathering of the previous work.

Happiness won’t help you live longer (but unhappiness won’t kill you either)

Guinea is finally declared Ebola-free, but that does not mean the crisis is over

Most popular Washington Post health stories of 2015: A mother tells her story of how she lost her darling daughter a few weeks short of her 29th birthday when she stepped in front of a train in Baltimore.

Top health issues to pay attention to in 2016: The rise of personalized diets and medical treatments

For more health news, you can sign up for our weekly newsletter here.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story is accurate in characterizing this research as a “second look,” or reanalysis of more than a hundred earlier studies comparing both classes of drugs with placebos and with each other since 2000.  But while the story is cautious in saying that one class of drugs “may be as effective and safe” as the other, the headline is much more definitive, stating that “New class of blood pressure meds as effective as old, analysis shows.”  The story closes with a nod to limitations, stating that the study was limited to those who did not have heart failure, “and because it involved a retrospective analysis of trials it was unable to control for differences in the design or data gathering of the previous work.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The study, published Thursday in The , looked at what happened in before and after 1996, when the country began rolling out mammograms for women ages 50 to 69 along with special breast cancer teams to treat all women with breast cancer.

The study is not perfect. The ideal study would randomly assign women to have mammograms or not. But, cancer experts said, no one would do such a study today when mammograms are generally agreed to prevent breast cancer deaths. In the study, which is continuing, women were followed for a maximum of 8.9 years. It is possible that benefits may emerge later.

Nonetheless, the new study is “very credible,” said Dr. Barnett Kramer, associate director for disease prevention at the .

“This is the first time researchers used real populations to compare the effects of treatment and mammography in the modern era of treatment,” Dr. Kramer said. “It shows the relative impacts of screening versus therapy in an era in which therapy has been improving.”

Dr. Otis Brawley of the said in a statement that the investigators used “careful methodology.” The society, Dr. Brawley said, “believes that the total body of the science supports the fact that regular mammography is an important part of a woman’s .”

Dr. Carol Lee, a radiologist at and chairwoman of the breast imaging commission of the American College of Radiology, said the new study affirmed that mammography saves lives.

“Mortality from breast cancer is decreasing, and I have to believe that screening mammography has played a part,” Dr. Lee said.

In their study, the investigators analyzed data from all 40,075 Norwegian women who had received a diagnosis of breast cancer from 1986 to 2005, a time when treatment was changing markedly.

In that period, 4,791 women died. And, starting in 1996, Norway began offering mammograms to women ages 50 to 69 and assigning multidisciplinary treatment teams to all women with breast cancer, similar to the teams at many major medical centers in the . The question was, Did the program of mammograms and optimal new treatment with coordinated teams of surgeons, pathologists, oncologists, radiologists and nurses lower the breast cancer death rate?

The investigators found that women 50 to 69 who had mammograms and were treated by the special teams had a 10 percent lower breast cancer death rate than similar women who had had neither.

They also found, though, that the death rate fell by 8 percent in women over 70 who had the new treatment teams but had not been invited to have mammograms. And Dr. Kramer said he knew of no evidence that breast cancer was more easily treated in women over 70 than in women ages 50 to 69.

That means, Dr. H. Gilbert Welch of Dartmouth wrote in an additional analysis in an accompanying editorial, that mammography could have reduced the breast cancer death rate by as little as 2 percent, an amount so small that it is not really different from zero.

Two percent is an estimate, Dr. Welch said. But, he said, whatever the effect of mammograms is, “all the signals here are that it is much smaller than we believed.”

Dr. Laura Esserman, a professor of surgery and radiology at the in , said it tells her that “if you get the same treatment and the outcome is the same if you find it earlier or later, then you don’t make a difference when you find it early.”

And screening has a cost, Dr. Welch said. Screening 2,500 50-year-olds for a decade would identify 1,000 women with at least one suspicious mammogram resulting in follow-up tests. Five hundred would have biopsies. And 5 to 15 of those women would be treated for cancers that, if left alone, would have grown so slowly they would never have been noticed.

When the study was planned, the scientists expected that screening would be even more effective than it was in studies from decades ago. After all, mammography had improved and, in Norway, each mammogram was independently read by two radiologists, which should make it less likely that cancers would be missed. The researchers expected mammograms to reduce the breast cancer death rate by a third.

“We were surprised,” said Dr. Mette Kalager, the lead author of the paper who is a breast surgeon at University and a visiting scientist at the Harvard School of Public Health.

Marvin Zelen, a statistician at the Harvard School of Public Health and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, who was a member of the research team said even though the mammography benefit is small, if he were a woman he would get screened.

“It all depends on how you approach risk,” Dr. Zelen said. His approach, he says, is “minimax” — he wants to minimize the maximum risk — which, in this case, is dying of a cancer.

Dr. Kalager came to the opposite conclusion. She worries about the small chance of benefit in light of the larger chance of finding and treating a cancer that did not need to be treated.

“Since I’m a breast cancer surgeon, I know what being treated is like,” she says. The decision to be screened, she says, “is a matter of personal preference. Is it worth it to risk becoming a patient without it being necessary?”

Many women may still want mammograms, she says, and that is fine.

“I think we have to respect what women want to do.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


This story explains how this study is different from earlier research on mammography. It points out both advantages of the study methods (comparing women in regions with screening to those without as Norway rolled out a national program over a 9 year period) and limitations (an observational study like this is not as powerful as a randomized trial, and the study might have found more benefits to screening if it had lasted longer). The story also noted the uncertainty in the numbers the researchers reported and that the real differences might be different.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - A new type of asthma drug meant to attack the underlying causes of the respiratory disease slashed episodes by 87 percent in a mid-stage trial, making it a potential game changer for patients with moderate to severe disease, researchers said on Tuesday.

“Overall, these are the most exciting data we’ve seen in asthma in 20 years,” said Dr. Sally Wenzel, lead investigator for the 104-patient study of dupilumab, an injectable treatment being developed by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc and French drugmaker Sanofi.

The drug also met all its secondary goals, such as improving symptoms and lung function and reducing the need for standard drugs called beta agonists.

Although far larger trials will be needed to confirm findings from the “proof of concept” study, researchers expressed optimism. They noted that dupilumab has also shown the ability to tame atopic dermatitis, or severe eczema, an allergic condition that is not well controlled by current treatments.

Results of the 12-week asthma study are being presented on Tuesday at the annual scientific meeting of the American Thoracic Society in Philadelphia.

The medicine, if approved, could hold promise for patients with moderate to severe persistent asthma that is not well controlled by standard drugs.

“We have been treating asthma with sort of Band-Aid therapies that didn’t get at the underlying causes,” Wenzel said in an interview, adding that dupilumab could be an important step in going to the root of the problem.

The drug works by simultaneously blocking proteins that have been linked to inflammation, interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interleukin-13 (IL-13).

Wenzel, director of the Asthma Institute at the University of Pittsburgh, said other drugmakers have tested medicines that block one or both of the proteins, but without success.

The trial recruited patients with high levels of eosinophils, a biomarker that shows immune system cells called type 2 helper T cells (Th2 cells) associated with allergy and asthma have been activated.

Such patients were deemed likely to benefit from treatment.

All patients initially stayed on their standard asthma treatments, meaning medium-to-high doses of inhaled glucocorticoids, as well as long-acting beta agonists. But patients gradually tapered off on those drugs and were no longer taking either of them after 9 weeks.

Throughout the Phase IIa trial, half the patients also received weekly injections of dupilumab, while half received placebo injections.

After the ninth week, 25 percent of those on placebos had experienced exacerbations, a catch-all term that included the need to take a beta agonist, a decrease in lung function, the need for an oral or inhaled corticosteroid, or if the patient went to the hospital or emergency room for worsening asthma.

“By end of the trial, after 12 weeks, 44 percent of those in the placebo group had exacerbations, compared with 5 percent of those on dupilumab,” Wenzel said. That represented an 87 percent reduction in exacerbations, which was highly statistically significant.

Wenzel said dupilumab was well tolerated, with side effects similar to placebo. But she cautioned that longer trials are needed to fully assess the drug.

Regeneron and Sanofi said standard drugs are unable to control asthma in 10 to 20 percent of patients. They estimate that inflammation caused by Th2 cells - the type of inflammation among patients they tested - affects up to 2.5 million people in the United States and up to 30 million worldwide.

Dupilumab has also shown strong hints of safety and effectiveness in two early-stage trials that involved 67 patients with atopic dermatitis. Larger studies are slated to begin later this year.

Atopic dermatitis is inherited and involves patches of highly itchy skin on any part of the body. Patients, many of whom also have asthma and hay fever, have compared the sensation to having unending poison ivy.

“This asthma data and the data we already have in atopic dermatitis really raises the possibility the scientific community has finally hit upon the key pathway across all these allergic diseases,” George Yancopoulos, Regeneron’s research chief, said in an interview.

Trial results were also reported on Tuesday in the New England Journal of Medicine, along with an editorial that said results of the study appeared “compelling” at first glance and superior to those seen in previous studies of other asthma drugs.

But the editorial said effectiveness of dupilumab has been established in just a “limited subpopulation of patients with asthma” because only 21 percent of those screened for enrollment in the study met its criteria.

“We do not know whether dupilumab will be effective in other patient populations,” the editorial said, including patients that stay on their standard therapies and who do not have high levels of eosinophils.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provides enough information for people to get a well rounded picture of the study and its limitations. It didn’t involve very many patients. It was conducted for a short period of time. It may have been confounded by the fact that the patients were taking multiple drugs at the same time. And, most importantly, the story says, “The trial recruited patients with high levels of eosinophils, a biomarker that shows immune system cells called type 2 helper T cells (Th2 cells) associated with allergy and asthma have been activated. Such patients were deemed likely to benefit from treatment.” It returns to this theme by referring to a New England Journal of Medicine editorial that accompanied the drug study. The story says, “But the editorial said effectiveness of dupilumab has been established in just a ‘limited subpopulation of patients with asthma’ because only 21 percent of those screened for enrollment in the study met its criteria.”
Unfortunately, much of that detail is overwhelmed by two references to this being “a potential game changer.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Sept. 19, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- For asthma patients whose condition is not controlled with standard inhaled steroids, the addition of Spiriva -- a medication already approved for lung disease -- appears to improve breathing, a new study finds.

However, the study authors and an outside expert stressed that these are early findings and much longer, larger clinical trials are needed.

Tiotropium bromide (Spiriva)) belongs to a class of drugs called anticholinergics, which work by enlarging the airways to allow for easier breathing. Currently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has only approved the medication for use by patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a chronic ailment that is a combination of bronchitis and emphysema.

Treating asthma has never been a one-size-fits-all proposition, so "having a new class of asthma medications could be potentially important," said lead researcher Dr. Stephen P. Peters, a professor of pulmonary, critical care, allergy, and immunologic medicine at Wake Forest University, in Winston-Salem, NC.

"People are different. Some people will respond to some medications, some respond to others," he said.

The report, funded by the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, is published in the Sept. 19 online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine. The journal is releasing the data early to coincide with its presentation Sunday at the European Respiratory Society meeting in Barcelona.

For the study, Peters' team tried three drug regimens on 210 asthmatics. These included: Spiriva plus an inhaled steroid; a double dose of the inhaled steroid; and an inhaled steroid plus Serevent, a long-acting beta agonist that relaxes the muscles in the airway.

Patients stayed on each regiment for 14 weeks.

The researchers found that Spiriva plus an inhaled steroid was more effective than giving a double dose of steroids in improving breathing and controlling asthma for these tough-to-treat patients.

In addition, the combination of an inhaled steroid and Spiriva was not less effective than using an inhaled steroid plus Serevent, they said.

That's important, Peters said, because there have been some safety concerns raised about long-acting beta agonists. These drugs carry a note on their labels warning of the possibility of severe adverse events, including death, he noted.

The results need to be confirmed in a much larger pool of patients, Peters said, and he noted that the patients were not followed long enough to see if Spiriva was able to reduce the severity of asthma attacks and hospitalizations.

In addition, Spiriva's safety profile among asthmatics still needs to be studied, he said.

Because the drug is not yet FDA-approved for use in asthma, Peters was reluctant to recommend it for that use. "My hope is that in three to five years we will have the drug approved for asthma," he said.

Dr. Shirin Shafazand, an assistant professor of pulmonary, critical care and sleep medicine at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, said that "perhaps there is a role for Spiriva in these poorly controlled asthmatics."

However, at this stage there is no definitive answer whether Spiriva should or shouldn't be used in asthma, she said.

"This is a good foundation to design a trial where you would look at Spiriva plus steroids versus doubling the dose of steroids in a large number of asthmatics who are poorly controlled and then you follow them long-term," Shafazand said, but right now there is no data on long-term efficacy and safety.

For more information on asthma, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: From the article’s headline to its last sentence, it firmly emphasizes the preliminary quality of this research. We give it a shout-out for prominently establishing the study’s early stage, providing wonderful context about the small sample size and follow-up period, identifying why future research is needed, and bringing those caveats home by concluding that right now there are no definitive answers and these new results do not constitute an all-out recommendation for its use in asthma.
As with the AP article, this story could’ve been clearer about the importance of randomization, blinding, and placebo controls, and there’s no explanation of the crossover design, obscuring the study’s duration and who received what when. However, the HealthDay article is not misleading about the duration, unlike the AP story that presents 14-week data on a 52-week timescale without acknowledging that an extrapolation was done.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 10, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental Alzheimer's disease drug, gantenerumab, may help lower levels of amyloid plaque in the brains of people with the disease, an early clinical trial indicates.

The new study, which appears online Oct. 10 in the Archives of Neurology, is among the first to show the effects of an anti-amyloid drug in humans with Alzheimer's disease, but experts caution that while promising, more research is needed before this drug can be deemed safe or effective.

And, in what may turn out to be an equally important caveat, experts also say that it's by no means certain that reducing levels of amyloid plaque would stave off memory loss and the other mental declines associated with the disease because the role of the plaque in Alzheimer's isn't fully understood.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia. Symptoms including serious memory loss, confusion and mood changes develop gradually and worsen with time. Recently, many strides have been made in diagnosing Alzheimer's disease earlier, but doctors have been stymied by a lack of effective treatments to stop or slow the course of the disease.

It's long been known that a protein fragment called beta-amyloid builds up in the spaces between nerve cells in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. The new drug, gantenerumab, targets these amyloid proteins by priming the body's immune system to recognize them as invaders.

Of 16 people with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease, those who received two to seven infusions of the experimental drug every four weeks showed marked reductions in the amount of plaque in their brains via imaging tests that were conducted several months after their treatments.

By contrast, amyloid load increased among people who were randomized to receive the placebo. The new drug was given at either 60 or 200 milligrams (mg) doses. The higher dose yielded greater reductions in amyloid levels, the study showed. People who were given the 60 mg doses saw a nearly 16 percent reduction in the amount of amyloid, and those given the 200 mg doses saw a 36 percent reduction. The new study was conducted and funded by the drug's manufacturer, F. Hoffmann-LaRoche Ltd., in Basel, Switzerland.

The big question is whether or not reducing amyloid levels has any effect on the symptoms or progression of Alzheimer's disease, said Dr. Patrick Lyden, chief of neurology at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. "There is a growing concern that amyloid is a guilty bystander, but not the actual culprit in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease, and taking away the bystander may not help the patient," he said.

There are approximately one dozen therapies, including vaccines, for Alzheimer's disease that are currently in the pipeline, Lyden noted. "They are all extremely exciting and promising in animals," he said. "This is the first one to show a preliminary result in people, but we have a huge way to go to make sure it is safe and improves symptoms."

Many in the Alzheimer's research community are awaiting these drugs with bated breath, but "none are ready for prime time," he said.

The leading theory of Alzheimer's disease is that an imbalance in the production or clearance of the amyloid plaque in the brain initiates a cascade of events that lead to dementia, explained Dr. Neelum Aggarwal, an associate professor of neurological sciences at Rush Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago.

"Accumulation of the plaques cause a variety of cellular responses: inflammation, neuronal death, and thus any potential treatment that can alter these processes would be beneficial," she said. The hope is that gantenerumab or other drugs like it will not only prevent amyloid from accumulating in the brain, but also slow down the cognitive impairment that occurs in people with Alzheimer's disease, she added.

That said, these experimental drugs carry the potential for serious side effects, including causing the immune system to go haywire. "The main issue that remains for this type of drug development is managing the immune response," Aggarwal said. Other side effects include a potentially fatal fluid build-up in certain areas of the brain. "This is problematic in that use of these treatments may carry a very high risk for neurologic complications, thus necessitating heightened monitoring, and diminishing its applicability as a treatment for a larger patient population such as the Alzheimer's disease population," she said.

If any of these drugs make it through the pipeline, it also needs to be determined who will get them, including whether the drugs will be given to prevent Alzheimer's in patients at high-risk of the disease or to treat it once it's started.

The need for a drug to delay the onset or slow progression of Alzheimer's disease can't be underestimated, Aggrawal said. In the United States alone, there are 5.4 million people with Alzheimer's disease, and the numbers are expected to increase to 13 million by 2050, when approximately three of every five people over the age of 85 will have Alzheimer's disease, she said.

For more information about Alzheimer's disease signs, symptoms and treatments, visit the Alzheimer's Association.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We applaud how HealthDay placed caveats very high, very early in the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The new drugs are not without disadvantages. They cost much more than generic warfarin, roughly $8 a day instead of $1 or less. And Eliquis and Pradaxa require two pills a day, one in the morning and one in the evening, instead of the once-daily warfarin. The study included 18,201 people in 1,034 clinical sites in 39 countries and was consistent worldwide, the sponsors said. Although the study was financed by the drug makers, which raises the issue of bias, it met the gold standard for medical research as a randomized, double-blinded trial in which doctors and patients did not know who took which pill until the end. The drug acts on an enzyme that leads to blood clots.

Dr. Christopher B. Granger, the study’s lead author and a professor of medicine at Duke University, said, “I think this is a profound trial result that will have a major impact on the practice and management of patients with atrial fibrillation. It combines both greater efficacy in terms of prevention of stroke with a substantial reduction to bleeding risk, and that package is one that will be particularly compelling.”

Wall Street has high expectations, too. The companies’ stock soared after they released a brief statement about the stroke and bleeding benefits in June. Barclays Capital said the final results on Sunday were “perhaps the most anticipated R.&D. event of the year.”

“If everything checks out,” Jami Rubin of Goldman Sachs said in an interview, “that will confirm in our minds that Eliquis has potential to take a majority share of the $10 billion anticoagulation market.”

More than 2.6 million people have atrial fibrillation in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. As many as 12 million people will have it by 2020 because of an aging population with longer life expectancy. The arrhythmia in the left upper chamber of the heart can cause slow blood flow and clots, raising the risk of stroke by four to six times on average, the government says.

As many as half of people with the condition, however, are untreated, by varying estimates. Warfarin, a cheap 60-year-old drug sold generically under the brand name Coumadin, requires frequent blood tests to monitor its active level and interacts with some other drugs and foods, including leafy greens. There is great appeal and demand for new drugs that do not vary so much and deliver the same stroke-preventing benefits.

The first new drug, Pradaxa, from the German drug maker Boehringer Ingelheim, was introduced in the United States last fall. In the first seven months on market, about four in five cardiologists and two in five primary care doctors had prescribed it to more than 250,000 people, Wa’el Hashad, Boehringer’s vice president for cardiovascular marketing, said in an interview last week.

Pradaxa inhibits thrombin, an enzyme in clot formation. Other emerging drugs block a related enzyme known as Factor Xa.

Xarelto, from Bayer and Johnson & Johnson, approved by the F.D.A. in July to prevent clots in hip and knee replacement surgeries, goes to an F.D.A. review panel for atrial fibrillation on Sept. 8.

Eliquis is scheduled to be submitted for F.D.A. review later this year. Its New York-based makers are marketing powerhouses with the top two best-selling drugs in the world, Lipitor from Pfizer and Plavix from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Patents on those drugs expire in the next year, making Eliquis even more important to their businesses.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story included a lot of information about the study it reported on – where the results were presented and published, its design, the number of clinical sites, countries involved, the number of people studied and the length of time they were studied..
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Blood test may identify gestational diabetes risk in first trimester

NIH analysis suggests early screening could allow for lifestyle changes before condition develops.

A blood test conducted as early as the 10th week of pregnancy may help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes, a pregnancy-related condition that poses potentially serious health risks for mothers and infants, according to researchers at the National Institutes of Health and other institutions. The study appears in Scientific Reports.

Gestational diabetes occurs only in pregnancy and results when the level of blood sugar, or glucose, rises too high. Gestational diabetes increases the mother’s chances for high blood pressure disorders of pregnancy and the need for cesarean delivery, and the risk for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes later in life. For infants, gestational diabetes increases the risk for large birth size. Unless they have a known risk factor, such as obesity, women typically are screened for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.

In the current study, researchers evaluated whether the HbA1c test (also called the A1C test), commonly used to diagnose type 2 diabetes, could identify signs of gestational diabetes in the first trimester of pregnancy. The test approximates the average blood glucose levels over the previous 2 or 3 months, based on the amount of glucose that has accumulated on the surface of red blood cells. According to the authors, comparatively few studies have examined whether the HbA1c test could help identify the risk for gestational diabetes, and these studies have been limited to women already at high risk for the condition. The test is not currently recommended to diagnose gestational diabetes at any point in pregnancy.

The researchers analyzed records from the NICHD Fetal Growth Study, a large observational study that recruited more than 2,000 low-risk pregnant women from 12 U.S. clinical sites between 2009 and 2013. The researchers compared HbA1c test results from 107 women who later developed gestational diabetes to test results from 214 women who did not develop the condition. Most of the women had tests at four intervals during pregnancy: early (weeks 8-13), middle (weeks 16-22 and 24-29) and late (weeks 34-37).

Women who went on to develop gestational diabetes had higher HbA1c levels (an average of 5.3 percent), compared to those without gestational diabetes (an average HbA1c level of 5.1 percent). Each .1 percent increase in HbA1c above 5.1 percent in early pregnancy was associated with a 22-percent higher risk for gestational diabetes.

In middle pregnancy, HbA1c levels declined for both groups. However, HbA1c levels increased in the final third of pregnancy, which is consistent with the decrease in sensitivity to insulin that often occurs during this time period.

“Our results suggest that the HbA1C test potentially could help identify women at risk for gestational diabetes early in pregnancy, when lifestyle changes may be more effective in reducing their risk,” said the study’s senior author, Cuilin Zhang, Ph.D., of the Epidemiology Branch at NIH’s Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.

Exercise and a healthy diet may lower blood glucose levels during pregnancy. If these measures are not successful, physicians may prescribe insulin to bring blood glucose under control.

The authors noted that further studies are needed to confirm whether measuring HbA1c levels in early pregnancy could determine a woman’s later risk for gestational diabetes. Similarly, research is needed to determine whether lowering HbA1c with lifestyle changes, either in early pregnancy or before pregnancy, could reduce the risk for the condition.

About the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD): NICHD conducts and supports research in the United States and throughout the world on fetal, infant and child development; maternal, child and family health; reproductive biology and population issues; and medical rehabilitation. For more information, visit https://www.nichd.nih.gov.

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release notes the observational nature of the data and the relatively small number of women overall in the two groups analyzed and compared. Readers don’t learn much about the population of women studied — age, race, number of pregnancies, socioeconomic status, comorbidities, etc. But given that the release makes clear more research would be needed to prove the association identified in the study, we give this a “satisfactory” rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 16, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Mindfulness meditation may help older adults get a better night's sleep, a small study suggests.

Researchers found that among 49 older adults with sleep problems, those who learned mindfulness practices started sleeping better within six weeks. In fact, they did better than their counterparts who were given conventional lessons on good sleep habits, the study authors said.

Experts said the findings, published online Feb. 16 in the journal JAMA Internal Medicine, are encouraging.

On average, the effects of the mindfulness program were comparable to what's been seen in studies of sleep medications and "talk therapy," said study leader David Black, an assistant professor of preventive medicine at the University of Southern California, in Los Angeles.

According to Black, that means older adults can feel comfortable opting for "mind-body" practices as a way to address moderate sleep problems. But he also emphasized the structured nature of the program tested in his study.

"From our results, it is worth a try to engage in a structured mindfulness-based intervention led by a certified teacher with extensive experience," Black said.

In general, "mindfulness" practices encourage people to focus their attention on the present moment, instead of the past or future, and to take an objective look at their thoughts and emotions.

Sleep problems, Black explained, both affect and are affected by the mind. When people have difficulty sleeping, they often start to worry about it -- and that anxiety can worsen their sleep problems. On top of that, poor sleep itself can lead to psychological "distress," such as depression symptoms, Black said.

"There is a cyclical pattern here between wakefulness, sleep disruption, worry and mood," he said.

By learning "non-judgmental mindful awareness," Black said, people can begin to see their thoughts and feelings without reacting to them. In basic terms, it helps them relax -- a "necessary prerequisite" for sleep, Black noted.

For the current study, his team recruited 49 older adults with "moderate" sleep problems, based on their answers to a standard sleep-quality questionnaire. It asked a range of questions -- including whether the person had problems falling asleep or staying asleep, had difficulty breathing at night, or felt drowsy during the day.

Black's team randomly assigned the participants to six weekly sessions of either sleep "hygiene" education or mindfulness training.

The mindfulness group learned different meditation techniques, as well as how to eat and move with more attention. The program, Black said, did not specifically address sleep -- a topic that might only stir anxiety in people who are already worried about a lack of sleep.

By the end of the study, the mindfulness group was showing a significant improvement -- shaving about three points, on average, from their scores on the sleep-problem scale. The group that received standard education lowered their scores by an average of 1 point.

The mindfulness group also showed greater improvements in depression symptoms and daytime fatigue, the investigators found.

Black said the benefits of mindfulness training were on par with what's been found in studies of sleep medications and cognitive behavioral therapy -- a form of "talk therapy" that is often helpful for insomnia, for example.

"Cognitive behavioral therapy is highly effective," said Adam Spira, an associate professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health in Baltimore.

The problem, Spira said, is that behavioral therapy for sleep problems is not always easily found -- and even when it's available, the process takes some effort.

"What I found most interesting about this [mindfulness] approach is that it's a non-drug option, and it's accessible to the community at large," said Spira, who wrote an editorial published with the study.

Classes in meditation are available in many communities, and there are books, websites and CDs where people can learn mindfulness techniques. (The course Black's team studied is available online, at http://marc.ucla.edu.)

The caveat, according to Spira, is that this study tested that specific program. There is no guarantee that the course at your local senior center or a book would have the same chances of working.

Still, Spira said, it's a promising approach to older adults' sleep problems -- and one that's needed. "We definitely need a whole menu of treatment options," he said.

One major reason is that sleeping pills, the most common current treatment, are temporary fixes at best. Plus, Spira said, they can have side effects that are particularly dangerous for older people -- such as dizziness and balance problems that can lead to falls, and problems with attention and memory.

Then there's the fact that sleep issues become common as people age, Spira said. Studies suggest that about half of adults age 55 and up have insomnia or some other sleep disturbance -- and that can have consequences for their physical and mental health.

There are still plenty of questions about the effects of mindfulness meditation on sleep quality. A key one is whether the benefits last.

Spira said that with cognitive behavioral therapy, there is evidence that people's sleep keeps improving after their therapy sessions have ended. "It'll be interesting to see whether people can learn mindfulness techniques, then see durable effects," he said.

The National Sleep Foundation has more on sleep disorders.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is where the story really excels and could be used as a model for other stories. Right in the headline and again in the lead, the story presents one of the key limitations of the study, noting that it is a “small study.” Then it explains how small the study is in the actual story, explaining that it included just “49 older adults with sleep problems.” It breaks down how the study was conducted and notes that the results were published in the peer-reviewed journal JAMA Internal Medicine. And it explains throughout the various limitations of the study in terms of application to everyday life, including the fact that the meditation — as practiced by the group being studied — required a certified instructor. Explaining that the participants were not aware that their sleep was being studied was another good detail.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
These children were more likely to be born to women who did not take folic acid. In the raw analysis, mothers who skipped the supplement were more than 2.1 times more likely to have a child with autistic disorder compared with mothers who took the supplement.

Among the 85,176 children in the study, 270 (or 0.32%) received an ASD diagnosis – 114 (0.13%) had autistic disorder, 56 (0.07%) had Asperger syndrome and 100 (0.12%) were diagnosed with “pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise specified,” or PPD-NOS.

Researchers in Norway examined health records of more than 85,000 children born there between 1999 and 2009 to see whether they had some kind of autism diagnosis. They also looked at questionnaires completed by their mothers to see how much folic acid they were consuming in the month before they became pregnant and during the first eight weeks of pregnancy, a critical period of embryonic brain development. Health officials in Norway recommend that pregnant women (and women who are trying to get pregnant) take 400 micrograms of folic acid per day.

Mothers who took folic acid supplements around the time they became pregnant were less likely to have children with an autism spectrum disorder, a new study has found.

But not all mothers were equally likely to take folic acid supplements. Those who did were more likely to have attended college, to be nonsmokers, to be first-time mothers and to have planned their pregnancies. The researchers also found that the popularity of folic acid supplements rose as time went on. After the researchers controlled for factors like these, they calculated that taking the supplements was associated with a 39% lower risk of having a child with autistic disorder.

The raw numbers also showed that women who took extra folic acid were less likely to have kids with Asperger syndrome or PPD-NOS, but when other factors were taken into account, the association was no longer statistically significant and could have been due to chance, the researchers found.

The results were published in Wednesday’s edition of the Journal of the American Medical Assn.

The study also looked at folic acid use later in pregnancy but found no correlation between that and the chances of a child developing an autism spectrum disorder. Nor did they find any link between fish oil supplements and risk of ASDs.

It’s unclear how these findings apply to mothers and children in the United States. Autism spectrum disorders are diagnosed much more frequently in the U.S. than in Norway.

On the other hand, pregnant women here are also far more likely to consume a healthy amount of the B vitamin because the Food and Drug Administration has required manufacturers of enriched breads, cereals and other grains to fortify them with folic acid since 1998. As a result, a cup of enriched white long-grain rice now contains 797 micrograms of folic acid, for example, and a cup of Cheerios has 493 mcg, according to this report from the Harvard Women’s Health Watch.

The fact that autism cases have been on the rise in the U.S. even after folic acid supplementation became mandatory is a puzzle, according to three researchers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Division of Birth Defects and Developmental Disorders. In an editorial that accompanies the JAMA study, they write that the discrepancy “may be attributable to changes in diagnosis and surveillance but also may reflect a concurrent real increase in the risk of ASDs attributable to as-yet undescribed risk factors and exposures.” They also note that data from the National Health Examination and Nutrition Survey published in 2009 show that the typical American consumes only 150 mcg of folic acid per day even with mandatory fortification.

You can read a summary of the study and the editorial on the JAMA website.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story is cautious in its language, emphasizing “link…association…more likely” and avoiding cause-and-effect inferences.  It includes details about possible factors besides folic acid supplements that could explain differences (such as education, smoking, whether the pregnancy was planned) and that researchers adjusted their results to try to account for those factors. This story also has a clear discussion of the underlying differences between autism risk in Norway and the US and how caution should be exercised in applying study results from one country to the other.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It’s the person who wakes up at the crack of dawn on the weekend, puts on shiny spandex and disappears with a mountain bike for hours at a time. It’s the guy who heads to the pool one night a week and endures a workout that might make Michael Phelps gasp for air. It’s the weekly rock climbers and double spin class-takers schvitzing their Sunday away. These weekend warriors cram the recommended amount of exercise into one or two days, while the rest of us faithfully head to the gym multiple times a week for a half-hour hamster run on the treadmill.

Related: Americans keep getting fatter, new report shows

A paper published January 9 in JAMA Internal Medicine suggests these warriors may be onto something. In a study based on nearly 64,000 adults, researchers in the U.K. found that weekend exercise appears to be just as effective at preventing heart disease and cancer as exercise done more frequently. This is great news for anyone who feels too busy on weekdays to work out but enjoys outdoor activity on the weekend.

“I think that the weekend warrior physical activity pattern is beneficial because they are actually doing a large proportion of vigorous intensity activity. And vigorous activity makes you fit, and fitness reduces your risk of disease and death,” says Gary O’Donovan, a researcher in physical activity and sedentary behavior at England’s Loughborough University and lead author of the paper.

O’Donovan and fellow researchers looked at data on middle-aged adults who responded to a government-sponsored household survey conducted from 1994 to 2012. The survey included questions about health history and fitness habits. The researchers then cross-referenced this information with health department death records.

They found the risk of death from all causes was about 30 percent lower for weekend warriors, compared with adults who maintained a sedentary lifestyle. And the warriors had a 40 percent lower risk of cardiovascular death and an 18 percent lower risk for cancer-related death. The mortality rates of weekend warriors were roughly the same as those who claimed to exercise more than two days a week but for shorter durations.

However, there are also some limitations to this study, the researchers say. More than 90 percent of the subjects were white. The information about physical activity was reported by the participants, and it’s likely that many were too generous in their estimates of how much time they spent at the gym. Unfortunately, taking 20 minutes in locker room to put on your sneakers doesn’t count as a workout.

Related: Severe childhood obesity is on the rise in the U.S.

It’s recommended that people get 150 minutes (or two and half hours) of exercise each week, based on guidelines from the American Heart Association, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other medical authorities. This could be something as simple as a brisk walk or other low-impact options for vigorous exercise about 20 minutes a day. (Experts often encourage recreational athletes to not exercise more than an hour a day.) “In theory, someone who did one bout of 150 minutes of moderate exercise is a weekend warrior,” says O’Donovan.

This study shows that it doesn’t matter how you decide to split up the recommended weekly amount of exercise. You just need to do it.

However, experts caution that it is possible to overdo it, and more exercise than two and a half hours a week can actually be unhelpful and even harmful. One study, published in 2014 in the journal Heart, suggests that in people with existing heart disease, the risk for cardiac arrest and stroke was the same for people who exercised more than an hour a day compared with those who didn’t exercise at all. The coronary heart disease patients who stuck with the recommended 150 minutes a week had the lowest risk for heart attack and stroke.

Related: Post-workout cold immersion likely won’t help you heal

There are risks that come with a weekend warrior exercise schedule, especially for people who aren’t used to being active. “I would be more concerned about what’s happening at the point of exercise—not the long-term benefits,” says Dr. Howard Andrew Selinger, chair of family medicine at Quinnipiac University. He says someone who is not in good shape is at risk for sudden cardiac arrest or acute injury, such as spraining muscles or putting too much stress on joints.

O’Donovan encourages aspiring weekend warriors to start slowly to avoid any health problems. He says middle-aged adults should exercise moderately during the first 12 weeks and then slowly build up to more vigorous activity.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provides adequate information about the study design, the populations involved and some of the limitations of the study design.
However, it left out important limitation: The inactive population studied was 7 years older, had more current smokers, and suffered more from unspecified “long standing illness” than the participants who were active.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For centuries, shamans and healers have been using psychedelics in sacramental rituals in the belief that the substances have healing qualities and can lead to meaningful spiritual experiences. It turns out contemporary science may back these ancient claims.

A new study conducted by the University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Public Health found that participants who took naturalistic doses of "classic" psychedelics – magic mushrooms, DMT, mescaline and LSD – had significantly decreased the likelihood of having suicidal thoughts, suicide attempts and psychological distress.

The study, published recently in the Journal of Pharmacology, analyzed data from an annual survey conducted by the National Survey on Drug Use and Health that measures substance abuse in relation to mental illness. The data were compiled between 2008 and 2012, and drew from the experiences of 190,000 adults. Participants answered pre-recorded questions about their individual use of classic psychedelics, and the data was collected in person.

Of those surveyed, 13.6%, or about 27,235 people, reported having used classic psychedelics. The results showed that those who had taken these substances in their lifetime had a 19% less likelihood of exhibiting psychological distress in the past month, and their reports of suicidal thoughts in the past year were likely to be 14% lower. What’s more, that same group reported a 36% lower probability of suicide attempts in the past year.

The National Alliance on Mental Illness estimates that 30,000 people in the U.S. die from suicide each year, and worldwide that number is 1 million. While treatment for mental health disorders has improved markedly in the past century, the suicide rate remains stagnant.

Only two population studies to date, this one included, specifically address the relationship between mental illness and psychedelics. In 2011, individuals with advanced-stage cancer were given single doses of psilocybin and were found to have reduced long-term incidences of depression and anxiety.

In recent years, some scientists, such as this study’s lead researcher, Peter S. Hendricks, have been pioneering innovative treatments to help decrease the suicide rate. Hendricks is a clinical psychologist by trade, but his interest in the use of psychedelics was piqued by working with people who struggled with addiction, particularly lifelong cigarette smokers. He says he became "demoralized" by patients who had little luck quitting with the intervention programs he and his team developed. Hendricks says psychedelics can possibly help patients shift their priorities, or lead to drastic changes in perspective or even spiritual experiences that will help them improve their mental states.

"Those who are addicted to, say, smoking or using cocaine, aren't doing so because they believe it's their purpose in life; in fact, often that behavior can conflict with whatever they believe their overall purpose might be. So when you administer a psychedelic, you re-prioritize their values such that whatever their grander purpose might be takes priority," Hendricks said in an interview with Newsweek.

The UAB isn't the first study to flirt with this idea. A smoking-cessation trial in the fall found that lifelong smokers who took several controlled doses of psilocybin demonstrated tobacco abstinence rates of up to 80% in the long term. The heightened connectivity to spirituality has also been demonstrated to curb suicidal thoughts and attempts.

A lack of resources and funding is a hindrance to continuing studies, however, as psychedelics are still classified as schedule 1 narcotics in the U.S. and criminal offenses accompany their possession. While skeptics may question the idea of using psychedelics as treatment for psychological distress, Hendricks emphasizes that he does not advocate for rampant recreational use of psychedelics, or widespread legalization. He believes the data support the idea of demoting psychedelics to schedule 3 or 4, and that they can be used in controlled therapy situations.

The study does have shortcomings: For one, the data relied on people self-reporting their habits, so there is a possibility of error there. Additionally, the effects of psychedelics on the developing brain are still largely unknown, meaning they could pose a threat to people with a predisposition to schizophrenia. The scientists recognize, too, that it's still unknown if classic psychedelics concretely led to a drop in psychological distress and suicidality; perhaps those who participated in the study and had reported using psychedelics in the past had personalities that made them less susceptible to distress and suicidality in the first place.

Culturally, psychedelics bear quite a bit of baggage: Timothy Leary’s call to “turn on, tune in and drop out” became a countercultural slogan in the 1960s, and proved damaging to potential research on utilizing the drug to improve mental health for more than three decades. Perhaps this study will be a turning point in how our culture regards psychedelics and mental health. "I know scientists are supposed to be objective and dispassionate," Hendricks says. "But I'm excited and hopeful. I've seen the data -- it seems to me that psychedelics hold tremendous therapeutic potential."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story notes a number of limitations in the study. The survey participants may not have told the truth, and those who participated in the study and reported having used psychedelics may have had something in their personalities — unrelated to drug use — that made them less susceptible to suicidality. So, in other words, the study can’t tell us if these drugs are responsible for — or merely associated with — these mental health benefits.
And as we pointed out in our review summary, an early version of this story posted online did not alert readers to this important limitation. It didn’t contain this line: “…perhaps those who participated in the study and had reported using psychedelics in the past had personalities that made them less susceptible to distress and suicidality in the first place.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Peramivir is given intravenously, making it usable by hospitalized patients who are too ill to take two approved flu drugs that work against the virus in similar ways — Tamiflu by Roche, which is typically given as a pill, or Relenza from GlaxoSmithKline, which is inhaled.

Late Thursday, the government announced orders for intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, which are much cheaper — a development that could force shares of BioCryst to give up some of their gains on Friday.

Peramivir, still being tested in clinical trials, is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for general use. But on Oct. 23, the F.D.A. granted authority for the drug to be used in emergencies for patients hospitalized with H1N1 flu who cannot take or do not benefit from Tamiflu or Relenza.

Before that, peramivir had been available only through a more cumbersome “compassionate use” procedure. Of the 32 patients who received the drug that way, 29 were still alive, BioCryst said in late October.

Although there are still questions about peramivir’s true effectiveness, some critics say the government moved too slowly to make the drug available, and that even now, access is too restricted. For each patient, doctors must call an 800 number or fill out a form on a Web site run by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The drug is then sent overnight from a central stockpile.

“If you have a critically ill patient, to delay therapy, it’s just incomprehensible to me,” said Dr. Richard Whitley, a professor at the University of Alabama and the president of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. He said the drug should be distributed so that hospitals could have it in stock.

But Dr. Nicole Lurie, assistant secretary for preparedness and response at the Department of Health and Human Services, said the limited supplies made more general distribution impossible. Some doctors said they were satisfied with the existing system.

“I think it’s fairly accessible,” said Dr. Thomas M. File Jr., chief of infectious diseases at Summa Health System in Akron, Ohio, who has treated a pregnant woman with peramivir. Some of the push to make the drug more widely available is coming from investors in BioCryst, including Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, the prominent Silicon Valley venture capital firm. John Doerr, the company’s technology guru, was in Washington this week making the case for greater availability of peramivir, according to a person who met with him there.

Other investors — both supporters of BioCryst stock and those betting the price will fall — have commented at government meetings on flu preparations, often without revealing their financial interests.

Anecdotes like Ms. Gurno’s aside, the efficacy of peramivir is still in question, according to the government. While some clinical trials showed the drug had an effect in resolving flu symptoms, others did not show statistically significant differences between peramivir and either a placebo or Tamiflu.

The question for both investors and federal authorities is how much more of the drug BioCryst can sell. So far, the order has been far less than some investors had hoped, though the price of the order announced Thursday was higher than expected.

Dr. Lurie, the federal official, said there had been 237 requests to use the drug since the emergency use authorization was granted nearly two weeks ago. Many doctors want to provide the treatment for 10 days instead of the recommended 5, she said, so the 10,000 courses the government ordered might actually treat as few as 5,000 patients.

The government has the right to buy up to 30,000 more treatment courses at the same price.

BioCryst says it will have perhaps 40,000 more treatment courses available within a few weeks, and a total of 120,000 by the end of the year. It also says it has signed up partners to try to win sales in Brazil, Mexico, Israel and China.

“We’re getting a lot of interest from countries outside the United States,” Jon P. Stonehouse, the company’s chief executive, said in an interview Thursday.

Shionogi, a Japanese drug company with licensing rights from BioCryst, ran its own clinical trials and this week applied for approval to sell the drug in Japan as a treatment for everyday flu, in competition with Tamiflu.

But in the United States, BioCryst plans to try to win approval for treatment only of hospitalized patients. It is now beginning phase 3 trials — the last stage before seeking F.D.A. approval.

Virtually all the money to develop the drug comes from $180 million in grants from the Department of Health and Human Services. Yet the company gets to keep as profit anything it makes from selling the drug to the federal government or to other governments. Mr. Stonehouse defended the price of the drug, saying it would save the health system money by getting patients out of intensive care earlier. “The cost of being in the I.C.U. and on a ventilator is extremely high,” he said.

But peramivir will soon have competition. The federal government said late Thursday that it had also ordered 10,000 treatment courses each of intravenous versions of Tamiflu and Relenza, with options to buy 30,000 more courses of each.

Those drugs could not be used, however, until they received emergency use authorizations from the F.D.A.

The government is paying an average of only $450 a course for those other drugs — only one-fifth of what it is paying for peramivir.

Right now, Dr. Lurie said, peramivir is the only drug that can be used intravenously so the government had to pay a high price. “I would say that one of the things that happens in the market when you have competition is that the price drops.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story points out more than once that peramivir is still being tested and that questions remain about its potential effectiveness.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Philippe Autier is willing to bet that taking vitamin D supplements will never be proved to do anything beyond helping to build strong bones — and certainly not to prevent heart disease, cancer, diabetes, depression, multiple sclerosis or the common cold, as many claim. In fact, the physician has wagered a few good bottles of champagne that none of three large randomized trials now underway will find proof of positive effects.

To Autier, a researcher at the Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences in Glasgow, Scotland, the widespread faith in vitamin D’s benefits is like a religion. “People want to have a simple story they can believe in,” he says.

Cedric Garland, meanwhile, hews just as strongly to the opposite view — that vitamin D supplements confer a slew of benefits, including warding off colon cancer, breast cancer, even Type 1 diabetes.

“The science is, in my opinion, unassailable,” says Garland, an adjunct professor of epidemiology at the University of California at San Diego. “It’s just preposterous to say it’s not proven.”

In January 2014, Autier published a statistical analysis of results from hundreds of studies of vitamin D. He concluded: “Unfortunately, there is probably no benefit to expect from vitamin D supplementation in normally healthy people.”

Garland, on the other hand, is the co-author of dozens of studies showing a strong, inverse association between vitamin D levels and seemingly every disease under the sun. Indeed, sun exposure is Garland’s explanation for why rates of cancer, Type 1 diabetes and other diseases tend to be higher the farther people live from the equator. Vitamin D, after all, is the “sunshine vitamin,” synthesized from cholesterol in the skin in response to sunlight.

“It’s a mathematical relationship,” he said in a telephone interview. “The higher your latitude and the greater your area’s average cloud cover, the higher your rates of cancer.” Since he and his late brother, Frank Garland, published the first study, in 1980, revealing that relationship, hundreds of other studies have explored the link between vitamin D, including supplements, and health — but none were large enough, long enough or designed well enough to convince the skeptics.

Now three nationally recognized researchers are leading landmark studies designed to settle at least some of the questions about vitamin D once and for all. The one thing the research leaders are certain of is that the public’s faith in vitamin D as a modern panacea has far outpaced what the scientific evidence proves.

“There’s been a rush to judgment on vitamin D,” says JoAnn E. Manson, chief of the division of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. “Everyone has gotten on the bandwagon. Unfortunately, the lessons of history have shown repeatedly that many of these supplements that appeared to be very promising did not pan out in more rigorous testing.”

Manson should know. She has led or collaborated on more than a dozen large, randomized, placebo-controlled studies, dating back more than two decades, which found none of the expected protection against cancer, heart disease, dementia or other diseases that scientists once attributed to beta carotene, vitamin E or vitamin C supplements. (She did find, however, that supplementation with folic acid, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 offered modest protection against age-related macular degeneration and, for those with a diet low in B vitamins to begin with, a hint of protection against the loss of cognitive abilities.)

Now Manson is co-directing the Vitamin D and Omega-3 Trial (VITAL), testing whether, compared with placebo, a daily supplement of either 2,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D or one gram of fish oil (another widely touted substance) reduces the risk of stroke, cancer, heart disease and other health problems. The five-year study, involving 25,874 men and women, is scheduled to end in October 2017.

Another trial is testing whether a daily supplement of 4,000 IU of vitamin D will prevent Type 2 diabetes. The so-called D2d study, which will run for four years, is seeking to enroll 2,382 people older than 30 who are at high risk of developing diabetes due to weight or blood-sugar levels but who have not yet been diagnosed with the disease.

“I would call myself an optimistic skeptic,” says Anastasios Pittas, principal investigator of the D2d study and a professor of medicine at Tufts School of Medicine in Boston. “The indirect evidence is very strong. People with higher levels of vitamin D in their blood have been shown again and again to have a lower risk of developing diabetes in the future. These studies are as consistent as we have ever seen with any nutrient.”

But, he adds, “those studies do not prove cause and effect. Before we make a blanket recommendation for the 86 million people in the United States who are at risk for Type 2 diabetes to go out and buy vitamin D supplements, we need to know for sure if they help.”

A third trial, designed to test whether 5,000 IU of vitamin D per day will slow the progression of multiple sclerosis in 172 patients, is being led by Ellen Mowry, an associate professor of neurology at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

“I do discuss vitamin D with my patients,” Mowry says. “But I point out that we don’t yet have randomized, controlled-trials data to back it up. That’s why there are no official recommendations yet from any medical organizations. We have to be sure.”

So what are people to do in the meantime? Four years ago, Manson sat on a committee established by the Institute of Medicine to review how much vitamin D and calcium Americans need each day to maintain health and prevent disease. The report concluded that both are necessary for bone health but that as for preventing cancer, heart disease, diabetes and autoiummune disorders, the evidence was “inconsistent, inconclusive as to causality, and insufficient to inform nutritional requirements.” Even so, the committee recommended that children and adults up to age 70 get 600 IU of vitamin D daily — from food and, if necessary, supplements — and that adults age 71 and older get 800 IU.

Some studies have found no ill effects from taking far higher amounts, and many of the prospective but not proven benefits against cancer and other diseases are believed to require doses ranging from 2,000 to 5,000 IU. Manson urges people to rely on the Institute of Medicine report, which set a safe upper limit of 4,000 IU of vitamin D per day.

“It’s fine to take that amount,” Manson said. “But keep in mind, there isn’t yet evidence that taking those higher amounts will confer any benefits beyond the recommended daily allotment of 600 to 800 IU.”

Some studies, she noted, have even found evidence that very high levels of vitamin D circulating in the blood might be just as unhealthful as very low levels. A 2014 study, for instance, found that people with the highest levels of vitamin D in their blood (more than 60 nanograms per milliliter) were significantly more likely to die in the three months following a hospitalization as were people whose levels were between 30 and 49.9 ng/mL. Such findings are why she, Mowry and Pittas strongly advise people against taking more than the currently recommended upper daily limit of 4,000 IU, even though doses as high as 10,000 IU are available online and at many stores.

Frustrated by the uncertainty? Pittas takes it in stride.

“This is the beauty of medical research,” he says, “where you have some people convinced that vitamin D does nothing and others who believe it’s already proved to work. There is such controversy now that the only way to convince people who sit on those sides of the equation is to complete rigorous, randomized trials. We’ll see what happens. I have a hypothesis that vitamin D will work, but we have to test it. At the end of the studies, one of us will be right. I just don’t know which one.”

Hurley is a science journalist and author of “Natural Causes: Death, Lies and Politics in America’s Vitamin and Herbal Supplement Industry” (Broadway Books, 2007).
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does an exemplary job exploring this issue and the reporting could serve as a model for others exploring areas with uncertain evidence. Beyond the extensive interviews with experts, the story deftly points out that correlation between two things does not mean that one causes the other. It also notes that benefits shown in early studies of other vitamins has later been contradicted by large trials — and that the same thing could happen with vitamin D.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Warfarin is a blood thinner that is commonly prescribed to patients to prevent life-threatening blood clots. Despite its longtime use, warfarin remains tricky to dose because a person's genetic makeup influences how the drug is processed in the body. Too much warfarin can cause internal bleeding; too little warfarin fails to prevent blood clots.

Now, a new study led by Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis shows that dosing warfarin (Coumadin and others) is safer -- producing fewer adverse events such as hemorrhage -- when key elements of a patient's genetic makeup are considered.

The research, published Sept. 26 in the Journal of the American Medical Association, reports results from the clinical trial known as GIFT (Genetics Informatics Trial of Warfarin to Prevent Deep Venous Thrombosis).

"Physicians have been prescribing warfarin since the Eisenhower administration," said first author Brian F. Gage, MD, a professor of medicine at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. "It's a widely used anticoagulant, but it causes more major adverse events than any other oral drug. Thousands of patients end up in the emergency department or hospital because of warfarin-induced bleeding. But we continue to prescribe it because it is highly effective, reversible and inexpensive. So our goal is to make warfarin safer. GIFT showed that precision-medicine based on clinical factors and three genes improves the safety of initiating warfarin therapy."

Patients in the trial were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group received warfarin dosing based on standard factors such as age, height and weight; the second group was dosed based on these clinical factors plus genetic variants. Participating sites in the trial included Washington University School of Medicine, Hospital for Special Surgery in New York, Intermountain Healthcare, University of Utah, and Rush University Medical Center.

Of the 789 patients who were dosed in the traditional manner, 116 experienced at least one adverse event (14.7 percent). Of the 808 patients whose warfarin dosing was guided by genetic testing, 87 experienced an adverse event (10.8 percent). Compared with patients receiving traditional warfarin dosing, patients dosed with the genetic approach had a 27 percent reduction in adverse events, which was statistically different. The adverse events were bleeding, formation of blood clots in the veins and warfarin overdoses. No patient died during the trial.

Earlier studies looking at whether genetic testing could improve warfarin dosing had produced conflicting results. However, these studies were smaller and considered fewer genes than GIFT. GIFT enrolled 1,600 patients age 65 and older at high risk of blood clots because they underwent hip- or knee-replacement surgeries.

Unlike prior studies, GIFT took into account genetic variants in three genes for 11 days of warfarin therapy. Genetic variants were assessed on a commercial platform called GenMarkDx. Variants in one gene affect vitamin K recycling. Variants in another gene affect warfarin sensitivity. Variants in the third gene alter warfarin metabolism in the liver and can cause an overdose if the dose is not adjusted soon enough.

"There are additional genetic variants that may help to guide warfarin dosing, especially among patients with African ancestry," Gage said. In the future, we hope to quantify how these variants affect warfarin."

Gage also noted how health-care costs relate to dosing warfarin in a genetically guided manner. "Although genetic testing is more expensive than clinical dosing, the cost is falling," he said. "In our study, we estimated that genetic testing costs less than $200 per person, which is less than one month of a newer anticoagulant."

This work was supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers R01HL097036 and UL1TR000448; the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, grant number CAG-00400N; and GenMarkDx, which supplied instrumentation.

Gage BF, Bass AR, Lin H, Woller SC, Stevens SM, Al-Hammadi N, Li J, Rodriguez Jr. T, Miller JP, McMillin GA, Pendleton RC, Jaffer AK, King CR, DeVore B, Porche-Sorbet R, Napoli L, Merritt K, Thompson AM, Hyun G, Anderson JL, Hollomon W, Barrack RL, Nunley RM, Moskowitz G, Davila-Roman V and Eby CS for the GIFT investigators. Effect of genotype-guided warfarin dosing on clinical events and anticoagulation control among patients undergoing hip or knee arthroplasty: the GIFT randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. Sept. 26, 2017.

Washington University School of Medicine's 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked seventh in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release offers a good description of the design of the study. It was randomized and enrolled more than 1,600 older patients at high risk of blood clots following surgeries. The release explains that one group received warfarin dosing based on standard factors (age, height and weight) and the second group was dosed using these clinical factors plus their genetic variants.
The release also offers a detailed breakdown on how many fewer side effects occurred among patients had genetic testing completed compared to those who didn’t.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Feb. 3, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- A special restrictive diet may significantly reduce symptoms of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in young children, a new study suggests.

When children between the ages of 4 and 8 were placed on a diet containing no processed foods for five weeks, ADHD symptoms diminished in 78 percent of them. And, when suspected trouble foods were reintroduced into the diet, two-thirds of the children experienced a relapse in symptoms.

"A strictly supervised restricted elimination diet is a valuable instrument to assess whether ADHD is induced by food," wrote the study authors. "We think that dietary intervention should be considered in all children with ADHD, provided parents are willing to follow a diagnostic restricted elimination diet for a five-week period, and provided expert supervision is available," they concluded.

Results of the study are published in the Feb. 5 issue of The Lancet.

ADHD is a common childhood disorder, according to the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). Children with ADHD have trouble paying attention, focusing and can be hyperactive. Parents have long suspected that sugary foods might be a culprit in inducing symptoms, but there's not a lot of evidence to support this theory, according to the NIMH. However, food additives and preservatives have recently been singled out as possibly having an effect on children's behavior, though the evidence isn't yet conclusive.

Since some children have negative physical reactions to certain foods -- such as eczema, asthma and gastrointestinal problems -- that affect different organ systems, it has been suggested that foods may also affect the brain in a way that results in adverse behavior, according to information in the study.

To test this theory, the researchers recruited 100 children from Belgium and the Netherlands. The children were between the ages of 4 and 8, and all had been diagnosed with ADHD. Most of the children were boys.

The children were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group was placed on the restrictive elimination diet, and the other group served as a control group and received advice on healthy eating.

The restrictive diet began with a diet called the "few foods diet," which includes just rice, meat, vegetables, pears and water. The researchers then complemented this diet with certain foods, such as potatoes, fruits and wheat. The restrictive diet lasted for five weeks.

During the next four weeks, kids in the restricted diet group received two food challenge diets, in which certain foods were reintroduced into the diet. The researchers selected foods that were considered both low- and high-IgG foods.

IgG is an antibody made by the immune system that some alternative medicine practitioners believe is linked to food hypersensitivities; however, IgG testing is controversial among many mainstream physicians and even some naturopaths, according to background information in the study.

Some complementary medicine practices test for IgG and recommend eliminating foods high in IgG, explained Dr. Jaswinder Ghuman, who wrote an accompanying editorial in the same issue of the journal.

Forty-one children completed the restrictive phase of the diet. Of those, 78 percent had a reduction in their ADHD symptoms, compared with no improvement in the controls. Nine children (22 percent) didn't respond to the diet. On an ADHD symptom scale that ranges from 0 to 72 points, with a higher score indicating more severe symptoms, the average reduction was 24 points, according to the study.

Thirty children who had shown a response on the restrictive diet went on to the challenge test. Nineteen of those children had a relapse in symptoms on the challenge test. What's more, it didn't appear to matter if the children with challenged with a low- or high-IgG food.

"Measuring IgG levels in kids doesn't seem helpful," Ghuman said, but it does look as if the elimination diet may help some children.

"If parents have noticed that a child's behavior seems to get worse with certain foods, it may be worth considering," said Ghuman, who is an associate professor of psychiatry and pediatrics at the University of Arizona in Tucson.

"But, for this diet to work, you have to be very consistent with it, and you have to pay attention to nutrition. It should be done under the supervision of a primary care doctor, and if possible, a dietician," she advised.

Ghuman said that this study doesn't answer a number of questions, such as whether or not the elimination diet reduces symptoms long-term. And, she added, that clinical practice shouldn't be changed based on the results of one study.

Dr. Andrew Adesman, chief of developmental and behavioral pediatrics at the Steven and Alexandra Cohen Children's Medical Center of New York in New Hyde Park, echoed Ghuman's concerns.

"Since none of the children stayed on the diet beyond five weeks, it is hard to know if this dietary intervention offers sustained benefit," he said, adding, "Since it is more difficult to enforce restricted diets in older children, this approach may not be suitable for the majority of older children with ADHD."

Adesman also pointed out that this study is only applicable to children with ADHD, not to children who had ADD without the hyperactivity component.

Learn more about ADHD from the National Institute of Mental Health.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story did a superior job to the WebMD story in evaluating the quality of the evidence and walking people through the different phases of the study. It provided more information about the study design and better context. For example, the HealthDay story says “that clinical practice shouldn’t be changed based on the results of one study.” But the WebMD story says in the first sentence “Children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) should be offered a special ADHD diet to see if eliminating certain foods might reduce their symptoms, Dutch researchers say.” This story was the only one of the two to actually explain the symptom rating scale. “On an ADHD symptom scale that ranges from 0 to 72 points, with a higher score indicating more severe symptoms, the average reduction was 24 points, according to the study.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The spread of some sexually transmitted infections could potentially be dramatically reduced by instructing people who have had unprotected sex to take antibiotics within 24 hours after the intercourse, a new study suggests.

But such a strategy, which was tested in a population of men who had frequent unprotected sex with a number of male sex partners, could spark a controversy over the use of antibiotics and the general threat of growing antibiotic resistance.

“My message with that study would be that we need to do more research to prevent STIs — because that’s a concern. And this strategy … could potentially be used,” said Dr. Jean-Michel Molina, head of infectious diseases at Saint-Louis Hospital in Paris and the lead author of the study.

Molina insisted he would never support long-term use of antibiotics to prevent STIs, but said that the approach might be an effective short-term strategy when paired with other control approaches, like more frequent STI testing among high-risk populations.

“I don’t want this strategy to be used widely in any person, clearly,” Molina said. “But if you can select a group with a high incidence rate of syphilis or chlamydia, and you want to try to reduce the rate of syphilis quite quickly in this group of people, you may think that this strategy could be used for a couple of months.”

Rates of syphilis in particular have risen steadily in recent years; the rate in 2015-2016 — 8.7 cases per 100,000 people — was the highest since 1993, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported. The rate of infection increased in every age group over the age of 15, in both men and women, and in all ethnic groups.

Molina’s study was recently published by the journal Lancet Infectious Diseases. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation was one of its funders.

The researchers randomly assigned 232 men to one of two groups. One of the groups was given antibiotics — the drug doxycycline — to take if they had unprotected sex. They were told to take two pills per encounter, and no more than six in a week, ideally within 24 hours and no later than 72 hours after the intercourse. In reality, the median use among the men was about 6.8 pills per month.

The men were tested regularly for STIs, and in the nine or so months they were followed, the rates of some sexually transmitted infections fell dramatically in the treatment group. The overall reduction of all STIs was 47 percent, but that average was dragged down by the fact that doxycycline doesn’t cure gonorrhea.

There was, however, a 70 percent reduction in chlamydia infections and cases of syphilis decreased by 73 percent. The authors noted, however, that the study length was short and they can’t tell if the strategy would work as well over the long term.

The results can’t be taken in isolation, others experts warned. Using doxycycline this way could drive the bacteria that cause the infections to develop resistance to the drug, warned Dr. Brad Spellberg, an infectious diseases specialist and chief medical officer at the Los Angeles County-University of Southern California Medical Center in Los Angeles.

Spellberg also said people who used the drug this way would be exposing the bacteria they have in their gastro-intestinal tracts — their own gut flora — to regular doses of doxycycline. And those bacteria too could develop resistance to the drug, leading to a host of other health problems.

The full picture of the knock-on effects of exposing your gut flora to antibiotics is still coming into focus, said Ramanan Laxminarayan, director of the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics, and Policy and a leading voice on the dangers of mounting antibiotic resistance. He noted a recent report in the journal Science revealed that some cancer immunotherapy drugs worked less well in people who had recently taken antibiotics.

Molina noted that antibiotic resistance to doxycycline has not been seen in chlamydia or syphilis, despite the fact that the drug has been used to treat these infections for decades. Still, he said the possibility it could arise cannot be discounted.

A commentary published with the study argued that reducing infection rates in men who have sex with men and who are highly sexually active might lower STI infection rates more generally in a community.

Authors Christopher Fairley and Eric Chow, of Australia’s Melbourne Sexual Health Center at Monash University, said pressure from patients to be given doxycycline on a preventative basis might be substantial, given that the drug is also prescribed in six-month courses to treat acne. Like Molina and his co-authors, they said STI preventive use at this point is premature.

Laxminarayan did not dismiss the notion of this type of use out of hand, however. “I certainly think that for a small subset of the population, if this helps prevent syphilis, then it certainly is worth exploring further,” he said.

But he said additional studies should be conducted first to try to get a better picture of the potential consequences of using doxycycline this way, including the risk of resistance developing, the potential that it might further erode condom use, and any other unintended consequences.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story reports that it was a short-term, open-label randomized trial (participants knew whether or not they were taking antibiotics) that included 232 men who had frequent unprotected sex with a number of male sex partners.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A few short visits and phone calls with a nurse may be enough to help insomniacs get their zzz’s, suggests a new study of sleep-deprived older adults.

Researchers found that more than half of participants overcame chronic insomnia within a month of starting a brief behavioral treatment.

The key ingredient in the therapy, according to lead researcher Dr. Daniel Buysse of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, was a simple, somewhat counter-intuitive lesson: “When you are sleeping poorly, the most important thing you can do is spend less time in bed.”

Insomnia affects about one in every five Americans, rising to one in three among the elderly, and has been linked to a range of physical problems, from accidents to hypertension. Not surprisingly, it is also detrimental to mental health.

Three decades of research has shown cognitive behavioral therapy to be equally effective to a pill for insomnia, with fewer side effects. Yet the time and resource-intense strategy — usually involving between six- and eight hour-long appointments with a clinical psychologist - is not widely available and its cost, generally hundreds of dollars, is prohibitive for many.

Buysse and his colleagues wondered if the pill-free treatment could be shortened and simplified, providing more rapid results at a lower cost.

To find out, they studied 79 adults with chronic insomnia. Participants averaged 72 years of age and were randomly assigned to receive either printed educational material about sleep or the brief behavioral treatment consisting of one 45- to 60-minute in-person session, a 30-minute follow-up session and two 20-minute phone calls.

A mental health nurse practitioner in a regular doctor’s office focused the behavioral instruction on how to restrict time in bed and set regular sleep-wake schedules, while also discussing the biological rationale behind the strategy, including the body’s daily cycles of physical, mental and behavioral changes.

“This (therapy) has the effect of compressing your sleep into a more solid block,” Buysse told Reuters Health in an e-mail. “More consolidated sleep is more refreshing.”

Based on questionnaires and sleep diaries, the researchers found that two out of every three participants receiving the behavioral intervention responded favorably by the end of 4 weeks, while just one out of every four receiving the printed material experienced substantial improvement in their sleep.

The gap was similarly wide when the researchers looked at the number of participants who no longer met the criteria for insomnia: 55 percent versus 13 percent.

On average, for every 2.4 participants treated, one responded favorably and one overcame insomnia, report the researchers in the Archives of Internal Medicine.

These improvements were sustained for at least 6 months, and were backed up by data from a sleep monitor worn on the wrist or ankle. When the researchers looked at information from a different, more in-depth sleep monitoring system, however, they failed to find significantly better outcomes with the behavioral therapy.

The new results were similar to those previously published on the more intense cognitive behavioral therapy.

“A lot of insomniacs spend a lot of time lying in bed worrying about their sleep, among other things. They expect to have insomnia,” Dr. Thomas Neylan of the University of California, San Francisco, who wrote an accompanying commentary in the journal, told Reuters Health.

“Generally, the most expedient thing to do is just prescribe a sleeping pill,” noted Neylan.

But the drugs can pose problems, ranging from dependence or abuse to cognitive impairment during the day. And the risks may be even more pronounced among older patients, added senior author Timothy Monk, also of the University of Pittsburgh. Under the influence of the drugs, seniors may be more likely to fall and fracture a bone.

While brief behavioral treatment for insomnia is not yet generally available, Monk told Reuters Health in an e-mail that his team hopes their findings will be “an important first step in that process.”

In the meantime, Neylan offers insomniacs some advice: “If you’re not ready to fall asleep, don’t lie down in bed and try to force yourself to sleep. And if you wake up in the middle of night and don’t fall back asleep easily, get out of bed.”

“You don’t want to have any linkage between the experience of lying in bed and being awake,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story gives a brief description of the experiment and some of the main outcomes that the researchers measured. The story would have been better if it told readers more about the limitations of this small trial, including what sort of further testing would be needed to determine if the intervention would work for people in the general population, rather than just those who match the profiles of the individuals who volunteered to participate in this test. The story compared this brief intervention to more established behavioral therapy, without noting the pitfalls of trying to compare results from different trials. The story did not tell readers that there is ongoing debate about the best way to measure the results of insomnia studies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
After three years, teens with severe obesity who underwent stomach reduction surgery to lose weight also significantly improved their heart health.

A study published Monday in Pediatrics shows that blood pressure, cholesterol, inflammation and insulin levels all improved, particularly among those who lost the most weight.

"The potential impact of such risk reduction translates into a reduced likelihood of developing significant heart disease later in life, including atherosclerosis, heart failure and stroke," says study author Marc Michalsky, surgical director of the Center for Healthy Weight and Nutrition at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, in an email. "This study serves to reinforce the benefits of bariatric surgery as a safe and effective treatment strategy that should be considered sooner rather than later."

Younger adolescents in the study showed bigger improvements in their cholesterol and inflammation levels than the older teens. Even participants who had normal-range blood pressure, triglycerides or cholesterol levels before surgery saw improved measures.

Nearly a third of all children and teens are overweight or obese in the U.S., and an estimated 4 to 7 percent have severe obesity. The greater a person's obesity, the greater their risk of high blood pressure, heart disease, Type 2 diabetes and organ damage.

The findings are important because many of the participants in this study likely already had some level of cardiac damage, such as thickened arteries or heart walls, says Geetha Raghuveer, a pediatric cardiologist at Children's Mercy Kansas City in Missouri who was not involved in the study.

"If you have very high blood pressure or lipids [cholesterol] or diabetes, you do see cardiovascular changes even at a very young age," Raghuveer says. "They may not be having a heart attack or stroke in their teens and 20s, but they're closer to having those in their 30s and 40s."

Among 242 teens in the study, 161 of them underwent a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass procedure, 67 underwent a vertical sleeve gastrectomy and 14 received an adjustable gastric banding. The study authors had no part in which procedures the teens received. They collected data from the five participating medical centers for their observational study, and decisions about procedures depended on each center's clinical practices.

The teens, ages 15 to 18 when the study began, had a body mass index (BMI) between 34 and 88, with half over 51. Medical providers use BMI, the ratio of a person's weight to height, to estimate body fat. A BMI over 25 is considered overweight; over 30 is obese. The obesity classification with the highest risks of health problems is a BMI of 40 or higher.

The risk factors measured in the study included elevated blood pressure (above 120/80 mg/Hg), high cholesterol, high insulin levels in the blood and abnormally high levels of C-reactive protein, an indicator of inflammation in the body. The higher a person's insulin levels are, the more likely they are to have or develop insulin resistance, which can increase blood sugar levels and diabetes risk. High insulin levels may also contribute to increased blood pressure and increase the risk of atherosclerosis, when fat clogs the arteries.

Three years after surgery, teens who underwent a gastric bypass had a 27 percent drop in their BMI, similar to the 26 percent drop in those who had the sleeve gastrectomy. Those with the gastric band had an 8 percent drop in BMI.

Before surgery, only 3 percent of the teens had no cardiac risk factors at all, but three years later, just over half of them (52 percent) had no risk factors. Just 5 percent had all four cardiac risk factors before their surgeries, but none had all of them three years later. In fact, the majority of the participants — 83 percent — had only one or no risk factors three years after their surgeries. The proportion of participants with two or three risk factors also dropped substantially.

"One of the surprises was that almost all patients benefited as a result of the surgery," says M. James Lenhard, the medical director of Christiana Care Health System's Diabetes & Metabolic Diseases Center in Wilmington, Del., who was not involved in the study. The average BMI three years after surgery was 39, still considered very obese, he says. "And yet they still had significant improvements in cardiovascular risk factors," Lenhard says. "The results were impressive."

The study's biggest limitation is its very selective population. Most of the participants were female, most were white, and most received the gastric bypass. Children of color have the greatest risk of obesity, heart disease and Type 2 diabetes, but it's not clear whether they would see the same improvement with these procedures. Lenhard expects the "odds are very good" that they would, and Raghuveer "would be cautiously optimistic" that the findings would be similar regardless of sex or ethnicity.

The population also included only teens with the greatest obesity who were also unsuccessful trying other weight loss methods.

"Severe obesity is notoriously difficult to treat with anything other than surgery," Lenhard says. "The results of this study suggest that performing surgery at a BMI even lower than 52 would provide even better outcomes."

An estimated 1,600 adolescents undergo metabolic or bariatric surgeries each year, the study notes, but families should only consider such procedures after exhausting other treatment options.

"This is not a procedure you would consider for any obese patient who walks through the door," Raghuveer says. "It would be considered for the highly obese and those not responding to any behavioral modifications, physical activity or calorie restriction."

Before undergoing bariatric surgery, teens and their families receive extensive counseling, Michalsky says.

"Teens considering bariatric surgery should have a frank discussion with their family and primary care provider and seek detailed information from well-established bariatric surgery centers that are specifically dedicated to treating adolescents," he adds.

All three procedures carry the same risks as any surgical procedure, such as infections, blood clots and bleeding, Lenhard said, and a common risk of sleeve gastrectomy is bleeding where the stomach is reconnected. People who have a gastric bypass often have nutritional and vitamin deficiencies, Lenhard said. And gastric banding has low effectiveness and a risk of the band slipping down the stomach.

Getting longer term data is important, too. Three years is a good follow-up time for this type of study, and it has many more participants than similar studies.

"However, three years is not a long time overall in the life of a child," Raghuveer says. "I'd be curious what happens to these kids at 10 years, 15 years later."

Michalsky says the study is ongoing, and they expect to continuing gathering information for years to come.

Ideally, public health efforts should aim for better obesity prevention, including parent education and interventions when children are toddlers and preschoolers, according to Raghuveer. "A generational divide" has left fewer families knowing how to fix meals, she says, and more families need to learn to cook and avoid packaged foods and microwave dinners.

"The big question is, how do we prevent obese kids from getting to this point where they would need an invasive surgical procedure?" Raghuveer says. "The bigger message should be that we should get to a point in society where we are not managing obesity, but we are preventing obesity."

Tara Haelle is the co-author of The Informed Parent: A Science-Based Resource for Your Child's First Four Years. She's on Twitter: @tarahaelle
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story describes how the study was conducted and provides important caveats, stating: “The study’s biggest limitation is its very selective population. Most of the participants were female, most were white, and most received the gastric bypass. Children of color have the greatest risk of obesity, heart disease and type 2 diabetes, but it’s not clear if they would see the same improvement with these procedures.” It also mentions that the study included “only teens with the greatest obesity who were also unsuccessful trying other weight loss methods. Further, it points out the need for longer-term data of 10 or 15 years.
The story does not mention one inherent weakness of this study: The lack of a comparison group that did not receive surgery.
[Editor’s note: We updated the final sentence in this criterion to strike the phrase “observational studies” and replace it with “this study.”]
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Gut Check is a periodic look at health claims made by studies and by newsmakers. We ask: Should you believe this?

The Claim: If you drink coffee you’ll live forever! Well, almost: nurses and other health professionals who drink coffee (regular or decaf) had a lower risk of premature death than coffee abstainers.

The Backstory: . . . is enough to make STAT cross-eyed. Decades of studies have examined links between coffee drinking and health outcomes. Overall, the conclusions have been pro-coffee. Lots of research has linked coffee drinking to a lower risk of dying early, including this, this, and this. Other studies have found associations with lower risk of specific conditions, like this on cardiovascular disease (by many of the same authors as the new study), this on stroke, this on heart failure, and this on diabetes. Most research has found the greatest benefits with daily consumption of around three or four cups — usually 6 to 8 ounces, and without distinguishing regular from decaf. Fewer studies link coffee to a higher likelihood of dying prematurely, but this classic found a link between 6-plus cups a day and dying of cardiovascular disease, while this 2013 paper, on 43,727 people followed for a median of 17 years, concluded that adults under 55 who averaged more than 4 cups a week had a 56 percent (men) or 130 percent (women) higher risk of dying over the study period than non-coffee drinkers.

First Take: The new research, published in Circulation on Monday and funded by the National Institutes of Health, mined three large, ongoing epidemiological studies (74,890 women in the Nurses’ Health Study, 93,054 women in the Nurses’ Health Study 2, and 40,557 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study), following them for at least 20 years. Overall, the heaviest coffee-drinkers (more than five cups a day, regular or decaf) had a tiny 2 percent additional risk of dying compared with coffee abstainers. Those drinking 1.1 to 3 cups, and 3.1 to 5 cups, had slightly (9 percent and 7 percent) lower risks of dying.

Then the researchers, led by Dr. Frank Hu of the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, did something clever: they ran the analysis on nonsmokers only. That eliminated the stereotypical coffee-swilling, cigarette-sucking types. Result: people drinking 1.1 to 3 cups a day had an 8 percent lower mortality risk, while the 3.1-5-cup crowd had a 15 percent lower mortality risk, mostly due to lower risk of deaths from cardiovascular disease, neurological diseases, type 2 diabetes, and suicide. Even the 5-plus’s had 12 percent lower mortality.

A co-author of the 2013 study linking heavy coffee drinking to higher mortality called the new one “very good,” especially since it controlled for the deadly effects of smoking, which the earlier one did not. It “supports the safety and efficacy of even high doses of coffee in non-smokers,” said Dr. Carl Lavie, a cardiologist at Ochsner Health System. But given the 2013 research suggesting “toxicity of high coffee doses” in some people, he said, “to me the most reasonable approach would be to keep coffee intake to two to three cups most days.”

Second Take: STAT knows better than to get between coffee lovers and their cup o’ joe, so if you want to take this study as permission to keep beating a path to your Keurig, we’re not going to slow you down.

This is another observational study, where researchers look for associations between people’s freely-chosen diet and other lifestyle decisions and subsequent health outcomes. Correlations do not establish causation: a link between Behavior A and Health Outcome B might or might not mean that A caused B. It might mean instead that a third factor — another behavior, socioeconomic status, even personality or genetics — might go hand in hand with Behavior A and be the true cause of Outcome B. Maybe people who drink coffee have some genetic, psychological, or behavioral trait (drinking fewer sugary beverages? eating less junk food?) that causes the observed benefit.

But surely the population in this study is so huge and socioeconomically similar (all health professionals) that correlation is more likely to reflect causation?

More likely, yes, but don’t count on it. This same Nurses Health Study, for instance, infamously found a correlation between post-menopausal hormone therapy and lower risk of cardiovascular disease and death, here and here. That turned out to be wrong. The definitive, randomized Women’s Health Initiative study showed that hormone therapy raised the risk of cardiovascular disease, contradicting the NHS and shocking nearly everyone.

Takeaway: Observational studies that associate coffee drinking with health benefits are strongly suggestive but not definitive. If you do want to infer causation from this latest study, know that drinking coffee reduced the absolute mortality risk from 6.8 deaths a year per 1,000 people to, at best, 5.8. That is, each year, coffee would be keeping 1 person in 1,000 from dying.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: STAT does a fine job of noting the sources of information used in the new analysis, and repeating — in novel ways — the shortcomings and strengths of the findings.  This kind of repetition, although frowned upon in journalistic circles because of space constraints, should be used more often where appropriate to remind readers of the context of each health claim in a story. The CNN story covering this research did a creditable job of describing the data, but how refreshing it is to see how smoothly a news article can reinforce take-home messages in a way readers will understand and remember.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
June 2, 2010 (San Francisco) -- A quick spray of a new drug may help men who suffer from premature ejaculation last nearly six times longer, new research suggests.

The numbers aren't huge. Men who sprayed the head of their penis with PSD502 five minutes before sex lasted an average of just over three minutes after three months of treatment, compared with just over 30 seconds before.

Nonetheless, doctors like Irwin Goldstein, MD, director of San Diego Sexual Medicine at Alvarado Hospital in San Diego, tell WebMD they're excited because this is the first time a drug is being rigorously tested for men with really serious premature ejaculation problems.

Up to 30% of men suffer some degree of premature ejaculation, defined as ejaculation that occurs within one minute of vaginal penetration. It's the No. 1 sexual health problem in men.

Premature ejaculation can be devastating for both a man and his partner, triggering anxiety, depression, and relationship problems, says Goldstein, who heard the results presented at the annual meeting of the American Urological Association.

Not all men with premature ejaculation suffer to the same degree as the men in the study, says researcher Ira Sharlip, MD, clinical professor of urology at the University of California, San Francisco. He consults for Shionogi Pharma Inc., which makes the spray and funded the work.

"Yet I think a substantial number of [men with premature ejaculation] would use it," he tells WebMD, alternatives being unproven products with names like "Stay Erect" and "Play Longer."

At the meeting, Sharlip presented the pooled results of two pivotal studies of PSD502 involving 530 men with premature ejaculation.

A total of 358 of the men gave themselves three quick sprays of PSD502 to the head of the penis five minutes before sex and then wiped it off right before penetration.

PSD502, which contains two common topical painkillers, lidocaine and prilocaine, is "slightly oily, but not objectionably so," Sharlip says.

The rest of the men used a placebo spray. All used the product for three months, for a total of 23,000 doses.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gave a great deal of detail about how the study was done – most of the three stories we reviewed. 
It also included this italicized note at the end: 
We had not seen that before on a WebMD story and we applaud it.  WebMD, are you listening to us?  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FDA said it is reviewing a handful of reports involving mood changes, suicidal behavior and suicide in patients who have taken the popular allergy and asthma drug.

Merck has updated the drug's labeling four times in the past year to include information on a range of reported side effects: tremors, anxiousness, depression and suicidal behavior.

FDA said it asked the company to dig deeper into its data on Singulair for evidence of possible links to suicide. The agency said it has not established a "causal relationship" between Merck's drug and suicidal behavior. An agency spokeswoman said the review was prompted by three to four suicide reports it received since last October.

CBS News correspondent Kelly Wallace reports Kate Miller's 15-year-old son Cody killed himself just 17 days after starting the drug.

"It was the end of our world and we didn't know why, because this child was a perfectly normal healthy child, Never had a problem," Miller says.

His mom now believes that Singulair cost him his life.

It could take up to nine months before agency scientists can draw any conclusions, FDA said in a posting to its Web site.

The agency recently began notifying the public earlier about possible safety issues. The policy change came after the FDA was criticized for acting too slowly on information about the risks of Merck's painkiller Vioxx and, GlaxoSmithKline PLC's diabetes pill Avandia.

Merck officials stressed that the FDA's inquiry is based on reports, not clinical studies - which are the standard tool for evaluating drug safety. The company said none of the 11,000 patients enrolled in 40 Singulair trials has committed suicide.

"We have no indication that anything about the mechanism of Singulair is consistent with these events," said George Philip, director of research and product development. "But because suicide is a life-threatening event we thought it was important to provide this information in the product label."

Merck said it recently added reports of suicide to Singulair's label, which already listed suicidal thinking and behavior as reported side effects.

Merck says the information is on the company's Web site, though one must go to the fourth page of a product labeling file to find it.

Dr. Mary Ann Michelis told CBS News she received calls from concerned patients Thursday. She's now writing letters to every patient who takes Singulair, urging them not to over-react.

Michelis said, "They should not stop taking their medication unless they are experiencing a major change in their moods."

In clinical trials of asthma patients, the most common side effects were headache, flu, abdominal pain and cough.

With sales of $4.3 billion last year, Singulair is used by millions of patients in the U.S, according to Merck. First approved in 1998, it is part of a class of asthma and allergy drugs that includes AstraZeneca's Accolate and Critical Therapeutics's Zyflo.

FDA said it is also reviewing reports of side effects with those drugs. Their labeling does not contain language about suicide.

Shares of Merck & Co. Inc. fell 16 cents to $44.54 in late trading.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The segment is based on an FDA investigation and labeling changes that follow post-marketing reports of four suicides and mental disorders. This is adequate evidence on which to base this news report. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Nov. 27, 2018 (HealthDay News) --What if a simple zap to the spine could relieve the debilitating lower back and leg pain brought on by a herniated disk?

Such is the promise of "pulse radiofrequency" therapy (pRF), which sends inflammation-reducing pulses of energy to nerve roots in the spine, a new study claims.

The therapy is not new, having first received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval in the 1980s.

But recent advances in CT scan technology now enable clinicians to deploy those energy pulses with much more accuracy, experts said. And the new research suggests the treatment could prove a boon to back pain patients for whom standard therapies have failed to do the trick.

"I was amazed with the results of pRF," said study author Dr. Alessandro Napoli. "Especially having read, as a radiologist, numerous lumbar MRI scans of patients with recurrent hernia after surgery."

And as a patient himself, Napoli added that "from personal experience I can tell you that the treatment is not painful, and the results are appreciated within days after a single treatment lasting 10 minutes."

Napoli is a professor of interventional radiology at Sapienza University of Rome in Italy.

He and his colleagues plan to report their findings Tuesday at the Radiological Society of North America annual meeting, in Chicago. Such research is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Lower disk herniation results when the insulating disks that sit between spinal vertebrae tear open, allowing jelly-like material to protrude and exert pressure on surrounding nerve roots. Beyond lower back pain, the condition often triggers sciatica, a pain that radiates down a patient's leg.

Standard therapies include over-the-counter pain meds, corticosteroid spinal injections, and/or invasive spine surgery that sometimes involves disk removal and vertebrae fusion.

The problem, said Napoli, is that such options entail risks without assured relief.

"Steroid injections are effective only in portion of the patients, and generally require more sessions," he noted. And though surgery safety has "largely improved," Napoli pointed to the risk for bleeding and infection, the need for a minimum two- to three-day hospital stay, the high cost, and the fact that some patients ultimately realize little benefit.

By contrast, pRF is scalpel-free, delivering radio signals directly to affected nerves via a CT scan-guided electrode. The process, said Napoli, requires no hospital stay, is noninvasive, far cheaper and less risky.

"The rationale for using pRF on disk herniation is that we eliminate the inflammation process of the compromised nerve root," he explained. "Without inflammation the pain fades, and the body starts a self-healing process that allows for complete resolution of the disk herniation in a large proportion of patients."

For the study, the Italian investigators compared 128 lumbar herniation patients who underwent a single 10-minute round of CT-guided pRF with 120 patients who received one to three rounds of steroid injections.

All the patients had already undergone standard interventions, with poor results.

By the one-year mark following either treatment, a full "perceived" recovery was reported by 95 percent of the pRF patients, compared with just 61 percent of the steroid injection patients.

Dr. Daniel Park, director of minimally invasive orthopedic spine surgery at William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Mich., offered some caution on the findings.

He noted that because "the majority of people with back pain improve with time and exercise alone," it remains an open question as to whether the pRF procedure really cured the condition.

Still, Park noted that diagnostic uncertainty can undermine the ability of surgery to get at the true source of a patient's pain, given that "the problem with low back pain is that there are many causes of it, and physicians have trouble identifying the cause of pain."

Nevertheless, he remains unsure if pRF is truly ready for prime time.

"Best case, I think [pRF] could be an option for people if they [have already] failed therapy and medication," said Park. "It may be a similar option for people if they do not or cannot have steroid injections, but they need more treatment. I think this is experimental, and should not be first-line."

The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons offers more information on herniated disks.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a close call.
The story deserves credit for pointing out that the research presented at a medical meeting “is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.”
We also like that it quoted a doctor who cautioned that it “remains an open question as to whether the pRF procedure really cured the condition,” since back pain often resolves on it own.
Still, there are other points we wish the story had addressed:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 21, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- When it comes to shedding pounds and improving or eliminating type 2 diabetes, gastric bypass surgery may be better than other surgical weight-loss procedures, two new studies find.

But obese patients should be careful to choose surgeons who have performed a high volume of these procedures before committing, said Dr. Guilherme M. Campos, lead author of one of two papers appearing in the February issue of the Archives of Surgery.

Gastric bypass and lap-banding are the two most common surgical weight-loss procedures performed in the United States. The former involves stapling the stomach so food has to bypass a section of the small intestine, meaning you get full faster and less food gets absorbed into the gut.

Lap-banding, introduced in 2001, involves separating the stomach into two sections with a band so, simply speaking, eating too much becomes more difficult. "It's a diet with a seatbelt," said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of bariatric surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City and Northern Westchester Hospital in Mt. Kisco, N.Y.

In a third type of weight-loss procedure, known as sleeve gastrectomy, surgeons remove part of the stomach.

The study led by Campos compared weight loss and diabetes outcomes in 100 patients who underwent gastric bypass surgery with 100 patients who underwent lap-banding. Gastric bypass is considered riskier and more technically demanding than the band.

All patients were morbidly obese (with a body-mass index higher than 40), and 34 in each group had type 2 diabetes.

Although Campos is now an associate professor of surgery at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health in Madison, he conducted the study while at the University of California, San Francisco.

In the bypass group, patients lost an average of 64 percent of their excess weight, vs. 36 percent for those in the lap-banding group. Three-quarters of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery saw their diabetes improve or resolve, vs. only half in the other group.

The average cost of a bariatric surgery is nearly $30,000, according to a recent study from Johns Hopkins University.

Like all surgeries, weight-loss surgery carries its own set of possible risks, including bleeding, blood clots, infection and leaks from sites where body tissues are sewn or stapled together, according to the U.S. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Later complications may include malnutrition, hernias and a tendency in about one in 10 people to regain much of the weight they lost as a result of the procedure.

In Campos' study, roughly equal numbers of patients in each group experienced complications after one year (12 percent in the gastric bypass group compared to 15 percent in the lap-banding group); these included infection, internal bleeding and blood clots, but no deaths. More people in the bypass group had complications right after the surgery. More of those undergoing lap-banding, however, needed repeat surgeries (13 percent vs. 2 percent).

The second study, conducted in Taiwan and led by Dr. Wei-Jei Lee of the Min-Sheng General Hospital, involved randomly assigning 60 obese (but not morbidly obese) patients with type 2 diabetes to receive gastric bypass surgery or sleeve gastrectomy.

Almost all of those undergoing gastric bypass surgery (93 percent) had their diabetes resolved, vs. only half in the other group (these numbers declined to 57 percent and 0 percent after a year).

Those in the gastric bypass group also lost more weight, and there were no serious complications in either group.

There are various theories to explain why gastric bypass may be superior, including one that attributes the success to changes in hormones that control the metabolism of blood sugar.

And certain procedures may still be preferable for certain patient populations, added Roslin, such as bands for patients with lower BMI who don't have so many metabolic challenges.

"Everyone thinks that all weight-loss operations are the same, even the doctors and the surgeons. [But] they're different, and they have different resolutions of comorbidities and probably should be used for different indications," he said.

An editorial accompanying the studies noted the results should be interpreted with caution since longer-term data is not yet available.

Visit the American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery for more on weight-loss procedures.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There were some differences between this story and the competing LA Times piece on this criterion. Notably, this story injected some caution into the discussion in the second paragraph, where it noted that bypass outcomes are better with more experienced surgeons like the ones who conducted the study comparing bypass to the gastric band. Patients with different surgeons at a different institution might not fare as well with bypass as the patients in this study. It also included comments from an expert who noted that the band may be a better choice for certain patients, such as those with a lower BMI or who don’t have related medical conditions such as type 2 diabetes. Although it included a closing caveat about the relatively short-term follow-up of these patients, which is an important limitation to point out, it could have done a bit better job of explaining why this is important. Previous studies suggest that some band patients continue to lose weight for years and may approach the weight loss seen with bypass patients, whereas bypass patients may gain back some of the weight they lose initially. There may also be differences in the risk of very long-term complications (e.g. neurological disorders resulting from nutritional deficiencies after 5-10 years in bypass patients, versus failure of the device and need for reoperation with the band).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Aug. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- By probing deeper into the biological mechanisms that go awry in melanoma, scientists have come up with an experimental drug that has had an effect in a surprising number of patients with advanced melanoma.

The drug, PLX4032, just completed a phase 1 clinical trial in which 81 percent of participants with a particular gene mutation had a partial response, meaning at least some shrinkage of the tumor.

The current standard treatments for metastatic melanoma -- chemotherapy and interleukin-2 (IL2) -- only have response rates in about 15 percent of these patients, said Dr. Paul Chapman, senior author of a study in which the findings are described.

The average survival time for someone diagnosed with melanoma is nine to 11 months, added Chapman, who is an attending physician in the Melanoma Sarcoma Service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.

One expert cautioned that it's too early to say whether the drug will actually prolong patient's lives, or if it might be helpful to patients in earlier stages of the disease.

"I don't want to say this is going to change survival rates but they're working with the most ill people, so you can't really generalize [to other patient populations]," said Dr. Alice Pentland, chair of dermatology at the University of Rochester Medical Center. "I think the most important part of this breakthrough is the bigger percentage of people who responded."

The study, which is published in the Aug. 26 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, was funded by drug makers Plexxikon and Roche Pharmaceuticals.

About nine years ago, scientists discovered that the tumors of about half of patients with melanoma have a mutation in a gene called BRAF.

The gene appears to help drive the runaway cell division that is a hallmark of cancer. "It's always on. It's always signaling to the nucleus [of the tumor cells] that it's time to divide," Chapman explained.

That finding opened the door to potential targeted, molecular therapies for melanoma, which has been sorely lacking in effective treatments.

PLX4032 is the first potent inhibitor of BRAF that has made it to the clinical trial stage, Chapman said.

In the trial, 55 patients received escalating doses of the drug. Ten of 16 patients who had the BRAF gene mutation had a partial response to the drug, meaning the tumor shrank by at least 30 percent, while one had a complete response, with the tumor disappearing altogether.

Among 32 patients with BRAF-mutated melanoma in the second phase of the study, 24 had a partial response and two had a complete response.

"It worked: 81 percent had a partial response -- which has never been seen. I don't know of any solid tumors that have a response rate that high," said Chapman. "What's different here is that we've discovered a molecule that is responsible for driving the melanoma cell. It turns out that the melanoma really cares if we block the gene BRAF. It matters. It's addicted to this pathway."

There are some important caveats, however. It's not known at this time if the drug can improve overall survival, and a sizable proportion of participants developed resistance to the drug, the researchers say.

The findings join other recent reports of potential treatments for melanoma in what appears to be an exciting time for the field. Progress in this field has essentially been stalled for decades, experts say.

Recently, scientists reported that another experimental drug, ipilimumab, prolonged median survival in patients with metastatic melanoma from 6.4 months to 10 months.

"[Existing therapy] is not good for melanoma, so this is really a new opportunity that I think may have some importance to people," Pentland said.

However, she stressed that the best defense against melanoma is to get your skin examined regularly by a professional who knows what to look for.

"Our most successful treatment is to get [the lesion] early, get it before it's thick, get it before it spreads," she said.

There's more on metastatic melanoma at the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story gave a lucid account of the research and communicated some of its key limitations. It noted that the dramatic results of this small study of very sick patients may not be generalizable to the broader population of individuals with melanoma. It also pointed out uncertainty regarding how long the drug will remain effective. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Oct. 18, 2010 -- An analysis of 22 studies involving about 2.5 million people shows a significant association between using cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins and a reduced risk for colorectal cancer.

The analysis shows there was a 12% reduction of colorectal cancer risk among statin users. Also, the longer patients used statin drugs, the greater their reduction in risk for colorectal cancer.

The findings are based on a review of 22 studies published through October 2009 and were presented at the American College of Gastroenterology's (ACG) 75th Annual Scientific meeting in San Antonio.

Study researcher N. Jewel Samadder, MD, MSc, from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, says the relationship between statin use and a reduction in risk for colorectal cancer was consistent across various study designs.

“This effect was largely consistent across study design with both case control and cohort studies showing a strong correlation,” he says in a news release. “The length of statin use, both greater than six months and greater than five years of use was associated with reduction in colorectal cancer risk.”

The group of statins that showed the greatest effect in reducing risk are classified as lipophilic: atorvastatin (Lipitor), fluvastatin (Lescol), lovastatin (Altocor, Altoprev, Mevacor), pitavastatin (Livalo), and simvastatin (Zocor),

Colorectal cancer is the third most common type of cancer in the U.S.; 102,900 new cases of colon cancer are diagnosed in men and women every year, and about 39,670 new cases of rectal cancer are diagnosed annually.

The relationship between statins and cancer is unclear, but other research exploring the impact of statins at the molecular level suggests that these cholesterol-lowering drugs may help control the development of tumor, as well as tumor growth.

“Observational studies have suggested that long-term use of statins is associated with reduced risk of several cancers, including breast, prostate, lung, pancreas and liver,” says Samadder in the news release. “Our findings suggest that randomized controlled trials designed to test the hypothesis that statins reduce the risk of colorectal cancer are warranted.”

This study was presented at a medical conference. The findings should be considered preliminary as they have not yet undergone the "peer review" process, in which outside experts scrutinize the data prior to publication in a medical journal.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:  The story was very clear that the results reported on were from a presentation at a meeting and as such had not undergone ‘peer review’. This was not done in the Reuters story on the same study.  This caveat – at the end of such stories – has become boilerplate language for WebMD and we applaud them for it. 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The promise of genetic medicine is beginning to be fulfilled, but it's been a long, hard slog.

Take the story of Kalydeco. It's designed to treat people with a lung disease called cystic fibrosis. While not quite a cure, the drug is extremely effective for some CF patients.

But the success of Kalydeco has been more than two decades in the making.

A good starting point for the story is Aug. 24, 1989. That's the day scientists from the U.S. and Canada announced the discovery of the gene associated with the disease. It was the early days of gene hunting, and the CF gene was a big prize.

CF is the most common genetic disease in Caucasians. When people inherit a damaged form of the CF gene, a critical protein inside cells doesn't work properly. As a result, sticky mucus builds up in a patient's lungs, causing infections and making it hard to breathe.

The announcement was supposed to be made in conjunction with three papers in the Sept. 8 issue of Science, but a reporter for Reuters got hold of the story early. Science took the unusual step of allowing the scientists to speak to the media before publication.

At the time, scientists predicted that a genetic test for CF was just around the corner. But they also thought a drug to treat the disease was in reach.

The first prediction turned out to be right. "But it wasn't until 20 years later that we were able to find drugs that directly target the underlying cause of cystic fibrosis," says Fred Van Goor, who led the team at what is now Vertex Pharmaceuticals that developed Kalydeco. "So it was a long time between the discovery of the gene and the discovery of Kalyedco."

It took awhile to find a drug that would help restore the function of the protein the CF gene makes. "We tested over 600,000 chemicals in cells with the defective protein that causes cystic fibrosis," says Van Goor.

One of those chemicals ultimately became a successful drug, but it had to be modified so patients could take it by mouth, and so it would last the right length of time in a patient's body.

From the start, Van Goor and his colleagues knew there was a problem with Kalydeco: It only works on a small subset of people with CF. They have to have a particular mutation in the CF gene, or the drug is of little use.

But for people who do have that mutation, the drug works remarkably well.

Emily Schaller was in one of the early studies of Kalydeco. As part of the study, researchers first gave her a placebo, then switched her to the active drug. She knew within days that something was different.

"I was with my brother in Florida, and we were walking down the street, and I took a deep breath, and when I took a deep breath in and I let it out, I didn't cough," says Schaller. "But not only did I not cough, but I felt that my lungs were clear, and that something huge had happened. It was just something I had never felt in my life before."

Schaller isn't cured. She still has a damaged CF gene. The only way to fix that would be gene therapy, where a healthy form of the gene would supplant the damaged one. Although it seems simple in theory, in practice gene therapy has been incredibly difficult to accomplish.

Schaller isn't particularly bothered by that. "Everyone talks about curing a disease — cure CF, cure these other diseases. [But] Kalydeco controls CF at the basic defect, so I'm OK with the other 'c' word, control, because I'm living it and I've never felt better in my life."

The time from gene discovery to successful drug may be shortening, but there are only a handful of successful drugs so far, and for a while at least, the appearance of new ones will be slow.

They're also likely to be expensive. Kalydeco costs in the neighborhood of $300,000 per year.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story doesn’t get into the evidence in depth, but we give the story high marks for the way it frames the gene treatment discovery process. We have seen very few stories tackle the topic in this fashion, and it is a service to the public to cut through the hype and provide a more clear-eyed picture. For example, the story points out that the drug company “tested over 600,000 chemicals in cells with the defective protein that causes cystic fibrosis” and that, ultimately, the company “knew there was a problem with Kalydeco: It only works on a small subset of people with CF. They have to have a particular mutation in the CF gene, or the drug is of little use.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Marijuana appears to improve the memory and learning abilities of old mice. Scientists discovered low doses of its main psychoactive ingredient—cannabinoid THC—can reverse the age-related decline in cognitive abilities, a finding that could lead to scientists figuring out a way of slowing brain aging in humans.

Researchers are increasingly examining THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) for its potential medical benefits. In the U.K., Oxford University recently launched a £10 million ($13 million) program to “identify new medical therapies through research into the molecular, cellular and systems mechanisms of cannabinoids.” Meanwhile, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has now approved several medications derived from THC.

Many scientists are currently looking at its potential use as a treatment for neurological conditions, including multiple sclerosis, epilepsy and Parkinson’s disease.

In a study published in Nature Medicine on Monday, researchers led by Andreas Zimmer, from the University of Bonn, Germany, have shown how THC can provide significant benefits to mice when it comes to age-related cognitive decline.

THC interacts with receptors in the brain’s endocannabinoid system, which is involved in many physiological functions, including pain, mood, memory and appetite. Previous research has also shown activity in the endocannabinoid system declines as we get older, indicating it plays a role in the progression of aging.

To study what effect THC has on the aging brain, scientists gave low doses of THC to mice at three different life stages—two months, 12 months and 18 months. The latter two groups represented mature and old age.

The team carried out three experiments. The first involved a water maze, where mice have to learn and then remember how to navigate their way to the end. In a control group, mature and old mice performed worse than the young group. However, when treated with THC, the older groups improved at the task, while the young mice fared far worse. (The study’s authors noted that this was in “good agreement with the known detrimental effects of THC on cognition in young animals and humans.”

Next, they created a task where mice had to locate a specific object. Older mice treated with THC performed to the same standard as young mice that had not been given the drug. A third test relating to partner recognition also showed THC led to improved memory in mature and older mice. “Together, these results reveal a profound, long-lasting improvement of cognitive performance resulting from a low dose of THC treatment in mature and old animals,” the scientists write.

Further research showed what might cause the improvement, with THC appearing to restore hippocampal gene transcription patterns—activity in the brain relating to memory and learning—to a similar state seen in young mice.

The team argues that while they do not yet know if these findings would be same in humans, it could lead to new treatments to prevent cognitive decline in older people: “Cannabis preparations and THC are used for medicinal purposes,” they write. “They have an excellent safety record and do not produce adverse side-effects when administered at a low dose to older individuals. Thus, chronic, low-dose treatment with THC or cannabis extracts could be a potential strategy to slow down or even to reverse cognitive decline in the elderly.”

Zameel Cader, associate professor in clinical neurosciences at Oxford University, is involved in the institution’s $13 million cannabis research project. Commenting on the Nature Medicine study, he tells Newsweek the paper is “very interesting on a number of levels.”

“First of all there’s clearly growing interest in the potential therapeutic role of cannabinoids and in this particular case THC on various human conditions,” he says. “This paper is addressing a possible role for that compound in memory and cognition, which is relevant to disorders such as Alzheimer’s and other dementias.”

He said that while it is important to remember the study was carried out on mouse models, the differences in the effect of the drug on younger animals versus older animals tells us a lot about our understanding of the differences between old and young brains.

Moving this research forward, however, will be problematic: “Testing in humans is going to be difficult. This is a challenge faced by anyone wanting to develop a therapy for a human disorder such as dementia. Human lifespan is very extensive. So the question would be, when would be the most appropriate time to give these kinds of medications? Over what period of time do you need to evaluate the effects? In humans it could be years before an effect is noticed.”

“Finally, there is the issue surrounding safety. With a cannabinoid like THC, which does have adverse effects in certain individuals, there would be worries about the chronic dosing of this kind of medicine. We would need to assess the safety first before going into seeing whether it would improve cognition."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article did a pretty good job of explaining the experiments and the outcomes, as well as previous research on the neuroscience of cannabinoid impact. It also made it very clear–and upfront–that this was animal research. That’s very important for setting reader expectations.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Take charge of your biological clock,” the invitation urged.

It beckoned women to an evening seminar in Manhattan. There, they received a coupon for the latest in fertility management: a genetic test marketed as a way to help maximize their chances of becoming pregnant.

The hitch: Top reproductive endocrinologists point out that there’s no evidence the $950 DNA test can actually help women conceive. And even the company’s founder and CEO acknowledges the test can’t provide clear and definitive answers on which treatments women should try next if they’re struggling with infertility.

The Fertilome test hit the market at the start of this year and the company behind it, Celmatix, said more than 50 doctors have already ordered it for hundreds of women seeking scientific guidance on questions such as whether they should freeze their eggs for future use, or whether it’s worth it to try another round of in vitro fertilization. The Celmatix CEO, Piraye Yurttas Beim, said her team has heard of a small wave of “Fertilome babies” on the way.

Some reproductive specialists are enthusiastic. But others caution that Fertilome is just the latest genetic test promising more than it can deliver — and, in this case, playing to the fears of women who are anxious about becoming a mother. (Another example: a new $89 test that claims to tell women how their DNA could influence the level of a beneficial fatty acid in their breast milk.)

The Fertilome test, which must be ordered by a doctor, analyzes a woman’s DNA for 49 genetic variants that have been linked to various conditions that can sometimes cause fertility problems. A couple weeks later, the doctor gets back a long report listing the odds that a patient has certain conditions.

For example, she might be 4.4 times more likely than women without a particular genetic variant to have a condition known as primary ovarian insufficiency, characterized by irregular periods and diminished fertility before age 40.

That sounds alarming, and might prompt a younger woman who’s planning to delay pregnancy to freeze her eggs to be sure she has them available down the road. But the report does not explain that the condition is fairly rare — affecting just 1 in 1,000 women by age 30 and 1 in 250 women by age 35 — so the absolute risk is still very small.

And just because women have an elevated genetic risk for a condition doesn’t mean they actually have it.

Many of the other conditions that the test screens for are also quite rare. But the report doesn’t explain the prevalence.

So a patient may see a table showing that her genetic variants make her twice as likely to have a condition known as recurrent pregnancy loss, defined as repeated miscarriages. But the report doesn’t note that just 1 percent of women have that condition in the first place, making the odds still overwhelmingly in her favor. The doctor ordering the test, or a genetic counselor, is supposed to provide that information.

Without the proper context, “some of this can be very misleading and very frightening to patients,” said Dr. John Petrozza, chief of the division of reproductive medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital.

Petrozza said he worries that women might wrongly interpret a long litany of genetic risks to mean that their hopes to start a family are “doomed.” He also said he sees the test as “very costly for what it’s trying to do — and not really giving, at least at this point, what I would consider meaningful information.”

The Fertilome test was eight years in the making. It draws on more than 5,000 studies that have found associations between particular genetic variants and conditions that can cause fertility problems, company spokeswoman Colleen McMillen said.

Beim, the Celmatix CEO, said the test is already bringing “tremendous” value, in part by providing guidance that can act as a “tiebreaker” to help patients and their doctor decide which treatment to prioritize.

“It will help save a lot of heartache and time if we could know from the very beginning that [a given patient] is at risk for a uterine factor, or if it’s more her eggs,” said Dr. Angie Beltsos, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in Chicago who ordered the Fertilome test for one of her patients for the first time last month.

What the test can’t do: provide evidence-backed answers on what patients should try next. Nor can it tell patients whether they’re wired to get pregnant from IVF — or wired to fail it. “We’re not there. We’re not claiming we’re there,” Beim said.

Beim trained as a molecular genetics researcher. As a Ph.D. student at Weill Cornell in the 2000s, she worked on an early project in what’s now called precision medicine: identifying the specific genetic alterations in the tumors of lung cancer patients that seemed to predict whether they would respond to a certain drug.

After shifting her research focus to embryology, Beim found herself frustrated that the fertility field wasn’t benefiting from the same boom in translational genetics that was reshaping oncology. So she started her own company.

Celmatix also sells software, called Polaris, that pulls from the medical histories of hundreds of thousands of women to try to predict which fertility treatments are likely to work in different circumstances.

Fertilome — not to be confused with a line of weed killers and other gardening products with the same name — launched in January with a $1,900 price tag. Insurers don’t cover it; after it became clear that patients were balking at the bill, Celmatix cut the price in half.

Celmatix is mostly marketing the test to reproductive specialists, who are largely using it in the toughest infertility cases, Beim said.

But the company is also beginning to market directly to women — including younger women who aren’t trying to get pregnant yet.

The company has recently started promoting social media ads, like one that asks: “Are you getting the right fertility treatments for your DNA?” Another asserts: “Over 60% of millennial women are open to #eggfreezing. The Fertilome test can help you decide if it is right for you.”

The company’s website also features testimonials from women who say they have used Fertilome to help guide their decisions. There’s Ella, a 30-year-old with dark hair and stylish clothing who decided to freeze her eggs after taking the Fertilome test. Then there’s Maxine, a 27-year-old medical school graduate with short hair and a warm smile who used the test to help her juggle the timing of starting a family and starting her career.

The wrinkle: The images of Ella and Maxine are actually stock photos, available for purchase online.

After questions from STAT, the company added a disclaimer acknowledging that testimonials are not quite as they were promoted from the start: the names, images, and details of patients’ stories have been changed to safeguard their privacy.

Along with its social media outreach, Celmatix has held several after-work events for New York City-area women. It hosted one, on a Wednesday night in April, in its offices on Wall Street.

And on a Tuesday evening earlier this summer, the company partnered with a women’s group to host a conversation about “proactive steps you can take today to reach your future family building goals.” Appetizers, wine, and beer were served — and, in a gesture to the crowd full of women with pregnancy on their minds, non-alcoholic beverages were on the menu, too.

The company is also trying to reach OB-GYNs whose patients aren’t yet trying to get pregnant — or may be just beginning to try. Celmatix held webinars earlier this summer for OB-GYNs, telling them that the test could help “optimize management plans from the very start.”

Dr. Aimee Eyvazzadeh, a reproductive endocrinologist in private practice in the Bay Area, is among a few doctors who’ve been given vouchers by the company to offer the test for $500. She’s been ordering the Fertilome test for her patients about five times a week.

Eyvazzadeh said the test recently helped her counsel a patient to forgo a third round of IVF, because the patient had a genetic profile that suggested it would be unlikely to work and wasn’t in a financial position to gamble on such slim odds. (A round of IVF can cost $13,000.) That patient is now considering an egg donor.

Another one of Eyvazzadeh’s patients is 31-year-old Tara Smith.

For Smith, who works as a foster parent providing intensive care in Northern California, there’s nothing more important than family. She’s dreamed of having her own baby since she was a child herself.

That’s why Smith and her husband have spent about $70,000 over the past four years trying, without success, to get pregnant. They’ve seen doctors in St. Louis and Las Vegas, taken countless blood tests, and tried two rounds of IVF and several cycles of intrauterine insemination. Smith has long known that she has a condition called polycystic ovary syndrome, which can make it harder to get pregnant, but no one could figure out exactly why none of the treatments were working.

“It’s gut-wrenching. You’re almost like this alien,” Smith said. “Nobody knows what’s going on, and you can’t fix the problem.”

So when Eyvazzadeh suggested that she take the Fertilome test, Smith jumped at the possibility of finally getting answers. Eyvazzadeh walked her through the results last month before showing her the report, so Smith had an idea of what to expect. Still, Smith said, “my heart sank” when she saw her results for the first time.

She was 2.88 times more likely to have endometriosis, a painful disorder of the uterus, than a woman without a certain genetic variant. She was 1.54 times more likely to have primary ovarian insufficiency. She also carried three genetic variants that elevated her risk of having recurrent pregnancy loss. And she had 24 additional genetic variants that are more weakly associated with various conditions that can play a role in fertility problems.

Despite it all, Eyvazzadeh had a plan. Because many of Smith’s genetic variants were involved in immune response regulation, she instructed Smith to focus on minimizing inflammation.

At Eyvazzadeh’s recommendation, Smith spent about $200 buying dietary supplements like fish oils, turmeric, cayenne pepper, resveratrol, and berberine from Amazon and Walmart. Smith also embarked on a new diet, cutting out dairy and red meat. (A 2015 review of the evidence on the optimal diet to promote fertility — and the utility of supplements — found the data “conflicting.”)

They also plan to have Smith get infusions of intralipids — a cocktail of soy bean oil, egg yolks, and other fatty acids — during her third round of IVF, which she’s embarking on now. (Intralipid infusions are increasingly popular, but the practice was found not to help in a 2016 study of older women with a history of miscarriage.)

Smith has mostly positive feelings about her Fertilome test. Having a concrete plan based on what’s in her DNA gives her a new sense of hope. “Now I feel like we’re armed with information,” she said. But at the same time, she said, knowing what may be wrong with her makes her apprehensive about whether she’ll ever get pregnant.

After all, so far, the test has pointed her only to try nutritional tweaks of uncertain value. It doesn’t offer any definitive answers.

And that’s what gives Dr. Valerie Baker pause. A reproductive endocrinologist at Stanford, she recently suggested the test to a patient with longstanding infertility. The patient asked a good question: What would we do differently if we had this genetic analysis?

“I don’t know,” Baker recalled responding. “I probably wouldn’t do anything differently.”

She did not end up ordering the test.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: On the one hand, the text explains that the Fertilome test draws on thousands of studies of associations between genetic variants and fertility problems. But it also goes into some detail about what the test cannot do, specifically, forge a causal connection between those variants and the problems and recommend next steps.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
N-acetylcysteine reduced PTSD symptoms, cravings, and depression in veterans with PTSD and substance use disorder in a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted at the Medical University of South Carolina and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center

N-acetylcysteine, when combined with group cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), reduced symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), cravings, and depression significantly more than CBT alone in veterans with co-occurring PTSD and substance use disorder, a particularly difficult-to-treat population, according to the findings of a randomized controlled pilot trial conducted by researchers at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) and the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

This trial is the first to use NAC as a pharmacotherapy for PTSD and a broad range of SUDs. The results were published online ahead of print on October 11, 2016 by the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.

The National Center for PTSD estimates that seven to eight percent of Americans will have PTSD at some point in their life. The numbers are even worse for veterans: it is estimated, for example, that 30 percent of Vietnam veterans will have experienced PTSD at some point in their life. Approximately 40 to 50 percent of veterans with PTSD also have a substance use disorder (SUD).

"Addiction goes along with virtually every psychiatric disorder at a higher percentage than it does in the general population" said Peter W. Kalivas, Ph.D. the senior author on the article and chair of the Department of Neuroscience at MUSC. "People who are prone to psychiatric disorders are also prone to addiction."

Currently, there are no well-explored pharmacological treatments for patients with co-occurring PTSD/SUD. Although selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been approved by the FDA for treatment of PTSD, pharmacological treatments for co-occurring PTSD/SUD have yielded suboptimal results.

Groundbreaking basic science research by Kalivas has shown that levels of glutamate transporters are decreased in SUDs and that administration of the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine can help restore those levels and guard against relapse in animal models of SUD. Because evidence suggests that SUDs and PTSD share overlapping neurobiological pathways, Sudie E. Back, Ph.D., lead author on the article, hypothesized that NAC treatment with CBT would be a novel approach to treat co-occurring PTSD and SUD. Back is a professor in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at MUSC and a staff psychologist at the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center.

In the eight-week randomized controlled trial led by Back and Kalivas, 35 veterans with PTSD and SUD, all of whom were receiving cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for their SUD, were randomized to either 2400 mg/day of NAC or placebo. The average age of the veterans was 49 years and many were veterans of the Vietnam War. To be included, veterans had to have abstained from substance use for at least seven days. Of the veterans enrolled in the trial, 83% completed it, a very high rate for this difficult-to-treat population.

Veterans in the NAC-treated group showed a 46% reduction in PTSD symptoms, compared with a 25% reduction in the placebo group on the Clinical-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), which assesses trauma history and symptom severity. The threshold CAPS score for diagnosis of PTSD is 50.

"As a group, the NAC-treated veterans were below diagnostic level for PTSD at the end of treatment," said Back. "For PTSD, these are some of the best outcomes we have seen in the literature for a medication."

Craving and depression were also reduced in the NAC-treated group. The amount of craving was reduced by 81% and the frequency of craving by 71% in the NAC group, compared with 32% and 29% in the placebo group. "Craving is a key component of substance use in relapse," said Back. "If you have a medication that can really reduce craving, that will go a long way to helping people stay clean and sober." Depression, gauged using the Beck Depression Inventory, was reduced 48% in the NAC group vs. 15% in the placebo group.

Veterans in the study had low rates of substance use during the trial, and the study found little effect of medication on use, perhaps due to the fact that all participants were receiving SUD treatment and exhibiting low levels of use. This finding could also be due to the relatively limited number of participants or to the chronic nature of the participants' PTSD. "This is a tough patient population with SUD to work with." said Kalivas. "We have Vietnam vets that have had PTSD for 15 to 20 years. This is not an easy-to-turn-around population."

Although these early, promising findings show that NAC reduced PTSD symptoms, craving, and depression, NAC should not be used as a monotherapy or substitute for evidence-based behavioral treatment, but instead be seen as an adjunct therapy that enhances it.

"We would not advocate using it instead of therapy," said Back. "But this could be something to help prevent relapse when used alongside a behavioral treatment."

NAC is available over the counter and does not cause side effects at the doses used in the study, but it degrades quickly when stored, is contraindicated in patients with asthma, and can cause nausea at higher doses and so should always be obtained and administered under a physician's supervision.

The next steps in Back's research are to run a longer-term trial of NAC in veterans with PTSD and SUD and to use MRS magnetic spectroscopy to better explore the effect of NAC on glutamate levels in patients with PTSD and SUD.

Founded in 1824 in Charleston, The Medical University of South Carolina is the oldest medical school in the South. Today, MUSC continues the tradition of excellence in education, research, and patient care. MUSC educates and trains more than 3,000 students and residents in six colleges (Dental Medicine, Graduate Studies, Health Professions, Medicine, Nursing, and Pharmacy), and has nearly 13,000 employees, including approximately 1,500 faculty members. As the largest non-federal employer in Charleston, the university and its affiliates have collective annual budgets in excess of $2.2 billion, with an annual economic impact of more than $3.8 billion and annual research funding in excess of $250 million. MUSC operates a 700-bed medical center, which includes a nationally recognized children's hospital, the Ashley River Tower (cardiovascular, digestive disease, and surgical oncology), Hollings Cancer Center (a National Cancer Institute-designated center), Level I Trauma Center, Institute of Psychiatry, and the state's only transplant center. In 2016, U.S. News & World Report named MUSC Health the number one hospital in South Carolina. For more information on academic programs or clinical services, visit musc.edu. For more information on hospital patient services, visit muschealth.org.

Located in historic downtown Charleston, South Carolina, the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a tertiary care teaching hospital providing the highest level quality care from cardiology to neurology to primary and mental health care for 70,000 Veterans along the South Carolina and Georgia coast. The Ralph H. Johnson VA achieved a 5-Star rating according to VA's Strategic Analytics for Improvement and Learning Value (SAIL) model. The SAIL rating ranks the Charleston VA in the top 10 percent of VA medical centers nationwide for quality of care and efficiency. The Charleston VA is also ranked in the top 10th percentile according to the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS). HEDIS is an independent review that measures performance of 90 percent of America's health plans and facilities in both the public and private sector on dimensions of care and service. The Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center is a center of excellence for robotic surgery and orthopedics, and is the first VA National Tele-Mental Health Hub providing care for Veterans across the U.S. The 149-bed hospital includes six community based outpatient clinics, a 20-bed nursing home, women's health, and the full range of inpatient and outpatient care, including medical and surgical intensive care. The VAMC provides more than 875,000 outpatient visits and approximately 4,400 in-patient stays annually. With more than 2,500 employees, Charleston VA has an annual budget of $458 million, research funding of more than $21 million, and more than 100 principal investigators participating in approximately 300 research studies. For more information, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This news release does not exaggerate the benefits found in the study, and added helpful caveats about the limitations of the study, its applicability to the general population and its small size.
We’d have preferred to see some specific language cautioning about the short duration of the study (just 8 weeks) and the fact that the results might not hold up over time.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chelation therapy is a risky procedure approved to treat rare, life-threatening cases of heavy metal poisoning. A taxpayer-funded study tested whether it could reduce heart attacks

A heart disease study presented Sunday is being called a $32 million waste of time — and even a danger to public health — by some of the country's leading health experts.

The taxpayer-funded study tested whether a controversial alternative therapy, called chelation, could reduce heart attacks and other cardiovascular problems in people who had already survived a heart attack.

Chelation therapy, which can remove metals from the blood, is a risky procedure approved to treat rare, life-threatening cases of heavy metal poisoning. Tens of thousands of patients a year undergo the procedure "off-label," however, paying around $5,000 out-of-pocket, based on the claims of doctors who say it can cure everything from Alzheimer's to autism.

National Institutes of Health officials say they launched the study because there has never been any evidence that the practice is effective or safe.

In a presentation Sunday, doctors said the trial found a small overall benefit to chelation, mainly because it prevented heart problems in people with diabetes.

Elliott Antman, chair of the American Heart Association's Scientific Sessions program committee, praised NIH for doing the study.

"Kudos for funding a trial that says, 'OK, if people are lining up to have this done, let's let it undergo rigorous clinical trials,'" Antman said in an interview before the results were unveiled.

In a statement after the study was presented, Antman, a cardiologist at Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital and professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, added, "Intriguing as the results are, they are unexpected and should not be interpreted as an indication to adopt chelation therapy into clinical practice."

Yet some doctors say the study was far from rigorously performed, and so badly run that its marginally positive results are meaningless.

Cardiologist Steven Nissen of the Cleveland Clinic, one of the USA's most respected heart experts, says he's concerned the study will encourage more patients to get off-label chelation instead of taking proven medications or making lifestyle changes that clearly have been shown to reduce heart disease.

"This study has the potential to be extremely dangerous," Nissen says. Chelation "should not be administered to any patients for the indication of heart disease. ... There are a lot of people, including me, who believe this was a poor use of taxpayer dollars."

At least 30 patients have died from off-label chelation therapy since the 1970s, including an autistic 5-year-old Pennsylvania boy, according to a 2008 report in The Medscape Journal of Medicine.

Even the study's lead author says the research should not be used to recommend chelation therapy, and he acknowledges that its findings could have been due to chance.

"A definitive answer on chelation therapy will take much additional research," Gervasio Lamas, chief of the Columbia University division of cardiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach, Fla., said in a statement. "The most exciting part of this study is that there may be an unexpected signal of benefit. We need to understand whether the signal is true, or whether it occurred by chance."

The trial, known as the Trial to Assess Chelation Therapy, or TACT, has been dogged by accusations of safety and ethical problems from its beginnings 10 years ago.

The study was temporarily halted in 2008 because of concerns over ethics and patient safety. An investigation by the federal Office for Human Research Subject Protections, which is charged with protecting patients, found that patients may not have been properly informed of chelation's risks.

In response to such concerns, researchers revised their consent forms — the documents that explain a study's risks and benefits to patients — which had failed to mention the risk of death in chelation therapy.

Federal officials also ordered researchers to notify patients that the drug they were receiving had never been approved for lead poisoning, as implied in the consent form, and that the Food and Drug Administration had taken the study drug off of its list of approved medications.

Stephen Kopecky, a Mayo Clinic cardiologist who participated in the trial, says he's also concerned about the reliability of its findings.

The overall benefits were very small, with 26.5% of those randomly assigned to chelation experiencing a cardiovascular problem, compared with 30% of those randomly assigned to a placebo infusion. Even more concerning, that benefit passed the bar for statistical significance — the standard for judging whether a result is real or a fluke — by only 0.001.

Further analysis showed the benefits were limited to those with diabetes, rather than for patients overall.

Under the best of circumstances, that's not a strong result, says anesthesiologist Kimball Atwood of Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Massachusetts, who has followed the study from its beginning.

This study's findings are even more questionable, however, Kopecky says, because patients who got chelation had lower bad cholesterol levels than the placebo group at the start of the trial. That could explain most of their reduced risk for a second heart attack, says Kopecky, president of the American Society for Preventive Cardiology.

In addition, 30% of patients stopped getting their assigned treatments, and 17% withdrew their consent, preventing doctors from including their data or even contacting them to see if they were still alive, Kopecky says.

That large of a dropout rate — which is normally no more than about 3% — could skew the study's findings, Kopecky says.

"That's a big concern any time a study shows a benefit on something that's not highly regulated by the FDA," Kopecky says.

Kopecky also acknowledges that there's no known biological basis for why removing metals from the blood would help heart disease. "That is a million-dollar question," he said.

More than half the trial sites were led by doctors who practice chelation, says Paul Armstrong, a professor of cardiology at the University of Alberta, chosen to discuss the study on a panel at the heart meeting. That could lead to a bias in favor of chelation, Atwood says.

"All of these factors call into question the results," says Michael Carome, deputy director of the advocacy group Public Citizen's Health Research Group.

NIH officials say the trial was worthwhile. Gary Gibbons, director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, says the study was a "breakthrough" not for proving that chelation works, but for "establishing that this chelation therapy regimen can be administered in a safe manner in the context of a clinical trial."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Mixed bag on this criterion, but we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt.
The story included repeated deserved criticism of the study and how it was conducted. Among other problems, the story notes that the study had high drop out rates – a factor that can introduce bias. And the story mentioned that patients had differing baseline cholesterol levels, which also could have led to a skewed finding favoring chelation.
2nd last line in the story: “All of these factors call into question the results,” says Michael Carome, deputy director of the advocacy group Public Citizen’s Health Research Group.
On the other hand, there was no warning that the findings have only been presented at a medical conference and haven’t been thoroughly peer-reviewed for publication in a journal; we may learn a lot more about how the study was conducted, and what the results mean, after the paper has been vetted by other experts as part of this process.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Women undergo more cesarean sections each year in the United States than any other major surgery, with the procedure carrying a significant rate of infection at the incision site.

A new study from Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis offers strong guidance on the best way to reduce the infection risk. Rather than prepping patients with iodine-alcohol — a common antiseptic combination in C-sections — the research indicates that chlorhexidine-alcohol is significantly more effective. The researchers argue that the evidence is strong enough to change standard skin-prep practices for C-sections.

The study appears online Feb. 4 in The New England Journal of Medicine and coincides with a presentation at the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine’s Annual Meeting in Atlanta.

“One of the biggest complications of surgery, and of C-sections in particular, is infection,” said first author Methodius G. Tuuli, MD, assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology. “For a new mother who needs to care for her baby — which is stressful even when all things are equal — having an infection can really impair her ability to do that. We are very interested in clarifying the best ways to prevent these infections, reducing the burden on the patients, on their infants and on the health-care system as a whole.”

An estimated 1.3 million women in the U.S. delivered their babies by C-section in 2013, with surgical-site infections complicating 5 to 12 percent of those deliveries. The average cost of treating those cesarean-related infections in the hospital is $3,500 and may be much higher for severe infections.

The research shows that patients in the chlorhexidine-alcohol group developed significantly fewer infections than patients in the iodine-alcohol group. Those who received the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination had a 4 percent infection rate, which is nearly half that of the patients who received the iodine-alcohol combination — 7.3 percent.

The clinical trial included 1,147 patients who underwent cesarean sections at Barnes-Jewish Hospital from 2011 to 2015. Of 572 patients randomly assigned to receive the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination, 23 developed an infection at the site of the surgery within 30 days of the procedure. Of 575 patients who randomly received the iodine-alcohol combination, 42 developed a surgical-site infection.

The investigators pointed out that all other standard procedures for reducing the risk of infection after surgery, including giving preventive antibiotics beforehand, were the same in both groups.

Studies of other types of surgeries also have suggested the superiority of chlorhexidine over iodine in preventing infection. But according to Tuuli, the unique circumstances of a C-section — that bacteria come from both skin and vagina and that a woman’s immune system is altered during pregnancy — mean the results of these studies may not apply.

In addition, past trials comparing antiseptics before surgery included relatively few participants and often compared a chlorhexidine-alcohol combination with iodine alone. These studies could not determine whether the worse performance of iodine alone was due to the chlorhexidine, the alcohol or the combination.

Although the new study was conducted at only one hospital, the researchers said the patient population was racially diverse and that more than 60 percent received public insurance. Tuuli and his colleagues also pointed out that the superiority of the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination was consistent whether the C-section was scheduled or unscheduled, whether or not the patient was obese, whether staples or sutures were used to close the wound and whether the patient had chronic medical conditions, including diabetes.

Highlighting the significance of the findings, the study’s senior author, George A. Macones, MD, the Mitchell and Elaine Yanow Professor and head of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, said, “This study is a tremendous addition to the literature on preventing surgical-site infections after cesarean. There are few circumstances when a single study should change our practice. But based on the biological plausibility and the striking reduction in surgical-site infections with chlorhexidine, this is one of those circumstances.”

This work was supported by a Women’s Reproductive Health Research Career Development grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant number 1K12HD063086-01; and by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis.

Tuuli MG, Liu J, Stout MJ, Martin S, Cahill AG, Odibo AO, Colditz GA, Macones GA. A randomized trial comparing skin antiseptic agents at cesarean delivery. New England Journal of Medicine. Feb. 4, 2016.

Washington University School of Medicine’s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release did a good job of explaining the quality of the evidence from this randomized controlled trial. Here is one paragraph about that evidence.
“The clinical trial included 1,147 patients who underwent cesarean sections at Barnes-Jewish Hospital from 2011 to 2015. Of 572 patients randomly assigned to receive the chlorhexidine-alcohol combination, 23 developed an infection at the site of the surgery within 30 days of the procedure. Of 575 patients who randomly received the iodine-alcohol combination, 42 developed a surgical-site infection.”
One thing that was discussed in the study that would have made the release better had it been included was the differentiation between minor and severe infections.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Finally, the world might be catching a break when it comes to drug-resistant gonorrhea.

A new study suggests that a vaccine that protects against a strain of meningitis may also ward off the sexually transmitted infection.

The research, conducted in New Zealand, found that the gonorrhea rate among teens and young adults there who had received a meningitis B vaccine during an emergency campaign in the early 2000s was significantly lower than the rate seen in people of the same age who weren’t vaccinated.

Researchers in Quebec say they saw the same phenomenon after a meningitis outbreak there, and previously published data from Cuba and Norway also hint of the vaccine’s unexpected benefit.

“It’s quite probably real,” said Helen Petousis-Harris, lead author of the New Zealand article and head of immunization research and vaccinology at the University of Auckland.

The findings are observational. Clinical trials will need to be conducted to see if the effect researchers have observed is actually due to the meningococcal B vaccine. But confirmation would be good news for the prevention and control of gonorrhea.

The last remaining drugs to cure this sexually transmitted infection are showing signs they may only have a few more years of usefulness left.

“While it is still very early days, these findings represent a positive step in the search for a vaccine against this common and distressing disease that is increasingly resistant to antibiotic treatment,” said Robin Gaitens, a spokeswoman for GSK, which owns the product that contains this meningitis component.

Why would a vaccine designed to protect against a strain of bacteria that causes meningitis also prevent gonorrhea infection? Some biology is useful here.

Meningitis is a condition — inflammation of the membranes that surround the brain and the spinal cord — that can be triggered by some viruses and several types of bacteria.

One of the latter is Neisseria meningitidis, sometimes known as meningococcal disease. It is the only form of bacterial meningitis that triggers epidemics.

Despite the fact that gonorrhea and meningitis are quite different from one another, the bacteria that cause Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis are actually related.

Meningococcal disease is rare but very dangerous. It can kill, and quickly. People who survive the infection can suffer permanent brain damage or may lose one or several limbs.

Because of the severity of the consequences, health officials often mount emergency vaccination campaigns in response to outbreaks of Neisseria meningitidis.

There are vaccines for several Neisseria meningitidis strains, but designing a vaccine to protect against the B strain was a particularly difficult nut to crack. As a consequence, the vaccine component that was made to protect against B targets a different part of the bacterium, Petousis-Harris said.

That may explain why the B vaccine appears to offer some protection against Neisseria gonorrhea. Meningococcal vaccines that protect against the other strains do not seem to have the same effect.

“A lot of these vaccines have been used widely globally,” Petousis-Harris said. “And what’s happened with gonorrhea? Nothing. Gonorrhea carries on its merry little way.”

New Zealand had a very bad meningococcal outbreak in the early 2000s caused by the B strain. A special vaccine that only protected against that strain was made; it was used between 2004 and 2008.

Petousis-Harris and her colleagues looked later to see if gonorrhea rates had changed after that meningococcal vaccination campaign. They found people who were vaccinated were 31 percent less likely to be infected with gonorrhea than those who hadn’t received the meningococcal B vaccine.

The study, published Monday in the Lancet, was funded by GSK and Auckland Uniservices, the commercialization arm of the University of Auckland.

The single-component vaccine used by New Zealand is no longer made. But the same component is one of several in the Bexsero vaccine, which was used in Quebec when the government decided to vaccinate against meningococcal B disease in a part of the province with a high relative rate of cases a few years ago.

Dr. Jean Longtin, head of the province’s public health laboratory, said he and some colleagues decided to look at whether the vaccination campaign was having an impact on gonorrhea rates in that area after reading about an early observation from Norway.

“In Quebec we saw the exact same effect as New Zealand,” said Longtin, who said his group is still analyzing its findings. “Gonorrhea rates have been going down in the vaccine group whereas in the non-vaccine group it’s following the rest of the province.”

It is not clear how long the protection — if it’s real — will actually last. But even a few years of protection could help significantly reduce the spread of gonorrhea, experts argue.

“Mathematical modeling has shown that even a vaccine of moderate efficacy and duration could have a substantial effect on the transmission and prevalence of gonorrhea, if coverage in the population is high and protection lasts during the highest risk period,” Kate Seib, of Australia’s Institute for Glycomics, wrote in a commentary that accompanied the study.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story states that the findings were observational and adds: “Clinical trials will need to be conducted to see if the effect researchers have observed is actually due to the meningococcal B vaccine.”
It explains that only a particular vaccine component that protects against one strain of meningitis appears to offer some protection against gonorrhea, while meningococcal vaccines that protect against other strains do not.
The story could have mentioned the number of vaccinated young people in the study, which was nearly 15,000.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Maryland medical group has started treating autistic children in South Florida with shots of a drug used for chemical castration, a therapy widely panned by mainstream experts.

The group gives children the cancer drug Lupron to stop their bodies from making testosterone, saying the drug helps expel toxic mercury and quells aggressive or sexually explicit behavior by kids with excessive levels of the male hormone.

A Boca Raton mother who just put her 18-year-old son on the drug said it seems to help.

But numerous physicians, researchers and therapists insist there's no proof mercury causes autism, that Lupron removes mercury or that autistic kids have excessive testosterone. What's more, the drug carries a risk of bone damage, stunted growth and heart trouble, and can render children impotent.

These experts contend that Lupron, costing about $5,000 a month but seldom covered by insurance, is one of many treatments that cash in on the desperation of parents trying to cope with an incurable condition for which medicine has few good answers outside of painstaking behavioral therapy.

"Not only is there no scientific backing whatsoever for Lupron treatments, there are several major concerns for the children's health," said neurologist BethAnn McLaughlin, an adviser to the Dan Marino Foundation autism group in Weston and the mother of two developmentally disabled children.

"These people are preying on the fears of parents. We cannot be using these children who are so vulnerable as guinea pigs in a medical experiment."

Untested autism treatments have flourished while science struggles to explain the disorder, which disrupts the abilities to speak, concentrate, connect with people and control impulses.

For unknown reasons, autism has been on the rise for the past few decades, with an estimated 675,000 children – about one in 100 – now having mild to severe symptoms. Scientists believe it stems from genetic defects that may only cause problems after an environmental trigger.

A vocal subset of parents and activists blame vaccines, especially those with the mercury-based preservative thimerosal, which has been banned from virtually all as a precaution. Numerous studies have found no connection between autism and vaccines or thimerosal.

Lupron therapy grew from the mercury camp. Baltimore researcher Dr. Mark Geier started using the drug in 2005 on the theory – disputed by mainsteam doctors – that testosterone binds mercury in the body and that many autistic kids have high levels of the hormone.

Lupron halts production of the female hormone estrogen, which the body uses to make testosterone. The drug mainly is used to treat endometrial cancer in women and prostate cancer in men, and sometimes to chemically castrate sex offenders.

Geier's promotional materials said he has treated hundreds of children with Lupron and has launched nine ASD Centers in eight states. In his latest, he teams with Dr. David Clayman, a Boca Raton radiologist who has an autistic teen son and is opening an ASD office beside his MRI center in Tamarac.

Clayman said he would not comment until he treats patients with Lupron therapy for a year. Geier could not be reached for comment despite several attempts by phone. He told one parent he did not plan to comment for this story.

The medical group began recruiting Florida patients in March when Geier spoke at a Fort Lauderdale conference for parents of children with autism.

Teresa Badillo was at the meeting. Her family has searched in vain for a way to help their autistic son, Marco, 18. Badillo said he has little speech or interaction with others, but is doing OK in high school. Lately, though, Marco has grown more aggressive, physical and rebellious.

"We were basically under seige in this house," Badillo said. "This kind of behavior is more scary at 18 [than] at 3. I had choices to make. If you see there is another option out there that can help your child, most parents are going to choose that option."

Also, Marco had discovered sex and sometimes touched himself inappropriately in public, a common problem among those with autism.

"The kids don't understand. They have impulses. It's what happens when you have high testosterone," Badillo said.

The family put Marco on Lupron about six weeks ago. He gets two injections a month at a dosage larger than used on adult cancer patients, plus a small daily shot.

"The therapy immediately stopped the aggression," Badillo said. "This is not castrating a kid. It's just lowering the [testosterone] levels enough to normal range so the kid is not aggressive."

She said Geier plans to continue the Lupron for several months to see if it helps Marco's other autistic behavior. She said she knows the drug has risks but believes Lupron critics do not fully grasp the hard realities of life with an autistic child.

Lupron critics said autism parents may not understand the dangers.

The drug is not approved for children – except a rare few with premature puberty – because it can impair bone development crucial to growth, said Dr. Gary Berkovitz, chief of pediatric endocrinology at the University of Miami medical school.

It's not recommended for people with heart disease, kidney disease, asthma, depression or seizures because it can worsen those conditions. Autistic children are prone to seizures.

"It has not been tested so there's no way to know if it has adverse effects in the long run," Berkovitz said.

Said neurologist McLaughlin: "We have very significant concerns about irreversible damage to sexual function and the brain and sex organs of these children."

In addition, the Food and Drug Administration is investigating complaints that Lupron causes diabetes in adults.

Geier published a 2006 study contending that 11 autistic children taking Lupron did better on tests of awareness, sociability and behavior. He has since issued other studies finding that mercury leads to excess testosterone and that autistic children have excessive levels of the hormone.

Other doctors said Geier's studies were small, were not scientifically sound and were published in journals that do not follow the standard practice of having experts review the methods.

The area's largest autism treatment center jointly run by the University of Miami and Nova Southeastern University, as well as another at Florida Atlantic University, frown on Lupron and other untested therapies, officials at the centers said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story explained that the Maryland physician promoting the theory "published a 2006 study contending that 11 autistic children taking Lupron did better on tests of awareness, sociability and behavior. He has since issued other studies finding that mercury leads to excess testosterone and that autistic children have excessive levels of the hormone."  But then it immediately notes: "Other doctors said (the) studies were small, were not scientifically sound and were published in journals that do not follow the standard practice of having experts review the methods." 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The pocket-watch-sized device is billed as "a pacemaker for the brain," the newest cutting-edge treatment for as many as 4 million adults whose severe depression is not relieved by psychotherapy, drugs or even shock treatments.

Since its approval under unusual circumstances eight months ago by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), more than 550 Americans have undergone surgery to have a vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) implanted in their chests to activate parts of their brains. Another 7,000 people -- aided by a network of nurses hired by Cyberonics, the Houston-based manufacturer of the device -- are seeking approval from their insurance companies for the $25,000 operation.

More than 3,700 psychiatrists, including doctors affiliated with Suburban, Georgetown, Sheppard Pratt and Howard University hospitals, have been trained in the use of VNS, the first device ever approved to treat depression. It consists of a battery-operated generator attached to an electrode implanted in the vagus nerve in the neck. The generator emits regular pulses of electricity that are supposed to stimulate serotonin and other brain chemicals believed to regulate mood, according to Cyberonics.

Yet despite the imprimatur of the FDA and an aggressive marketing campaign mounted by the company, the most basic question about the treatment remains unanswered: Does it work? Is VNS a lifesaving treatment for chronic depression, as some patients and doctors maintain, or an unproven and potentially harmful treatment based on flimsy science, as critics contend?

At the heart of the debate is this: The only rigorous clinical trial of the device -- which is approved to treat severe epilepsy -- failed to demonstrate effectiveness in alleviating depression. That study involved 235 patients, all of whom received the device, which was turned on in only half the group. At the end of three months, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups.

A second study of 174 VNS recipients found that 30 percent showed significant improvement after one year. Because that study lacked a control group and because patients received other depression treatments after the device was implanted, there is no way to know whether the device was responsible. For years experts have known that depression -- unlike, say, type 1 diabetes -- can get better without treatment.

Last July, a top FDA official, citing the lack of alternatives for severely depressed patients, overruled unanimous opposition by 20 members of his staff and approved the device as a depression treatment for adults who had failed four other treatments.

FDA spokesman Stephen King said that VNS met federal standards for medical devices, which are less stringent than those governing drugs, and might help adults who had exhausted other options and were at a high risk of suicide. Cyberonics officials testified that 30,000 people commit suicide annually, most of whom were diagnosed with severe depression. The same rationale had led an FDA advisory panel in 2004 to approve the device by a 5-2 vote.

To Philadelphia psychiatrist Richard P. Malone, a member of the panel who voted against approval, such arguments are specious.

"Pancreatic cancer is a hopeless condition" with a much higher death rate than chronic depression, said Malone, a professor of psychiatry at Drexel University. "And we have as much evidence that this works for pancreatic cancer as it does for depression. Why not use it for that?"

Some patients with chronic depression say they were willing to try anything that promised relief. Graphic artist Colleen Kelly decided in 2000 that she had nothing to lose by enrolling in an experimental study of VNS. Now 42, Kelly, who lives in Prince George's County, said dozens of medications had not helped her for long or had caused severe reactions. Nearly three dozen electroshock treatments failed to work and wiped out years of memories, she said.

VNS gave Kelly three "very good years," she said, and then her depression returned. "The past year has been abysmal," said Kelly, who urged the FDA advisory panel to approve the device. "I still keep hoping it's going to help me in some way."

But critics say they are not persuaded by Cyberonics's theory of how VNS works. The company's Web site says that "preliminary imaging studies suggest that VNS Therapy affects many areas of the brain implicated in mood regulation."

But Malone called the theory "all speculative."

"This almost has a feel of 18th-century psychiatry -- having a device and not being able to show how it works," he said.

Washington psychiatrist Wayne Blackmon agreed. "Psychiatry has been burned again and again by overextravagant claims" about devices and psychosurgery, said Blackmon, a lawyer and a past president of the D.C. Medical Society. "The history of psychiatry is plagued by psychiatrists jumping the gun because these poor people are suffering and the argument is we have to do something."

The device has also attracted attention on Capitol Hill, where the Senate Finance Committee has spent two years looking into decision-making at the FDA.

Last month committee chairman Charles E. Grassley (R-Iowa), whose panel issued a report highly critical of the agency's approval of VNS, said he was concerned that patients and their doctors were not being adequately informed about the risks of VNS, which include cardiovascular problems that can be life-threatening.

Grassley questioned whether Medicare and Medicaid should pay for the device, which costs $15,000 and must be replaced every five years or so when the battery runs low. So far neither the federal government nor private insurers have agreed to cover VNS for depression on a routine basis, although many have approved individual cases.

Last week, BlueCross BlueShield of Alabama announced it would pay for VNS treatment in chronically depressed patients who had failed four previous treatments.

Two recent technology assessments by major insurance companies have concluded there is insufficient evidence to find that VNS works for depression. A report by Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, an influential mental health insurer in Boston, called it "experimental, investigational and unproven."

Robert "Skip" Cummins, Cyberonics's CEO, dismissed such criticism and said his company, whose sole product is VNS, faced similar skepticism after the device was approved for epilepsy in 1997.

He noted that VNS is now accepted by insurers as a treatment for intractable seizures, which can be fatal if they are not controlled. About 35,000 epilepsy patients have received the implant.

Many FDA "regulators, politicians and third-party payers" know little about resistant depression, Cummins said. "Hundreds of psychiatric thought leaders and patients are rallying around the device" for "the worst of the worst" cases of depression, he said.

"There is nothing out there as safe and effective," Cummins said, adding that a company-financed study showed that the effectiveness of VNS improved over time. He added that he has a personal interest in intractable depression because his mother and grandfather committed suicide.

New York psychiatrist T. Byram Karasu, chairman of the task force that writes the section on depression for psychiatry's diagnostic and statistical manual, said that even though the effectiveness of VNS is uncertain, it appeals to patients and their psychiatrists.

In its marketing campaign, Cyberonics notes that VNS treatment does not cause the weight gain associated with antidepressants and the confusion and memory loss common after electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), psychiatry's term for shock treatments.

"VNS has a quality of cardiac surgery to it, a certain cachet," and it lacks the stigma of shock treatments, said Karasu, adding that six of his patients adamantly refused ECT and opted instead for VNS. "No one would know you didn't get a defibrillator."

For Paulo Negro's patients, the issue is not stigma, but options. Negro, chief of behavioral health services at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, said his VNS patients have tried everything, but their depression always recurred.

"What would you do if you've not been getting better for years?" asked Negro. "It's a chance to get better. I'd take it."

That's what Charles E. Donovan III did. The St. Louis resident credits the implant he received five years ago with saving his life. At the time, the Georgetown University graduate said he was so depressed he told his doctor he hoped to die on the operating table.

But in the weeks after surgery, Donovan said, he started to feel better. Although he takes antidepressants, Donovan said, he is sure drugs are not responsible, because they hadn't helped him previously.

Donovan, who is featured on the Cyberonics Web site, said he has no financial relationship with the company. He recently self-published a book about his experiences, entitled "Out of the Black Hole," and runs a pro-VNS Web site for patients. "I am so humbled by this treatment and grateful," he said.

Others have had far less positive experiences. Among them is Katherine V. Coram, 58, of Silver Spring who got the implant in the same study as Donovan. Coram said she knew she was in the group with the activated device because she could feel it going off, she said. She frequently lost her voice while she was talking and felt a persistent constriction in the back of her throat. Both are common side effects of VNS treatment.

Coram said the device seemed to help a bit at first, but when the doctor turned up the settings, she felt suicidal for the first time in years. Worsening depression and suicide attempts were reported by one-third of patients in one study funded by Cyberonics, according to data presented to the FDA.

Last year Coram said she had the generator removed from her chest because it wasn't helping. The electrodes in her neck must remain forever; doctors tell VNS patients that removing them is too risky because tissue grows around them As a result, VNS recipients cannot undergo a full body MRI or therapeutic ultrasound.

"I'm still angry about the whole thing," said Coram, who said she regrets getting the implant and currently relies on the standby treatments: psychotherapy and antidepressants.

"You get desperate when you've been depressed for years," she said. "This sounds benign, like a pacemaker. My crusade is for people to know a lot more about it before they sign up." ·
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Notes both randomized and non-randomized results, with caution about interpretation.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the late 1940s, the steroid cortisone, an anti-inflammatory drug, was first synthesized and hailed as a landmark. It soon became a safe, reliable means to treat the pain and inflammation associated with sports injuries (as well as other conditions). Cortisone shots became one of the preferred treatments for overuse injuries of tendons, like tennis elbow or an aching Achilles, which had been notoriously resistant to treatment. The shots were quite effective, providing rapid relief of pain.

Then came the earliest clinical trials, including one, published in 1954, that raised incipient doubts about cortisone’s powers. In that early experiment, more than half the patients who received a cortisone shot for tennis elbow or other tendon pain suffered a relapse of the injury within six months.

But that cautionary experiment and others didn’t slow the ascent of cortisone (also known as corticosteroids). It had such a magical, immediate effect against pain. Today cortisone shots remain a standard, much-requested treatment for tennis elbow and other tendon problems.

But a major new review article, published last Friday in The Lancet, should revive and intensify the doubts about cortisone’s efficacy. The review examined the results of nearly four dozen randomized trials, which enrolled thousands of people with tendon injuries, particularly tennis elbow, but also shoulder and Achilles-tendon pain. The reviewers determined that, for most of those who suffered from tennis elbow, cortisone injections did, as promised, bring fast and significant pain relief, compared with doing nothing or following a regimen of physical therapy. The pain relief could last for weeks.

But when the patients were re-examined at 6 and 12 months, the results were substantially different. Over all, people who received cortisone shots had a much lower rate of full recovery than those who did nothing or who underwent physical therapy. They also had a 63 percent higher risk of relapse than people who adopted the time-honored wait-and-see approach. The evidence for cortisone as a treatment for other aching tendons, like sore shoulders and Achilles-tendon pain, was slight and conflicting, the review found. But in terms of tennis elbow, the shots seemed to actually be counterproductive. As Bill Vicenzino, the chairman of sports physiotherapy at the University of Queensland in Australia and senior author of the review, said in an e-mail response to questions, “There is a tendency” among tennis-elbow sufferers “for the majority (70-90 percent) of those following a wait-and-see policy to get better” after six months to a year. But this is not the case for those getting cortisone shots, he wrote; they “tend to lag behind significantly at those time frames.” In other words, in some way, the cortisone shots impede full recovery, and compared with those adopting a wait-and-see policy, those getting the shots “are worse off.” Those people receiving multiple injections may be at particularly high risk for continuing damage. In one study that the researchers reviewed, “an average of four injections resulted in a 57 percent worse outcome when compared to one injection,” Dr. Vicenzino said.

Why cortisone shots should slow the healing of tennis elbow is a good question. An even better one, though, is why they help in the first place. For many years it was widely believed that tendon-overuse injuries were caused by inflammation, said Dr. Karim Khan, a professor at the School of Human Kinetics at the University of British Columbia and the co-author of a commentary in The Lancet accompanying the new review article. The injuries were, as a group, given the name tendinitis, since the suffix “-itis” means inflammation. Cortisone is an anti-inflammatory medication. Using it against an inflammation injury was logical.

But in the decades since, numerous studies have shown, persuasively, that these overuse injuries do not involve inflammation. When animal or human tissues from these types of injuries are examined, they do not contain the usual biochemical markers of inflammation. Instead, the injury seems to be degenerative. The fibers within the tendons fray. Today the injuries usually are referred to as tendinopathies, or diseased tendons.

Why then does a cortisone shot, an anti-inflammatory, work in the short term in noninflammatory injuries, providing undeniable if ephemeral pain relief? The injections seem to have “an effect on the neural receptors” involved in creating the pain in the sore tendon, Dr. Khan said. “They change the pain biology in the short term.” But, he said, cortisone shots do “not heal the structural damage” underlying the pain. Instead, they actually “impede the structural healing.”

Still, relief of pain might be a sufficient reason to champion the injections, if the pain “were severe,” Dr. Khan said. “But it’s not.” The pain associated with tendinopathies tends to fall somewhere around a 7 or so on a 10-point scale of pain. “It’s not insignificant, but it’s not kidney stones.”

So the question of whether cortisone shots still make sense as a treatment for tendinopathies, especially tennis elbow, depends, Dr. Khan said, on how you choose “to balance short-term pain relief versus the likelihood” of longer-term negative outcomes. In other words, is reducing soreness now worth an increased risk of delayed healing and possible relapse within the year?

Some people, including physicians, may decide that the answer remains yes. There will always be a longing for a magical pill, the quick fix, especially when the other widely accepted and studied alternatives for treating sore tendons are to do nothing or, more onerous to some people, to rigorously exercise the sore joint during physical therapy. But if he were to dispense advice based on his findings and that of his colleagues’ systematic review, Dr. Vicenzino said, he would suggest that athletes with tennis elbow (and possibly other tendinopathies) think not just once or twice about the wisdom of cortisone shots but “three or four times.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 
The journalist seemed to have an excellent grasp of the evidence under discussion.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Using a simple device for eight hours a night to treat sleep apnea can help people with prediabetes improve their blood sugar levels and may reduce the risk of progressing to diabetes, according to a new study published online in the April 21, 2015, issue of the American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine.

About 57 million Americans have prediabetes, a disorder marked by blood sugar levels that are elevated but not sufficiently high to be considered diabetic. Prediabetics are at increased risk for developing diabetes, which can damage the eyes, kidneys, nerves and blood vessels and often leads to cardiovascular disease.

Many people with prediabetes also have untreated sleep apnea, although few of them are aware of it. The most widely accepted treatment for sleep apnea is continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), a device that blows a constant pressure of air into the lungs through a tube and face mask during the night. This helps people breathe better while they sleep by keeping the upper airway open.

"Our study showed that CPAP in patients with prediabetes can lower their risk of progressing to diabetes when CPAP is used for eight hours, a full night's sleep," said the study's lead author, Sushmita Pamidi, MD, a former fellow at the University of Chicago who is now on the faculty at McGill University in Montreal, Canada.

"Although eight hours of CPAP per night can be difficult to achieve in real-life, our results should provide a strong incentive for anyone with sleep apnea, especially prediabetic individuals, to improve adherence to their treatment for cardio-metabolic risk reduction," she said.

People with sleep apnea, which is common among overweight and obese individuals, have repeated episodes where their upper airway closes during sleep. This can disrupt sleep and temporarily lower oxygen levels. It has been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension and stroke, and may decrease their ability to regulate blood sugar levels. This increases the risk of diabetes.

For this study, the researchers recruited 39 middle-aged, overweight or obese volunteers with prediabetes and sleep apnea. Two-thirds of them (26) were randomly assigned to two weeks of CPAP treatment. The other 13 received a placebo -- a pill containing no medicine -- to be taken 30 minutes before bedtime. They were told the study would compare the two treatments.

All participants slept in the sleep laboratory and were closely monitored with all-night sleep recordings during the treatment period. Those assigned to CPAP wore the device for eight hours a night under continuous supervision by a technician. Before and after each treatment period, participants' glucose metabolism was assessed by oral and intravenous glucose-tolerance tests.

The researchers also measured the stress hormone noradrenaline in the blood and continuously monitored blood pressure for 24 hours at home. All participants were permitted to leave the laboratory during the day and engage in their routine activities.

After two weeks, blood sugar control, as measured by an oral glucose tolerance test, improved for those in the CPAP group compared to the oral placebo group. In addition, the ability of insulin to regulate their blood sugar, estimated by the intravenous glucose tolerance test, was improved in the CPAP group compared to the oral placebo group. The CPAP group had, on average, 27 percent lower levels of the stress hormone, norepinephrine, as well as lower blood pressure than the oral placebo group.

"Despite the demonstrated efficacy of lifestyle interventions and the availability of many drug treatments, the economic and public health burden of diabetes remains enormous," said Esra Tasali, MD, assistant professor of medicine at the University of Chicago and senior author of the study. "Assessment of sleep apnea should be considered in patients at high risk for diabetes and cardiovascular disease, since our study shows that treatment of sleep apnea can reduce these risks."

The National Institutes of Health, plus the Diabetes Research and Training Center and the Institute for Translational Medicine at the University of Chicago funded this study. Additional authors include Kristen Wroblewski, Magdalena Stepien, Khalid Sharif-Sidi, Jennifer Kilkus and Harry R. Whitmore from the University of Chicago.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of describing the study, addressing the overall number of participants (39), the number using CPAP (26), and those using placebo (13). The release also does a good job explaining the study’s methods and how it measured health effects in study participants. As noted above under Benefits, we thought the release failed to explain some important limitations to the research, but since we’ve already penalized the story for that shortcoming, we won’t do so again here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - People who eat lots of magnesium-rich foods such as leafy green vegetables, nuts and beans have fewer strokes, according to an international analysis covering some 250,000 people.

But the authors of the study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, stopped short of recommending people take a daily magnesium supplement because their analysis focused on magnesium in food — and it may be another aspect of the food that is responsible for their finding.

“Dietary magnesium intake is inversely associated with risk of stroke, specifically ischemic stroke,” wrote lead author Susanna Larsson, a professor at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden.

The results suggest that people eat a healthy diet with “magnesium-rich foods such as green leafy vegetables, nuts, beans and whole grains,” she added.

Larsson and her colleagues combed through research databases spanning the last 45 years to find studies that tracked how much magnesium people took and how many of them had a stroke over time.

In seven studies published in the past 14 years, about 250,000 people in the United States, Europe and Asia were followed for an average of 11.5 years. About 6,500 of them, or three percent, had a stroke in the time they were followed.

For every extra 100 milligrams of magnesium a person ate per day, their risk of an ischemic stroke — the most common kind, typically caused by a blood clot — fell by nine percent.

The median magnesium intake for U.S. citizens included in the analysis was 242 milligrams a day. The United States recommends that men and women over age 31 eat 420 and 320 milligrams of magnesium daily, respectively.

Most of the studies allowed the researchers to rule out other factors, such as family history.

But Larsson told Reuters Health in an email that she could not say whether other aspects of what the people ate partially or entirely explained the finding.

More in-depth studies are needed before researchers can say that the magnesium was what actually reduced the stroke risk, she added.

Other experts said the results were consistent with dietary recommendations.

“It’s a diet that’s rich in fruits, vegetables and grains. Those are things that have low sodium, high potassium and high magnesium,” said Larry Goldstein, director of the stroke center at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, North Carolina.

"It's again the diet per se, not any one individual component of the diet." SOURCE: bit.ly/AhalBY
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We appreciate how the story’s second sentence emphasized: “But the authors of the study, published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, stopped short of recommending people take a daily magnesium supplement because their analysis focused on magnesium in food — and it may be another aspect of the food that is responsible for their finding.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 2, 2013 (HealthDay News) -- An implanted device that monitors brain activity may offer a way to predict seizures in people with uncontrolled epilepsy, a small pilot study suggests.

The findings, reported online May 2 in the journal Lancet Neurology, are based on only 15 patients, and the device worked far better in some than others. But experts said the results are promising, and should prompt further studies.

"We just wanted to see if this is feasible, and this study shows that it is," said lead researcher Dr. Mark Cook, of the University of Melbourne and St. Vincent's Hospital in Australia.

The prospect of being able to predict seizures is "very exciting," he said, in part because it's the uncertainty of the disorder that can dim people's quality of life.

If people know a seizure is coming, Cook said, they can avoid driving or swimming that day, for example. They might also be able to adjust their medication use.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder in which the brain's normal electrical activity is temporarily disrupted, leading to a seizure. Seizures can be obvious, causing unconsciousness or convulsions, but often they trigger subtler changes in a person's perceptions or behavior -- like a short staring spell, confusion or an altered sense of taste or smell.

Epilepsy is usually managed with medication, but for 30 percent to 40 percent of people with the condition, drugs don't keep seizures at bay. The new study included 15 people who were having at least two to 12 "disabling" seizures a month that were resistant to drug therapy.

Cook's team implanted each patient with the experimental device, which consists of electrodes placed between the skull and the brain, plus wires that run to a unit implanted under the skin of the chest.

That unit wirelessly sends data to a hand-held device that flashes a red warning light if there is a "high likelihood" of an impending seizure. (A white light signals a "moderate" likelihood, while a blue light means the odds are low.)

For the first four months, the devices collected data on patients' seizures without actually flashing warnings. For 11 of the 15 patients, the implants seemed capable of correctly predicting a high risk of seizure at least 65 percent of the time. Those patients went on to the next four-month phase, where the devices were activated to give warnings.

Over those four months, the implants worked fairly well for eight patients -- correctly giving the high-risk warning anywhere from 56 percent to 100 percent of the time.

There are plenty of questions left, said Dr. Ashesh Mehta, director of epilepsy surgery at the North Shore-LIJ Comprehensive Epilepsy Care Center in Great Neck, N.Y.

"This study is an important first step," said Mehta, who was not involved in the research. "The next step would be to implant these in a larger sample of patients. And you need to see which groups of patients might be good candidates for this."

Mehta said someone who has seizures only once in a while might not get enough benefit to outweigh the downsides of false alarms, for example. And someone who has many seizures each month might get little added information from the warning system, he said.

It may be the people who fall in the middle -- who have disabling seizures at unpredictable intervals -- who would stand to benefit the most, he said.

But any benefits need to be weighed against the risks. Besides false alarms and unnecessary anxiety, the implant itself can cause problems. In this study, three patients had serious complications, including one with an infection and one whose chest device moved and caused her pain. Two patients ultimately had the implants removed.

Still, Mehta agreed that the technology could prove helpful to some people with epilepsy. If they know a seizure is coming, they might take an extra dose of their medication, for example.

An implanted device like this could also give patients and their doctors more information about their epilepsy, he added. In this study, the implants revealed that most patients were suffering more seizures than they thought; one patient who reported 11 a month was actually having more than 100.

In real life, Mehta said, it can be hard to know if you're feeling bad because of side effects from epilepsy medication or because you're having a lot of seizures. A device like this could help sort that out.

But what's still needed is evidence that this device does improve the quality of patients' lives, Mehta said.

The study was funded by NeuroVista, the Seattle-based company developing the technology. Several of Cook's co-researchers work for the company.

Learn more about epilepsy from the Epilepsy Foundation.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story quoted an independent expert saying “There are plenty of questions left” and then he detailed some of them.
The story also put “small pilot study” in the first sentence and “based on only 15 patients and the device worked far better in some than others” in the second sentence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Jan. 17, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Combining two drugs that target an aggressive type of breast cancer known as HER2-positive appears to work better than using either drug alone, researchers report.

The dual-drug approach greatly boosted the chances of eliminating microscopic signs of early cancer by the time a woman was due to have surgery, said researcher Dr. Jose Baselga, chief of hematology/oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School.

The study was published online Jan. 17 in The Lancet.

The two drugs are Tykerb (lapatinib) and Herceptin (trastuzumab). Using both together resulted in a 51 percent response, compared with a 30 percent response in women given Herceptin alone. Those given Tykerb alone had a 25 percent response.

"What we observed was a massive improvement in response," Baselga said.

GlaxoSmithKline, the maker of Tykerb, helped fund the study.

"Lapatinib was approved for advanced breast cancer in 2007," Baselga said. "The question we had was, what is the efficacy if we give it in early-stage breast cancer prior to surgery?"

Baselga and his colleagues conducted a trial treating 455 women from 23 countries. All had HER2-positive breast cancers. All had tumors larger than about three-fourths of an inch.

In HER2-positive breast cancer, test results are positive for a protein called human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, which promotes cancer cell growth.

In the study, 154 women got Tykerb, 149 Herceptin and the other 152 both drugs. All had the drug regimen before surgery, with Taxol (paclitaxel), a standard chemotherapy, added after six weeks. After 12 more weeks of treatment, the women had surgery.

At that point, researchers evaluated who had better responses. The women continued the treatments for one more year, allowing researchers to follow them and see how the approaches affected survival.

Baselga stressed that the study looked only at women with early-stage HER2-positive breast cancers, and that the drug Tykerb is approved now only for advanced breast cancers.

The study is well done and important, said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society. The two drugs, he said, "affect the same pathway but do it in a different way."

While the combination showed a better response rate, "there is also an increased level of side effects," he noted.

While no major heart problems occurred, those on Tykerb alone or the two-drug combination had more diarrhea. Liver-enzyme alterations were also more frequent when Tykerb was used.

GlaxoSmithKline notes that liver toxicity with the drug may be severe and that deaths have been reported, although the cause of the deaths has not been determined.

The important question, however, has not been answered yet, Lichtenfeld said. That's the effect on overall survival in using the two-drug approach. The researchers are continuing to evaluate that.

Cost is another consideration: Tykerb runs about $4,000 a month wholesale, and retail prices could be higher.

In another study, published online Jan. 17 in The Lancet Oncology, researchers from Germany reported that Tykerb is less beneficial than Herceptin as a single-drug therapy.

They assigned 620 women with HER2-positive breast cancer to get standard chemotherapy plus Herceptin or Tykerb.

They looked to see which drug was better at eliminating invasive cancer in the breast and metastatic cells in the lymph nodes. While 30 percent of those in the Herceptin group had this response, 23 percent of the Tykerb group did. The study was funded by drug makers GlaxoSmithKline, Roche and Sanofi-Aventis.

Baselga reports receiving honoraria from Roche; other co-authors report receiving speaking fees or honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline and fees from other drug companies.

To learn more about breast cancer, including HER2-positive cancers, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The quote from Lichtenfeld of the American Cancer Society is the only saving grace on this criterion:
The important question, however, has not been answered yet, Lichtenfeld said. That’s the effect on overall survival in using the two-drug approach. The researchers are continuing to evaluate that.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Dec. 5, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- If colon cancer screening was as easy as taking a breath, more people might do it. Now, a small pilot study suggests such a test could be developed.

The study, of 78 people with and without colon cancer, found that those with the disease tended to have a distinct pattern of chemicals in their breath. And when researchers analyzed the study participants' breath samples, they correctly identified the colon cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

The findings, reported online Dec. 5 in the British Journal of Surgery, sound good. But if you're waiting for your doctor to offer such a test, don't hold your breath.

"It's an interesting concept, but this is in the very early stages," said Dr. Durado Brooks, director of prostate and colorectal cancers for the American Cancer Society.

"There's no way to tell if this would work in the general population," said Brooks, who was not involved in the research.

What's more, he added, there are already several good ways to catch colon cancer -- or, even better, precancerous growths called polyps, which can then be removed before a tumor develops. Yet about 40 percent of Americans who should be getting screened are not.

"Colon cancer is a highly preventable disease," Brooks said. "And I would encourage the four out of 10 people who are not taking advantage of the existing screening tools to talk with their doctor."

The idea of using a breath test to catch cancer is not new: Researchers are looking into breath tests for detecting a number of cancers, including lung and breast tumors. It's all based on studies showing that breath samples from cancer patients tend to have a distinguishing pattern of so-called volatile organic compounds (VOCs).

When it comes to colon cancer, people already have several options for screening, which for most adults should begin at age 50 -- or possibly earlier if you are at higher-than-normal risk.

The choices include a yearly stool test that looks for hidden blood, or either of two invasive tests that scope the colon: sigmoidoscopy every five years, along with stool testing every three years; or colonoscopy every 10 years.

But many people are turned off by those tests.

So Dr. Donato Altomare and colleagues at the University Aldo Moro in Bari, Italy, decided to test the feasibility of a breath test.

Analyzing breath samples from 37 patients with colon cancer and 41 healthy middle-aged adults, the researchers found 15 VOCs that seemed to differ between the two groups.

They then used a statistical model to see if certain VOC patterns separated the colon cancer patients from the healthy participants. In the end, the researchers were able to correctly identify the cancer patients 76 percent of the time.

But, Brooks pointed out, that also means the breath test was wrong about one-quarter of the time.

There's no way of knowing how well such a screening test would work in the real world -- including how many people might wrongly get a positive result and undergo needless invasive tests to follow up, Brooks said.

Another big question, he added, is whether breath analysis could pinpoint people with colon polyps.

"One of our goals in screening is to detect polyps, not cancer," Brooks said. "This study doesn't address that."

Altomare's team acknowledges that there is a lot of work left to do. It's still unclear which breath chemicals should be measured, or what statistical method is best for weeding out cases of colon cancer.

Brooks said it would be nice to have a very simple, accurate screening test -- whether that means a breath test or blood or urine tests. Yearly stool tests are simple and cheap, but people often don't want to do them.

"We're always searching for simpler things to do," Brooks said. But for now, he added, "this study raises many more questions than answers."

Learn more about colon cancer from the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story sprinkled useful caveats throughout the coverage:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A popular dietary supplement called SAMe may help depressed patients who don’t respond to prescription antidepressant treatment, a new study shows.

SAMe stands for S-adenosyl methionine, a naturally occurring molecule that is widely used in Europe for depression, arthritis and other ailments. It is found throughout the human body, with high concentrations in the liver, adrenal glands and brain.

The latest research, conducted by investigators at Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, is important not only because it suggests another treatment option for patients with depression, but because it also offers news clues into the physical pathways of depression that could ultimately lead to more effective treatments.

“There are many directions in research that this opens up,” said Dr. George I. Papakostas, director of treatment resistant depression studies at Mass General and the study’s lead author. “It provides clues to new treatments, and it provides clues to understanding what causes depression as well as what goes on biochemically when people get better from depression.”

The researchers studied the use of SAMe or a placebo in 73 adults with depression who were not responding to prescription antidepressant treatment. All of the study subjects continued to take the prescription antidepressant, but 39 of them were randomly assigned to receive SAMe for six weeks. The remaining 34 patients received a placebo in addition to their regular prescription treatment.

After six weeks of treatment, 36 percent of the patients taking a combination of SAMe and an antidepressant showed improvement, compared to just 18 percent of those taking the antidepressant and placebo. And about 26 percent of patients in the SAMe group experienced a complete remission of symptoms, compared to just 12 percent in the placebo group, according to a report published in The American Journal of Psychiatry.

The research offers hope to patients who haven’t been helped by traditional antidepressant treatment. Studies suggest that for more than half of depressed patients, antidepressants alone don’t eliminate symptoms. As a result, doctors are looking for additional treatments to help these patients, referred to as “nonresponders.”

Modern antidepressants essentially work by building up concentrations of neurotransmitters, which amplifies their effect on the brain. It’s not clear exactly how SAMe works to curb depression, but researchers have several theories. SAMe may influence the expression of genes involved in depression or alter the function of different receptors and structures that transport neurotransmitters in the brain. The molecule also may be directly involved in the creation of neurotransmitters.

“Most antidepressants we use are acting on neurotransmitters in the brain,” said Dr. J. Craig Nelson, professor of psychiatry at the University of California, San Francisco, and author of an editorial accompanying the study. “It may be that SAMe is facilitating the synthesis of the neurotransmitters that the drugs then act on. That’s probably the best hypothesis.”

Other studies have suggested that SAMe can relieve symptoms of depression. A 2002 analysis of depression trials conducted by the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality found that SAMe use resulted in clinically meaningful benefits to depressed patients compared to placebo, and that the supplement worked as well as tricyclic antidepressants, a category of prescription drugs.

In his editorial, Dr. Nelson notes that SAMe is typically not covered by insurance companies, and that although the cost is relatively low, it is still more than the drug co-payments required by most health plans. A monthly supply of the same brand of supplement studied would be about $143, the editorial notes.

Dr. Nelson, who was not involved in the Harvard study, said the results need to be replicated in a larger study, and that more information is needed on dosing, side effects and long-term treatment with SAMe, among other things. Dr. Papakostas agrees the study “needs replication” but said he is hopeful about the potential for future research.

“It’s a huge advancement in terms of expanding the types of medications we have to treat depression,” Dr. Papakostas said. “In the last 60 years of depression research, all the treatments have focused on similar mechanisms of action. This is one of the first few studies that suggests a different mechanism. It’s a medication that works differently than everything else.”

The study was funded by a grant from the National Institutes of Mental Health, but the SAMe pills and placebo pills were provided by the dietary supplement maker Pharmavite. Dr. Papkostas, Dr. Nelson and other researchers involved in the study all disclosed several financial relationships with makers of prescription antidepressants.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The piece tells us about the number of subjects, randomization, placebo control, background therapy, length of treatment, and publication in a journal. We were furthermore told what needs to come: replication in a larger study and more research on dosing, side effects, and long-term treatment. For these reasons, we give it the benefit of the doubt on this criterion, but there were some areas for improvement.
There were some unmentioned limitations that make this study preliminary. One is that the study compared SAMe to placebo, not to any real-world treatment strategy used in people who don’t respond to antidepressants. It’s great that it showed promise, but the rosy picture will darken if the benefits prove worse than those of the adjunctive treatments we already use in nonresponders. Another limitation was that several groups of people were excluded from the trial, including those taking non-SSRIs antidepressants.
Ideally, the preliminary nature of this evidence should have been highlighted instead of glossed over. According to the researchers themselves, the study “aimed to provide preliminary evidence,” and the results “justify larger scale, adequately powered tests of efficacy as well as tolerability and safety (for instance, with respect to supine systolic blood pressure and weight change).” 
 Due to the vague way the 2002 AHRQ study was summarized, it leaves readers with questions about the novelty of the new evidence and its quality. (See our comments under Novelty.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It takes up to 15 years and $5 billion for a new drug to make it through testing and earn approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Before researchers try a compound on humans, it’s tested at labs in petri dishes and on animals, such as mice and monkeys. More often than not, these studies produce mixed data that don’t tell researchers much about whether it is safe and effective for humans.

For some time, scientists have been searching for ways to cut down on the cost and failure rate of drug testing. Researchers at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University have developed a beautiful solution: Organs-On-Chips.

The clear and flexible polymer microchips are lined with human cells. Each one represents a different human organ system, such as lungs, heart and intestines. The institute’s goal is to create 10 different organ systems that can be joined together by blood vessel channels to simulate human physiology on a microscale and provide a cheaper, more reliable way to test new drugs.

The sophisticated architecture of these organs-on-chips—which are about the size of a thumb drive—has also earned the Wyss Institute recognition in the art world with a Design of the Year award from the Design Museum and placement in the Museum of Modern Art’s permanent collection.

“The real power of this approach is that you have a window to the inner workings of life,” says Don Ingber, founding director of the Wyss Institute and a professor of Vascular Biology and of Bioengineering at Harvard University. “Anything you can ask at the molecular level, we could do in our chips.”

In 2008, the team built and tested its first “organoid” chip to mimic the mechanical function of human lungs. It contains tiny channels separated by a porous membrane to create two distinct, hollow passageways—one lined with human lung cells and the other with capillary blood vessel cells. Air is suctioned through the side channels to emulate breathing. Ingber and his team introduced bacteria into the chip’s lung channel and white blood cells into the capillary channel. They observed that the white blood cells permeated the membrane and attacked the bacteria in the lung cell channel—exactly what would happen in human lungs fighting off an infection.

In another experiment, the team at Wyss filled a chip’s lung cell channel with interleukin 2, a chemotherapy drug known to cause pulmonary edema, an accumulation of fluid in the lungs. When air entered the lung cell channel, the channel filled with fluid and then blood clots—exactly what happens in the lungs of patients who develop this life-threatening condition. This proved the chips could provide real world information to scientists studying the effects of new drug compounds.

The project has received support from the National Institutes of Health and the FDA. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency also recently awarded the institute a $37 million grant to create chips representing nearly all systems in the body. Ingber says some scientists are interested in using the chips to conduct research that would be unethical if performed on people, such as studying the effects of gamma radiation on the human body.

Of course, the chips have limitations. “We can’t mimic consciousness; we can’t mimic compression on a joint,” says Ingber.

Danilo Tagle, associate director for special initiatives at the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, a division of the NIH, is spearheading a similar organ-on-chip project. He suspects that in the beginning the chips will be used to “complement and supplement” animal studies, but will eventually become routine practice. The chips will also provide researchers with information on dosing at a much earlier stage in drug studies—particularly helpful because animals metabolize chemical substances at a different rate than humans. “You can go forward with a candidate drug with greater assurance and confidence that it will have the desired effect on humans,” says Tagle. “Biology is very complex.”

Incorporating the chips into drug testing could save millions of dollars and years of time on research. Some companies are already trying out the concept. Janssen Pharmaceuticals Company, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, is using a version of the chips to understand how blood clots in the lungs. The information is essential to reduce the risk for this side effect of oncology drugs.

Though there still aren’t enough data to prove the chips are reliable enough to put rodents out of a job, Ingber says it’s only a matter of time; they hope to have them tested and ready for market in two years. “The FDA has been very supportive,” he says. “They’ve told us if they are as good as animals that they would consider accepting data provided by a drug company from one of these models rather than an animal model.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: As noted above under “Benefits,” it’s not possible for these systems at present to replicate the dynamic processes of the human body, and the story doesn’t alert readers to that limitation. But we’ve already dinged the story for that concern, and the story does mention some other limitations, including that researchers can’t mimic consciousness or compression on a joint. It’s also clear from reading that this is still a technology that isn’t yet available or proven. The story does a reasonable job of describing what has been done so far and what needs to be done in the future. We’ll rate this Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
About 400,000 Americans have multiple sclerosis, and up until now, the only drugs offered to them to slow the course of the disease had to be injected or dripped into a vein. But soon, it seems, they will have an alternative to this painful regimen: drugs that can be taken by mouth.

Easier To Take, More Impact

This week's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine reports on two new drugs that can be taken orally to slow the progress of MS. The studies for these drugs, which are not yet on the market, were funded by the drug manufacturers.

Dr. John Richert, executive vice president of research and clinical programs at the National MS Society, says the introduction of these pills will mark a major improvement in the lives of MS patients.

"What we've had available the last 16, 17 years has made a big difference," Richert says, "and what we have coming onboard now, these are going to make even a larger difference. It's really an important advance."

The main benefit of the pills will be that they are easier to take. Richert believes this simpler option will encourage more people to seek treatment.

"People will be more prone to take them early, more prone to stay on the drugs," Richert says.

The new pills also appear to be more effective than most current drugs. In clinical tests they reduced the number of flare-ups by more than half. The drugs now on the market typically reduce flare-ups by only a third. Such relapses reflect underlying nerve damage, so reducing their number is an indicator that less damage is taking place.

Jeffrey Babin, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, was diagnosed with MS nearly seven years ago, when he was 39. He says the discovery shook his world.

"This is a very scary disease. And when you have an episode, it is one of the most life-changing and life-re-evaluating events," Babin says.

He has been free of MS relapses for several years now, an improvement that may be attributed to the drug Copaxone, one of a half-dozen drugs on the market now that can slow the course of MS.

Babin says he is grateful for the drug — but he has to go through the painful process of injecting it every day.

"Injections are no fun; nobody likes to inject themselves," Babin says. "In my case, I wouldn't say there are any major side effects, but I do get those painful welts at the injection sites."

Those painful welts are something he would happily do without — and the new pills could be the answer.

Dr. Peter Calabresi of Johns Hopkins University School of Medical is an author of one new study. He is excited about the new drugs, but cautious.

"It's extremely exciting. I'm happy to have a new choice, especially a pill," Calabresi says. "I think we also have to be careful and not use it too abruptly or too easily."

Calabresi says many people think of pills as safer than injections, but this may not be the case.

"In reality, these are extremely potent pills that have the potential to cause a variety of serious side effects," he says.

These dangers are nothing new — the MS drug Tysabri was pulled from the market after some patients came down with rare brain infections. It was later reintroduced with strict monitoring requirements.

In light of that experience, federal regulators may go slowly with the two new drugs, called fingolimod and cladribine.

When considering changes to his own medicinal regimen, Babin says he will go slowly too.

"In spite of the fact that I hate injections, I probably would not leap at the first pill that comes to market," he says. "You want to be careful to jump into something new and risk the side effects from something you haven't tried before."

Meanwhile, approval of another new oral MS drug may come soon. That drug, called fampridine, does not prevent the nerve damage of MS, but in about a third of patients, it improves their damaged nerves, so they can walk better.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The radio piece didn’t give much information on how the studies were done – and therefore, not much on the quality of the evidence. But the NPR online piece at least offered direct links to both studies and to an editorial – something often overlooked by many news organizations covering studies in journals.  For that reason, we give this a satisfactory grade. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AURORA, Colo. (Nov. 16, 2016) - Researchers at the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus have found that high doses of vitamin D reduce the incidence of acute respiratory illness (ARI) in older, long-term care residents.

The findings of the clinical trial, published today in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, could help reduce one of the leading causes of serious illness, debilitation and death among patients in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities.

"After studying these patients for a year, we found a 40 percent reduction in acute respiratory illness among those who took higher doses of vitamin D," said the study's lead author, Adit Ginde, MD, MPH, professor of emergency medicine at the University of Colorado School of Medicine. "Vitamin D can improve the immune system's ability to fight infections because it bolsters the first line of defense of the immune system."

Ginde said in older people that first line of defense is often impaired. But vitamin D can reinforce it and prevent illnesses like pneumonia, influenza and bronchitis.

It may also prevent infections and exacerbations of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) like emphysema.

At the same time, Ginde found that those who received higher doses of vitamin D also saw an increase in falls. The falls were lower in those given smaller doses rather than higher monthly doses of vitamin D.

The clinical trial, the first to examine vitamin D's impact on respiratory infections in nursing home residents, looked at 107 patients with an average age of 84 over a 12 month period. Of those, 55 received high doses of vitamin D or 100,000 units monthly (averaging 3,300-4,300 units daily). And 52 received lower doses averaging between 400-1,000 units daily. Those with higher doses saw ARIs cut nearly in half. They also had over double the incidence of falls, the study said.

"This finding requires a confirmatory trial, including whether high daily doses of vitamin D, rather than high monthly doses, makes patients less likely to fall," Ginde said.

But Ginde said the primary finding that vitamin D can reduce ARI is a major step forward in treating these dangerous infections.

"This is a potentially life-saving discovery," Ginde said. "There is very little in a doctor's arsenal to battle ARI, especially since most are viral infections where antibiotics don't work. But vitamin D seems able to potentially prevent these infections."

He cautioned that the study is not definitive proof that vitamin D can prevent ARI but it suggests that it can and at little risk to the patient.

"If our results are confirmed by a larger trial, high dose vitamin D, ideally using daily dosing to minimize fall risk, has the potential for substantial public health benefit through ARI prevention for the large and growing population of long term care residents," Ginde said.

The study co-authors include Patrick Blatchford, PhD, Keith Breese, MA, Lida Zarrabi, MPH, Sunny Linnebur, PharmD, Jeffrey Wallace, MD, MPH and Robert Schwartz, MD. All are from the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release describes the basic outlines of the year-long trial, and it notes that the findings were published in a journal. The release also clues readers in to limitations of the study. It cautions that “the study is not definitive proof that vitamin D can prevent ARI.” It also states that “This finding requires a confirmatory trial, including whether high daily doses of vitamin D, rather than high monthly doses, makes patients less likely to fall,” according to the lead author.
It’s worth noting that, according to the published study, less than 10 percent of the patients approached to take part in the study agreed to participate. This might suggest that the findings may apply to only a subset of nursing home patients.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Calcium in the arteries of the breast predicts early buildup of plaque in the heart's arteries, and may improve risk assessment in many women, especially young women

Routine mammography--widely recommended for breast cancer screening--may also be a useful tool to identify women at risk for heart disease, potentially allowing for earlier intervention, according to a study scheduled for presentation at the American College of Cardiology's 65th Annual Scientific Session.

Data from this study show for the first time a link between the amount of calcium in the arteries of the breast--readily visible on digital mammography--and the level of calcium buildup in the coronary arteries. Coronary arterial calcification, or CAC, is considered a very early sign of cardiovascular disease. Importantly, the presence of breast arterial calcification also appears to be an equivalent or stronger risk factor for CAC than other well-established cardiovascular risk factors such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure and diabetes. Earlier research had shown a link between breast arterial calcification and atherosclerotic disease--even heart attack, stroke and other cardiovascular disease events, but researchers said these data provide a more direct relationship between the extent of calcified plaque in the mammary and coronary arteries, as well as a comparison to standard risk evaluation.

"Many women, especially young women, don't know the health of their coronary arteries. Based on our data, if a mammogram shows breast arterial calcifications it can be a red flag--an 'aha' moment--that there is a strong possibility she also has plaque in her coronary arteries," said Harvey Hecht, M.D., professor at the Icahn School of Medicine and director of cardiovascular imaging at Mount Sinai St. Luke's hospital, and lead author of the study.

All told, 70 percent of the women who had evidence of breast arterial calcification on their mammogram were also found to have CAC as shown on a noncontrast CT scan of the chest. For women under 60 years of age with CAC, half also had breast arterial calcification--an important finding as very few would be thinking about or considered for early signs of heart disease. There were even fewer false positives among younger patients; researchers said that if a younger woman had breast arterial calcification, there was an 83 percent chance she also had CAC.

Notably, breast arterial calcification also appeared to be as strong a predictor for cardiovascular risk as standard risk scores such as the Framingham Risk Score, which underestimates women's risk, and the 2013 Cholesterol Guidelines Pooled Cohort Equations, which tends to overestimate risk, Hecht said. When researchers added 33 asymptomatic women with established CAD, breast arterial calcification was more powerful than both risk assessment formulas, which suggests the presence of subclinical atherosclerosis may be a more important indicator of heart disease than other risk factors.

"This information is available on every mammogram, with no additional cost or radiation exposure, and our research suggests breast arterial calcification is as good as the standard risk factor-based estimate for predicting risk," Hecht said. "Using this information would allow at-risk women to be referred for standard CAC scoring and to be able to start focusing on prevention--perhaps even taking a statin when it can make the most difference."

Multivariate analysis showed that early signs of a buildup of plaque in the coronary arteries were most strongly related to breast arterial calcification. While CAC was about two times as likely with advancing age or high blood pressure, it was three times more likely with breast arterial calcification.

"The message is if a woman is getting a mammogram, look for breast arterial calcification. It's a freebie and provides critical information that could be lifesaving for some women," Hecht said, adding he hopes these findings will prompt clinicians, who rarely report breast arterial calcification, to routinely report not just the presence or absence of breast arterial calcifications but also to estimate and note the amount.

"The more breast arterial calcification a women has, the more likely she is to have calcium in her heart's arteries as well. If all it requires is to take a closer look at the images, how can we ignore it?," he said.

A total of 292 women who had digital mammography and noncontrast CT scans within one year were included in the study. Of these, 124, or 42.5 percent, were found to have evidence of breast arterial calcification. Mammograms were reviewed by a second radiologist who was blinded to the CAC results. Women with breast arterial calcification were more likely to be older, have high blood pressure and chronic kidney disease, and less likely smokers. Women with established cardiovascular diseases were excluded. Breast arterial calcification was evaluated on a scale from zero to 12 by increasing severity, and CAC was measured on the CT using a validated 0-12 severity score. The overall accuracy of breast arterial calcification for the presence of CAC was 70 percent, and 63 percent of those with CAC also had breast arterial calcification.

To date, there is no consensus on using CAC as a screening test, though a very large outcome study of 39,000 subjects is underway in the Netherlands. Mammography, however, is widely used and accepted and, as Hecht said, may provide an opportunity to risk stratify asymptomatic women by breast arterial calcification who might have calcium in the coronary arteries and ordinarily would not have been readily considered for cardiovascular screening.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death among women, yet breast cancer is often the most feared.

Roughly 37 million mammograms are performed annually in the U.S. Mammography is recommended annually for women over 40 years of age by the American Cancer Society and every other year for women 50-75 years old and women at high risk for breast cancer by the U.S. Preventive Service Task Force. Digital mammography is more sensitive to the presence of calcifications and is now available in 96 percent of mammography units in the U.S.

Another intriguing point that deserves additional study, according to the researchers, is that the nature of the atherosclerosis is different in breast arterial calcification and CAC, making it unclear why one should be related to the other.

Hecht stresses that these findings warrant further evaluation and validation in larger studies. Future prospective trials are needed to see what the prognostic significance of breast arterial calcification might be. Because the study involved women who received both mammography and CT scan for clinical indications, these women may have been more likely than the average woman to have coexisting conditions, although Hecht said these were unrelated to heart disease.

This study is being published simultaneously online in JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging.

In an accompanying editorial in JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging, Khurram Nasir, M.D., M.P.H., and John McEvoy, from the Center for Healthcare Advancement and Outcomes at Baptist Health South Florida, said that the report provides impetus to document breast arterial calcification in mammography reports, to improve education of primary care and radiology providers on the link with heart disease, and other actions to establish best practices for incorporating this research into care.

"Even by the conservative estimate of 10 percent, approximately 4 million women nationwide undergoing screening mammography will exhibit breast arterial calcification; with 2 to 3 million of them likely to have signs of premature coronary atherosclerotic disease," the authors said. "Whether the best use of breast arterial calcification is to trigger additional testing or to directly inform preventive treatment decisions, either by flagging high-risk women to their providers or by reclassifying traditional (heart disease) risk estimates, is worth further discussion."

The study was funded, in part, by the Flight Attendants Medical Research Institute.

The study, "Digital Mammography: Screening for Coronary Artery Disease?," will be presented on April 3, 2016, at 9:45 a.m. CT/10:45 a.m. ET/3:45 p.m. UTC at the American College of Cardiology's 65th Annual Scientific Session in Chicago. The meeting runs April 2-4.

The ACC's Annual Scientific Session, which in 2016 will be April 2-4 in Chicago, brings together cardiologists and cardiovascular specialists from around the world to share the newest discoveries in treatment and prevention. Follow @ACCMediaCenter and #ACC16 for the latest news from the meeting.

The American College of Cardiology is a 52,000-member medical society that is the professional home for the entire cardiovascular care team. The mission of the College is to transform cardiovascular care and to improve heart health. The ACC leads in the formation of health policy, standards and guidelines. The College operates national registries to measure and improve care, offers cardiovascular accreditation to hospitals and institutions, provides professional medical education, disseminates cardiovascular research and bestows credentials upon cardiovascular specialists who meet stringent qualifications.

Laurie Margolies, M.D., associate professor of radiology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and co-author of the study will be available to the media in an embargoed web briefing on Tuesday, March 22, 2016, at 2 p.m. ET/1 p.m. CT/6 p.m. UTC. Eligible media should contact Shealy Molpus, smolpus@acc.org, to receive access to the briefing.

Hecht will present the study, "Digital Mammography: Screening for Coronary Artery Disease?," on Sunday, April 3, 2016, at 9:45 a.m. CT/10:45 a.m. ET/3:45 p.m. UTC in Poster Area, South Hall A1.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: A fairly good description of the study protocol is provided. The volunteer group included 292 women who had undergone digital mammography or CT scans within the past year. The group only included women with no previously known heart disease. The mammograms of the 124 women who were found to have BAC were sent to a second radiologist who was blinded to the BAC results. BAC was rated on a severity score of 0-12, with 12 being the most severe. The researchers found CAC present in 70 percent in the group of 124, while 63 percent of those with CAC also had BAC.
There is also reasonable attention to limitations. A quoted researcher says, for example, “Future prospective trials are needed to see what the prognostic significance of breast arterial calcification might be. Because the study involved women who received both mammography and CT scan for clinical indications, these women may have been more likely than the average woman to have coexisting conditions.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, July 19, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- It's still very early, but scientists say a test based on a patient's saliva might someday help detect Alzheimer's disease.

"Saliva is easily obtained, safe and affordable, and has promising potential for predicting and tracking cognitive decline, but we're in the very early stages of this work and much more research is needed," study author Shraddha Sapkota, a neuroscience graduate student at the University of Alberta in Canada, said in a news release from the Alzheimer's Association.

The study was to be presented Sunday at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference in Washington, D.C. Experts note that studies presented at medical meetings are typically considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

In the study, Sapkota's team tested the saliva of 22 people with Alzheimer's disease, 25 people with what's known as mild cognitive impairment (a decline in memory and thinking that's sometimes a precursor to dementia), as well as 35 people whose mental skills were normal for their age.

They found that the saliva of people with Alzheimer's had different levels of certain substances compared to the saliva of healthy people or those with mild cognitive impairment.

Experts agreed that the findings held promise, but much more research will be needed.

"This is a very preliminary study with a small number of subjects and the results are far from conclusive," said Dr. Allison Reiss, head of the Inflammation Section at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y.

She believes the current study lacks information on possible confounding factors -- things such as "coexisting illnesses, medications, hydration state, tobacco use and multiple other variables" that could influence what's found in the saliva samples.

"There are many gaps in the evidence," Reiss said. "It is uncertain whether the strength and consistency of the relationship between these metabolites [in saliva] and Alzheimer's risk will be maintained in a large multicenter study."

Still, Dr. Paul Wright, chair of neurology at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., said the research "is still in its infancy but very promising."

If a saliva test lives up to its promise, one advantage is "the ease of obtaining a sample," he said.

But that convenience also brings its own problems, Wright added. People might ask for a test even when they don't show any signs of dementia, and "this may result in anxiety and depression if there is a false positive result," he said.

For that reason, "larger studies are needed to corroborate and validate their findings," Wright said.

The U.S. National Institute on Aging has more about Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a very nice job pointing to potential weaknesses in the study: ” . . . the current study lacks information on possible confounding factors — things such as ‘coexisting illnesses, medications, hydration state, tobacco use and multiple other variables’ that could influence what’s found in the saliva samples.”  A second source says, “There are many gaps in the evidence. It is uncertain whether the strength and consistency of the relationship between these metabolites [in saliva] and Alzheimer’s risk will be maintained in a large multicenter study.”  These caveats come half-way through the story and are substantive enough to meet our standard.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Monitoring high-risk pregnancies with ultrasound tests may help prevent some fetal and newborn deaths, a new research review finds.

The review assessed a technology called Doppler ultrasound, which measures blood flow through the umbilical cord. Abnormal findings indicate that the fetus may be under stress.

Doppler ultrasound, done in the third trimester, is an established way to monitor high-risk pregnancies — those complicated by problems like poor fetal growth or health conditions in the mother, such as high blood pressure and heart and kidney diseases.

Still, the benefits of such monitoring had not been entirely clear. There have been concerns that abnormal findings on Doppler ultrasound may prompt doctors to sometimes unnecessarily intervene — by, for instance, performing a cesarean section.

But in the new review, researchers found that across 16 studies of more than 10,000 high-risk pregnancies, Doppler ultrasound testing was linked to a 29 percent reduction in fetal and newborn deaths.

Among women who did not receive ultrasound monitoring, 1.7 percent suffered a fetal or newborn death, versus 1.2 percent of women who underwent ultrasound.

The benefit seemed to stem from better decisions on C-sections and inductions of labor, according to the researchers, led by Dr. Zarko Alfirevic of the University of Liverpool in the UK.

He and his colleagues report their review findings in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, which is published by the Cochrane Collaboration, an international research organization that evaluates medical studies.

In an interview, Alfirevic said that the evidence supports using Doppler in high-risk pregnancies where the mother has high blood pressure or the fetus is abnormally small. In these cases, the fetus may not be getting enough nutrients and oxygen through the placenta.

“These women really should have a Doppler investigation of the umbilical artery,” Alfirevic said. Typically, high-risk women would receive other types prenatal testing as well, such as electronic fetal-heart monitoring.

“We’re just saying this (Doppler ultrasound) should be part of it,” Alfirevic said.

In practice, Doppler ultrasound may also be recommended for women who have diabetes or are having a prolonged pregnancy (beyond 42 weeks). But there is not yet strong evidence that these women benefit, Alfirevic said.

In general, he and his colleagues found, the trials included in the review, which were mainly done in the 1990s, had their shortcomings. Some had flaws in their design, while in other cases the researchers failed to provide details on key elements of the study design.

However, with Doppler an established technique for monitoring high-risk pregnancies, Alfirevic said it is very unlikely that any future studies will test Doppler against no Doppler — as most studies in this review did.

Research, according to Alfirevic, has moved on to other questions, including how to best manage abnormal findings from a Doppler scan.

In some cases, early delivery may be the best course, but it is unclear whether other options — such as bed rest or tighter blood pressure control in a woman with high blood pressure — are effective.

Another question, Alfirevic said, is whether ultrasounds of blood vessels other than the umbilical artery might improve pregnancy outcomes.

One thing that is clear, the researcher stressed, is that Doppler ultrasound is not necessary for women with average, healthy pregnancies.

“There is no evidence to suggest that it should be done in low-risk women,” Alfirevic said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story explains that this report is a review of other studies. It also points out some shortcomings in the underlying studies. The story also includes a comment from one of the study authors that since the technique is established in current practice it is unlikely that there will be future studies of the use of the technology in high-risk pregnancies.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The majority of smokers who successfully switch to vaping say they have fewer respiratory infections, according to a study led by Queen Mary University of London

The majority of smokers who successfully switch to vaping say they have fewer respiratory infections, according to a study led by Queen Mary University of London (QMUL).

The on-line survey of 941 respondents assessed subjective changes in respiratory symptoms in smokers who switched to vaping for at least two months. The results, published in the Journal of Addiction Research & Therapy, show that 66 per cent of respondents reported an improvement in respiratory symptoms, 29 per cent reported no change and 5 per cent reported worsening.

Senior author Professor Peter Hajek from QMUL said: "There is no doubt that e-cigarettes are much safer than conventional cigarettes, but smokers are still led to believe that they're dangerous. This misinformation includes a misreported study on rats that claimed that vaping may increase vulnerability to infections. These new findings from human vapers show that this is not the case.

"The study needs to be interpreted with caution because it is based on self-reported data, and further studies using objective measures are needed. However, the present results provide sufficient information to suggest that vaping does not increase infection rates and may in fact lead to a decrease in infections."

Some previous cell and animal studies have been interpreted as suggesting that vaping may increase vulnerability to infection, but these studies did not use realistic exposure levels. Human trials have reported no significant adverse respiratory effects associated with e-cigarette use for up to 1.5 years and a follow-up study of smokers with asthma who switched to vaping found significant improvements.

The researchers say that it is not surprising that the survey respondents noticed improvements in their respiratory health. This is because smoking increases susceptibility to respiratory infections and stopping smoking can be expected to have a positive effect. In addition to this, vaping may also provide some antimicrobial protection through the e-liquid ingredient propylene glycol, though further evidence is needed to confirm this.

The main limitation of the study is that the reports are subjective. Future studies should assess respiratory symptoms objectively and on unselected samples of vapers. Despite the limitations, the researchers say that the study provides a reasonable reassurance that vaping does not promote respiratory infections and may in fact reduce them.

For more information, please contact: 

Joel Winston 

Public Relations Manager (School of Medicine and Dentistry) 

Queen Mary University of London 

j.winston@qmul.ac.uk 

Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 7943 / +44 (0)7970 096 188

* Research paper: 'Changes in the Frequency of Airway Infections in Smokers who Switched to Vaping: Results of an Online Survey'. Joanna Astrid Miler, Bernhard-Michael Mayer and Peter Hajek. Journal of Addiction Research & Therapy 2016. DOI: 10.4172/2155-6105.1000290 

http://www.

Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) is one of the UK's leading universities, and one of the largest institutions in the University of London, with 20,260 students from more than 150 countries.

A member of the Russell Group, we work across the humanities and social sciences, medicine and dentistry, and science and engineering, with inspirational teaching directly informed by our research - in the most recent national assessment of the quality of research, we were placed ninth in the UK (REF 2014).

We also offer something no other university can: a stunning self-contained residential campus in London's East End. As well as our home at Mile End, we have campuses at Whitechapel, Charterhouse Square and West Smithfield dedicated to the study of medicine, and a base for legal studies at Lincoln's Inn Fields.

We have a rich history in London with roots in Europe's first public hospital, St Barts; England's first medical school, The London; one of the first colleges to provide higher education to women, Westfield College; and the Victorian philanthropic project, the People's Palace based at Mile End.

QMUL has an annual turnover of £350m, a research income worth £100m, and generates employment and output worth £700m to the UK economy each year.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release does some things right. It stresses in the fifth paragraph that the study “needs to be interpreted with caution because it is based on self-reported data, and further studies using objective measures are needed.”
But more detail should have been provided. For one thing, the news release should have explained that the survey was posted in two large online German vape forums. Responses were invited from e-cigarette users who had stopped smoking or reduced smoking by at least 95%.
The news release does not mention that it’s possible some vapers “were trying to portray vaping in a positive light to counteract the general anti-vaping ethos of public health and media coverage,” according to the published report. The report says it’s possible some respondents reported improvements in infection resistance “even when the actual change was small or none.” Another potential problem cited in the study and left out of the news release is that people who experienced adverse effects from e-cigarettes and stopped using them would have been left out of the survey.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Fat was the food villain these past few decades but sugar is quickly muscling in to take its place. As rates of sugar-related disorders such as diabetes, obesity and heart disease climb, many experts believe that when Americans rid themselves of fat, they simply replaced it with sugar in all its forms.

But that the rise of the chronic diseases was actually linked to higher sugar consumption is a challenge. Dr. Robert Lustig, from the department of pediatrics at the University of California, San Francisco, who has made a name for himself publishing books and research addressing the question of sugar’s effects on the body, wanted clearer answers. Now, in a paper published Tuesday, he and his colleagues believe they have come up with the definitive evidence that sugar, as Lustig says, “is toxic.”

In most lab studies, the doses of sugar that scientists test are quite high; they want to see what the effect is quickly and, depending on the research, they may not have time to wait to study the more gradual effects that might emerge. And in studies where people reduce the amount of sugar they eat, for instance, those people end up eating fewer calories overall, so it’s difficult to know whether any changes are due to the removal of sugar or to the drop in calories.

Lustig and his colleagues think they’ve produced the “hard and fast data that sugar is toxic irrespective of its calories and irrespective of weight.”

MORE: FDA Wants Nutrition Labels to Include More Detail on Added Sugars

Lustig’s confidence comes from the unique study, described in , of 43 Hispanic or African-American children aged eight to 18 years old. He collected detailed food questionnaires from each of the adolescents to get an idea of the average amount of calories they ate per day, then designed a special menu for each of them for nine days that matched the total numbers of calories they would normally eat. The only difference in the nine-day diet was that most of the sugar the children ate was replaced by starch — the overall number of calories remained the same. The children weighed themselves daily, and if they were losing weight, they were told to eat more of the provided food in order to keep their weight the same throughout the study.

“Everything got better,” says Lustig. Some of the children went from being insulin resistant, a precursor state to developing diabetes, in which the body’s insulin levels can no longer keep up with the pace of breaking down sugar that’s coming in from the diet, to insulin sensitive.

MORE: Artificial Sweeteners Aren’t the Answer to Obesity: Here’s Why

“We took chicken teriyaki out, and put turkey hot dogs in. We took sweetened yogurt out, and put baked potato chips in. We took pastries out and put bagels in,” says Lustig. “So there was no change in [the children’s] weight and no change in calories.”

After nine days of having their total dietary sugar reduced to 10% of their daily calories, however, they showed improvements in all of these measures. Overall, their fasting blood sugar levels dropped by 53%, along with the amount of insulin their bodies produced since insulin is normally needed to break down carbohydrates and sugars. Their triglyceride and LDL levels also declined and, most importantly, they showed less fat in their liver.

MORE: 7 Amazing Things That Happen to Your Body When You Give Up Soda

Because some of the children lost weight, to convince themselves that the effects weren’t due to the small amount of weight that some of the children lost, Lustig and his team compared those who lost weight to those who didn’t during the study, and found similar improvements in both groups.

“Up until now, there have been a lot of correlation studies linking sugar and metabolic syndrome,” says Lustig. “This is causation.”

The diet he provided the children isn’t considered ideal from a health perspective — starches are still a considerable source of calories and can contribute to weight gain. But Lustig relied on the starches to prove a point in a scientific study — that the effect sugar has on the body goes beyond anything connected to its calories and to weight. “I’m not suggesting in any way, shape or form that we gave them healthy food,” he says. “We gave them crappy food, shitty food, processed food — and they still got better. Imagine how much even better they would have gotten if we didn’t substitute and took the sugar out. Then they would have gotten even better yet. That’s the point.”

MORE: The Trouble With Sugar Free Kids

Not everyone is convinced that the results definitely prove sugar, and not weight loss, is the culprit, however. Susan Roberts, professor of Nutrition, USDA Nutrition Center at Tufts University notes that because some of the children lost weight, it’s still possible that shedding the pounds helped their metabolic measures to improve. She also points out that the children self-reported their initial diet, which can often be inaccurate. “We know that a healthy diet and weight loss cause good metabolic changes, and although this study tries to attribute its effects to low fructose, in fact it is impossible to do that because of the study design.”

Some experts are concerned for other reasons. They’re worried that the findings may shift attention away from what they consider to be the more fundamental issue — that overall, we’re eating too much. “Too much calorie intake is still the biggest problem,” says Dr. Mark Corkins, professor of pediatrics at University of Tennessee Health Science Center and member of the American Academy of Pediatrics committee on nutrition. He notes that the study involved children who were obese already and consuming too many calories. “It’s an important study, and the facts coming out of it are very important. It means we need to look at sugars, and at the type of sugars and sugar intake. But I worry that people are going to hang everything on this when we still need to reduce consumption.”

Lustig hopes that won’t happen as more data emerges that details how sugar is altering the body in unhealthy ways outside of its caloric contribution. That wasn’t the subject of the current paper, but he promises follow up studies based on this work that will address that. This study does hint however, at what might be happening. While there has been a lot of attention on the presence of belly fat and its connection to metabolic syndrome, the fact that the children saw improvements in the amount of fat in their liver suggests that might be an important way that sugar is contributing to chronic disease. Obese children and those with diabetes often suffer from fatty liver, a condition normally associated with alcohol abuse but increasingly common among non-drinkers who gain excessive amounts of weight.

This new view of sugar could change the advice that doctors and government health officials give about eating the sweet stuff. Lustig’s hope is that the information is considered as the U.S. Department of Agriculture finalizes its latest Dietary Guidelines, expected by the end of the year, which delineate recommendations for what, and how much of different types of foods and nutrients Americans should eat.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a fine job of explaining how the study was done and why the evidence it provides is meaningful. It explains that compared with previous research, which was observational in nature and couldn’t prove cause and effect, the new study suggests that cutting out sugar may be causing the beneficial metabolic changes observed. We do have a problem with the story’s framing, however, which frontloads discussion about how important the findings are, while burying discussion of limitations far down in the text. Experts point out some problems with the study, but we think the story could have gone further — explaining for example that the study was small and time-limited and that it had no control group. Though the story feels slightly unbalanced, we’ll acknowledge that it did make an attempt to critically evaluate the findings — hence the Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a remarkably rapid translation of laboratory research findings into a treatment with the potential to benefit patients, UC San Francisco scientists have successfully completed a Phase II clinical trial showing that an FDA-approved antihistamine restores nervous system function in patients with chronic multiple sclerosis (MS).

In light of previous laboratory studies of the antihistamine compound at UCSF, the researchers said, the drug most likely exerted its effect by repairing damage MS had inflicted on myelin, an insulating membrane that speeds transmission of electrical signals in the nervous system.

The drug tested in the trial, clemastine fumarate, was first identified as a candidate treatment for MS in 2013 by UCSF's Jonah R. Chan, PhD, Debbie and Andy Rachleff Distinguished Professor of Neurology, vice chief of the Division of Neuroinflammation and Glial Biology, and senior author of the new study. First approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1977 for allergies, the drug has been available over the counter in generic form since 1993.

The researchers said that the Phase II results, published online on 10 October, 2017 in The Lancet, are the first in which a drug has been shown to reliably restore any brain function damaged by a neurological disease in human patients.

"To the best of our knowledge this is the first time a therapy has been able to reverse deficits caused by MS. It's not a cure, but it's a first step towards restoring brain function to the millions who are affected by this chronic, debilitating disease," said the trial's principal investigator, Ari Green, MD, also Debbie and Andy Rachleff Distinguished Professor of Neurology, chief of the Division of Neuroinflammation and Glial Biology, and medical director of the UCSF Multiple Sclerosis and Neuroinflammation Center.

Chan and Green are co-directors of the UCSF Small-Molecule Program for Remyelination, and both are members of the UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences.

The new results are particularly notable, Chan said, because patients in the trial had suffered from MS symptoms caused by injury to myelin for years. "People thought we were absolutely crazy to launch this trial, because they thought that only in newly diagnosed cases could a drug like this be effective -- intuitively, if myelin damage is new, the chance of repair is strong. In the patients in our trial the disease had gone on for years, but we still saw strong evidence of repair."

MS is an autoimmune neurodegenerative disorder that affects nearly 2.5 million people worldwide. The disease strikes when the immune system attacks myelin, layers of fatty insulating membrane that surround nerve fibers. Unlike the rubber insulation around wires, however, myelin helps electrical signals in neurons move faster and more efficiently. As myelin damage continues over the course of the disease, neurons progressively lose their ability to reliably transmit electrical signals, resulting in progressive loss of vision, weakness, walking difficulties, and problems with coordination and balance.

Current MS treatments aim to prevent the immune system from doing further harm, but none have been shown to repair damaged myelin. In both his 2013 research and in subsequent studies with a mouse model of MS, however, Chan and colleagues had demonstrated that clemastine fumarate promotes myelin regeneration and restores neural function, promising preclinical results that inspired the new study, known as the ReBUILD trial.

Because the visual system is often one of the first and most prominent parts of the brain to be affected in MS, and because there are well-established tools to measure the speed of neural transmission in the areas of the brain devoted to vision, the research team used a method known as visual evoked potentials, or VEPs, to assess clemastine's therapeutic effects in the trial.

The five-month Phase II trial enrolled 50 patients with relapsing but generally long-standing MS whose VEPs reflected preexisting deficits in neural transmission. The researchers showed flickering patterns on a screen to participants, and used electrodes placed over the brain's visual areas at the back of the head to gauge how long it took for the flickering signal presented to the eye to generate an electrical response that could be detected by the electrodes. The time from presentation of the pattern to the detection of the VEP is a measurement of how long it took for the signal to travel via nerve fibers from the retina, at the back of the eye, to the visual areas at the back of the brain.

To enhance the power of their study, the researchers used a "crossover" design: they divided the patient population in two and gave the drug, blinded to both participant and researcher, to one group, and a placebo to the other for 90 days; then they switched between the two groups, giving a placebo to the first group and the drug to the other for the next 60 days. This "flip-flop" technique gave the researchers the ability to compare patients to themselves -- a form of control that increased the statistical power of the study by nearly an order of magnitude, Green said.

During the periods when each group was taking the drug, the neural signal from the eye to the back of the brain was significantly accelerated over the baseline measurements taken before the patients began the study. The effect persisted in the group that had switched to placebo, suggesting that durable repair of myelin had been induced by the drug.

Although the research team could not directly observe evidence of rebuilding of myelin in trial participants using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), Chan and Green said that this reflects a weakness of current MRI techniques as a tool for this purpose rather than evidence that myelin regeneration did not take place. "We still don't have imaging methods that have been proven to be able to detect remyelination in humans," said Chan.

That myelin increases the speed of neural transmission is one of the most well-established concepts in neurobiology, and combined with the clear evidence from Chan's preclinical research showing that clemastine fumarate promotes myelin formation, myelin regeneration is the only plausible explanation for the VEP results, the authors said.

"This is the first step in a long process," Green said. "By no means do we want to suggest that this is a cure-all. We want to ground-truth myelination metrics -- we're designing the crucible that's going to be used to test any future method for detecting remyelination."

The work was funded through generous support from the Rachleff Family.

In addition to Green and Chan, authors (all at UCSF) include Jeffrey M Gelfand, MD, MAS; Bruce A Cree, MD, PhD, MAS; Carolyn Bevan, MD; W. John Boscardin, PhD; Feng Mei, PhD; Justin Inman; Sam Arnow; Michael Devereux; Aya Abounasr; Hiroko Nobuta, PhD; Alyssa Zhu; Matt Friessen, PhD; Roy Gerona, PhD; Hans Christian von Büdingen, MD, PhD; Roland G Henry, PhD; and Stephen L Hauser, MD.

UC San Francisco (UCSF) is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care. It includes top-ranked graduate schools of dentistry, medicine, nursing and pharmacy; a graduate division with nationally renowned programs in basic, biomedical, translational and population sciences; and a preeminent biomedical research enterprise. It also includes UCSF Health, which comprises three top-ranked hospitals, UCSF Medical Center and UCSF Benioff Children's Hospitals in San Francisco and Oakland, and other partner and affiliated hospitals and healthcare providers throughout the Bay Area.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release does an excellent job laying out the basics of the trial, providing an easy-to-understand, thorough description of the study design. This five-month phase II trial enrolled 50 patients with relapsing, long-standing MS, whose histories also revealed deficits in neural transmission. One group was given clemastine for 90 days, while the other took a corn starch placebo. Then the groups were switched for the next 60 days, with the first group taking placebo with the other undergoing clemastine drug therapy.
Researchers measured how quickly it took for visual signals to travel from patients’ eyes to the back of their brains. While there was improvement in speed of transmission, how would that translate to improved outcomes for patients? What should have been made more clear was that no clinical benefits were seen that improved patients’ day-to-day lives.
The news release does address the inability to observe the regeneration of myelin using magnetic resonance imaging (also called MRI) scans. Researchers chalked this up to the inadequate imaging methods currently in place.
We rate this Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Of course, Hologic has done some selling of its own. The firm, which markets itself as “The Women’s Health Company,” makes other products, including a 2-D digital mammography machine, a test that assesses risk of preterm labor, gynecological products, including Adiana (a permanent contraception technique), and widely used equipment that measures bone density. But 3-D mammography could become its flagship, because for the moment it owns the entire market – although other companies, including powerhouse GE, are developing their own 3-D machines, Hologic is the only one with FDA approval thus far. Of course, given the sluggish economy and the continuing state of uncertainty around American health care, persuading hospitals to upgrade may be challenging. So perhaps it’s not surprising that the company’s PowerPoint presentation to the FDA included the unsubtle phrase “huge breakthrough,” or that the first American patient to undergo 3-D mammography – Laura Lang, a polished 55-year-old Boston marketing executive and breast cancer survivor – did so in front of a CBS camera crew last February.

Indeed they do. They’re catching on like – well, it’s not a slow burn. The device earned Food and Drug Administration approval on February 11, and for a short time it was available only at MGH. Now it is available in at least nine states, three of which have multiple sites, and most of the several dozen hospitals around the United States that assisted with clinical trials are planning to buy systems, too. The images aren’t the only selling point. The early data are compelling as well. In studies presented to the FDA, radiologists reported a 7 percent improvement in their ability to distinguish cancerous from noncancerous cases when they used the new system. If that sounds unimpressive, consider that 39 million women are screened each year; any significant reduction in callbacks for additional testing would mean hundreds of thousands of women would be spared painful, and expensive, follow-up.

Dr. Elizabeth Rafferty is trying not to lapse into rhapsodic cliches. “I don’t want to call it a magic bullet, because that would oversell,” she says. “It’s not a panacea.” Then, five minutes later: “I don’t want to say it’s catching on like wildfire.” After a few minutes more, though, Rafferty can’t help herself. She lets her enthusiasm loose. “People have been waiting for it for a long time,” she says. “It’s a step, but it’s a step by a person who has a stride of 7 feet.” “It” is a 3-D mammography machine, the Selenia Dimensions system, one of which sits in the breast imaging clinic at Massachusetts General Hospital that Rafferty, a radiologist, runs. The machine, which is made by the Bedford company Hologic and developed partly at MGH under Rafferty’s supervision, produces images that are so vivid and clear they seem to speak out loud: “Hey, right here! This is a tumor!” If you look at enough of them, you may become convinced that you don’t need medical training to spot a case of breast cancer or distinguish a false positive on a mammogram from a true one. The distinction seems that clear. “If you can tell the difference as a non-radiologist, imagine how a radiologist feels,” says Rafferty. “The images sort of sell themselves.”

Much of the criticism focused on the data the task force had used to make its decision, which consisted largely of the results from prospective, randomized clinical trials conducted in the United States. Trials like this are the gold standard of medical evidence. They are also expensive and time-consuming, and thus hard to come by. The most recent such trial looking at mammography and mortality in the United States was published in the 1980s. “A lot of the people on the task force are my friends, and I have tremendous respect for them, but this was a big point where we differed,” says Brawley. “The standard type of mammography that’s used all over the country today may very well be better than what was used in that trial. So the outcomes may be better, too.” The studies the task force had chosen to examine showed that screening beginning at age 40 had little impact on mortality while at the same time generating a significant number of false positives. Those data were complete and comprehensive. But, says Brawley, they were outdated.

The task force wasn’t expecting a firestorm. That, however, was what it got. Breast cancer advocacy groups mutinied, saying the guidelines would cause significant numbers of women to go undiagnosed for years, some of them fatally. Politicians started giving scary speeches about rationing health care. Many radiologists – including the MGH department as a whole – rejected the new guidelines. Daniel Kopans, a world leader in breast imaging (he wrote the textbook of that name) and a radiologist at MGH, now says that the panel didn’t “understand mammography screening.” Furthermore, he adds, the new guidelines had “no biological or scientific reason” behind them.

The last time someone tried to improve the way American women are screened for breast cancer, it turned into a national debacle. In November 2009, the US Preventive Services Task Force, a government-backed group of doctors charged with making recommendations that often influence what insurers will pay for, updated its guidelines for mammography. Previously, it had advised women to begin annual or biannual screening at 40. The new guidelines pushed that age to 50, emphasizing that starting earlier should be an individual choice.

Debates about mammography are often so emotionally charged that this type of nuance goes missing. “I think some of our rhetoric – medicine’s in general, and also that of advocates?– has made people think that every metastatic breast cancer is a failure of the woman to get a mammogram or of a doctor to read a mammogram correctly,” says Otis Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society and a professor at Emory University’s School of Medicine in Atlanta. “In reality, yes, mammography does save lives – but it is far from perfect. It’s not as good as many people think it is.” So if the new 3-D mammography isn’t perfect, just how good is it?

But the company, and the rest of us, should be careful not to overhype 3-D mammography. As Rafferty says, it’s not a panacea. The technology does come with costs, financial and medical. A fully equipped 3-D machine runs on average $474,541, not including the annual service fee Hologic charges for maintenance, and even hospitals that already own an upgradeable 2-D system made by Hologic have to pay about $125,000 to get it adapted for 3-D use. There are also costs in the sense of risks: Women who get a combo 2-D and 3-D mammogram, the protocol that confers the most dramatic jump in benefits, are exposed to twice as much X-ray radiation as the norm (albeit still an amount that’s under the FDA’s permitted limit). And no one yet knows if the new technique will actually save lives.

Is Hologic's 3-D mammography machine likely to fare better? There are reasons to think it will. Unlike MRI, which requires an injection with contrast dye and an hour in the imaging machine, it isn’t an ordeal – or at least it’s no worse than a conventional mammogram. (Yes, you still have to endure the dreaded clamp.) And it seems to be more effective than its most similar precursor, the 2-D digital technique. Early data from Rafferty’s trial showed that the same group of women who did benefit from 2-D digital benefited even more dramatically from 3-D. (It’s worth noting that this is not a small group of people. Fifty percent of women are in what the American Cancer Society considers the “intermediate zone” of risk, which overlaps considerably with the group that saw some benefit in DMIST.) Perhaps more important, even the women who didn’t see any improvement in accuracy with 2-D get a small boost with 3-D over film. And 3-D seems to be both more sensitive and more specific – improvement in one area doesn’t have to come at the cost of the other.

But when the definitive trial of 2-D digital techniques, called DMIST, was published in 2005, tracking nearly 50,000 patients, it didn’t provide the answers that advocates had been expecting. Digital mammography did seem to perform more accurately than film in women who were younger than 50, women who were pre- or perimenopausal, and women with dense breast tissue. But when all women were considered as a group, that benefit disappeared. On the whole, it turned out, digital just didn’t live up to the way it had been sold.

When 2-D digital mammography was introduced in 2000, doctors hoped it would vault over those problems. (Well, most of them. The cost concern was still present: Digital mammography machines were five times as expensive as film ones.) The marketing materials suggested it already had. An ad for GE’s 2-D digital system that ran during the Summer Olympics called it a “major new breakthrough in the fight against breast cancer.” Digital technology, the thinking went, would show nuances that film never could, because it could render, literally, many more shades of gray.

The problem, however, was that each time they introduced a new imaging tool for breast cancer, they found that they could not advance on one front without taking a step backward on the other. “First there was ultrasound,” says Rafferty. “We did find more cancers, but we also found so many false positives that it was untenable.” Then there was MRI, which had the same problem – and it was 10 times more expensive than mammography.

Rafferty had already been running trials of 3-D mammography for two years when the task force’s guidelines came out. She understood its concern about false positives – she was trying to address it, herself, albeit in a very different way. In fact, technology developers had been trying in various ways for years to increase mammography’s sensitivity (its ability to flag possible cases of cancer) while also increasing its specificity (its ability to filter out the false positives).

There’s an intuitive argument for why 3-D mammography might be more accurate. The technique works a little like a CT scan does; it takes 15 pictures of the breast at slightly different angles, then fuses them into a single synthesized image. If breast cancers were spherical in shape, they’d look basically the same in all 15 images, or, for that matter, on a conventional 2-D picture. But they’re very rarely shaped that way in reality. “In the breast, in particular, cancer cells tend to creep out single-file along the architecture of the body,” says Rafferty. “And that makes some of them especially hard to see on a [2-D] mammogram. They look like distortions, not blobs.” There’s another thing about cancer that is much clearer on a 3-D mammogram: spicules, or thin, spidery tentacles emerging from the center of a tumor. 2-D images, when taken from the wrong angle, are often too fuzzy to show them. In 3-D, however, the spicules are visible in high resolution – and seeing them is critical, since they are a hallmark of malignancy.

To Rafferty, the existing data are persuasive enough. “I own no stock in Hologic. I have no financial ties to them. And I was skeptical of this idea at first. You think to yourself, it is that simple? That elegant?” she says. “But this really does address the fundamental flaw of mammography. I want every woman to have access to this technology. I got my sisters down here when it was approved. I was like, ‘You’re all going to get this!’ Because in my heart I know it’s better.”

Andy Smith, Hologic’s vice president of imaging science, is similarly hopeful. “It’s expected to improve the cancer detection rate. It is going to reduce the recall rate,” he says, referring to suspicious findings that require women to return for follow-up tests, some of which turn out to be false alarms. “And we will have more numbers on that within one to two years.” This last part, at least, is very likely true. Mammography is heavily regulated, and clinics are required to send their recall statistics – the number of women they call back for second looks – to the federal government. The data on whether 3-D will save more lives than 2-D may not be known immediately. But they will exist.

However, the most meaningful data – the numbers that would show whether 3-D mammography saves women’s lives – won’t be available for decades. Only a prospective, randomized trial with mortality as its “endpoint” can say for sure, and that’s how long it takes to conduct one. Smith knows that that’s the reality. “We are expecting a reduction in morbidity and mortality, but we won’t know that for a long time,” he says. “You know, this technology has only been approved for two months.”

By the time such data do come out, mammography will surely have changed again. There are already efforts to augment it with contrast dyes, to develop a complementary tool called a “gamma camera,” and to augment imperfect human judgment by refining computer programs that can spot tumors as well as a radiologist might.

What this means is that the next time the US Preventive Services Task Force or anyone else wants to take a hard look at mammography, the data it has will once again be outdated. It’s inevitable. Three-D mammography may very well be more accurate than 2-D. It may see more cancers and fewer impostors. But whether it’s truly a “huge breakthrough” by the metric that matters most is a question that can’t currently be answered – and that may be irrelevant by the time it can be. Rafferty may know “in her heart” that 3-D is better. But right now, at least, that’s the only way she truly can.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a tough call.  But in the end we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt.
Weaker points:
Strong points:
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
One of the most difficult decisions a man makes about prostate cancer happens long before the diagnosis. Should he get a regular blood test to screen for the disease?

Screening for early detection of cancer sounds like a no-brainer, but it’s not an easy choice for men considering regular P.S.A. tests, which measure blood levels of prostate-specific antigen and are used to detect prostate cancer. Though use of the test is widespread, studies show that the screening saves few, if any, lives.

While the test helps find cellular changes in the prostate that meet the technical definition of cancer, they often are so slow-growing that if left alone they will never cause harm. But once cancer is detected, many men, frightened by the diagnosis, opt for aggressive surgical and radiation treatments that do far more damage than their cancers would have, leaving many impotent and incontinent.

As a result, major health groups don’t advise men one way or the other on regular P.S.A. screenings, saying it should be a choice discussed between a man and his doctor.

So how does a man decide whether to get P.S.A. screening or not? Finally, some new research offers simple, practical advice — at least for men 60 and older.

Researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and Lund University in Sweden have found that a man’s P.S.A. score at the age of 60 can strongly predict his lifetime risk of dying of prostate cancer, according to a new report in the British medical journal BMJ.

The findings also suggest that at least half of men who are now screened after age 60 don’t need to be, the study authors said.

The researchers followed 1,167 Swedish men from the time they were 60 years old until they died or reached 85. During that time, there were 43 cases of advanced prostate cancer and 35 deaths in the group. The researchers found that having had a P.S.A. score of 2.0 or higher at the age of 60 was highly predictive of developing advanced prostate cancer, or dying of the disease, within the next 25 years.

About one in four men will have a P.S.A. score of 2.0 or higher at the age of 60, and most of them will not develop prostate cancer, said the study’s lead author, Andrew Vickers, associate attending research methodologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. But the score does put them in a higher-risk group of men who have more to gain from regular screening, he concluded.

The higher the score at age 60, the greater the long-term risk of dying from prostate cancer, Dr. Vickers and his colleagues found. Men with a score of 2.0 or higher at age 60 were 26 times more likely to eventually die of the disease than 60-year-old men with scores below 1.0.

Still, the absolute risks for men with elevated scores were lower than might be expected. A 60-year-old man with a P.S.A. score just over 2.0 had an individual risk of dying from prostate cancer during the next 25 years of about 6 percent, the researchers found. A 60-year-old man with a P.S.A. score of 5 had about a 17 percent risk.

“Most of those men are going to be absolutely fine,” said Dr. Vickers. “But they can be told they are at high risk and they need screening.”

Men with a P.S.A. score of 1.0 or lower at age 60 had a very low individual risk of death from prostate cancer over the next 25 years, the study found: just 0.2 percent.

“They can be reassured that even if they have prostate cancer or get it, it’s unlikely to become life-threatening,” said Dr. Vickers. “There’s a strong case that they should be exempted from screening.”

The advice is less clear for men with scores between 1.0 and 2.0 at the age of 60. They still have a very low individual risk of dying from prostate cancer, judging from the new data. The long-term risk of dying from prostate cancer ranged from about 1 percent to 3 percent for these men, and the decision to screen may depend on their personal views and family histories, Dr. Vickers said.

While the findings don’t answer all of the questions associated with P.S.A. screening, they should give peace of mind to sizable numbers of men who decide not to continue regular testing. The results also will reassure men who decide to continue with regular screenings that the benefits most likely outweigh the risks.

Dr. Eric A. Klein, chairman of the Glickman Urological and Kidney Institute at the Cleveland Clinic, said that he would like to see the findings of the new study independently confirmed, but that other studies also have suggested that the risk of cancer is low in men whose P.S.A. levels remain below 1.5 in their 50s and 60s.

“We are in the midst of a paradigm shift in screening and risk assessment that no longer relies on a simple P.S.A. cutoff to determine who should be biopsied,” Dr. Klein said.

P.S.A. screening is already not advised for those 75 and older, because the slow-moving nature of the disease means that a vast majority of men at that age are likely to die from something other than a newly detected prostate cancer. A major study last year confirmed that P.S.A. testing is not helpful for men with 10 years or less of life expectancy.

But the advice continues to be murky for younger men. In a large European study reported last year, 50- to 54-year-olds didn’t benefit from screening. But men ages 55 to 69 who had annual P.S.A. testing were slightly less likely to die from prostate cancer than those who weren’t screened.

The researchers who conducted the latest study also have investigated whether a man’s P.S.A. score at 50 can predict his long-term risk. In a 2008 report of 21,000 men published in the journal BMC Medicine, the researchers found that two-thirds of the advanced cancer cases that developed over 25 years were in men who had a P.S.A. score of 0.9 or higher at the age of 50.

Those findings can help younger men decide how intensely they want to screen for the disease. A man whose P.S.A. test shows him to be at low risk at age 50 may decide not to be retested again until the age of 60. A man with a higher score may want to do more frequent testing.

“We haven’t solved every single problem with screening,” Dr. Vickers noted. “We need to screen fewer people, screen the right people, and we don’t have to treat every cancer we catch.”

A version of this article appeared in print on September 28, 2010, on page D1 of the New York edition of The Times.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provided a lot of interesting information on results from several recent studies.  To better enable readers to know how much credence to put on the results reported, it would have been useful to mention that the first study reported on was a case controlled study and that the European study was a randomized clinical trial.  
The story implied that men with a PSA between 1 and 2 at age 60 are in some sort of limbo because the ‘advice is less clear’.  The story really ought to have included the insight that these levels of PSA are well within what is considered normal.   At worst, men in this category would still be predicted to have less than a 6% chance of developing prostate cancer in their future.  Perhaps what is less clear is the particular experts advice about future testing, though this really circles back to the initial premise of the story – that men need to make choices about whether to undergo PSA testing.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Science doesn’t just help to invent new products, it can push existing ones.

Look no further than the beauty industry. It does lots of testing and flaunts products with scientific terms like microbeads, enzymes and rejuvenating serums. But what are the data behind them? And what if the company selling the product did the tests?

Take Inneov Sun Sensitivity, a nutritional supplement “clinically proven” to protect your skin from the sun’s harmful UV rays while leaving you with a nice tan, according to its maker Laboratoires Inneov, a joint venture between L’Oreal and Nestle.

The pill combines lycopene and beta-carotene — the red and orange substances in tomatoes and carrots, respectively — with a probiotic reported to impact the skin’s response to UV light.

“The efficacy of our nutritional supplement was demonstrated by rigorous studies,” said Nathalie Piccardi, of Laboratoires Inneov, who worked on the study.

“The next step is to present this product to dermatologists,” she told Reuters Health, noting it has already been launched in Europe and South America.

But a closer look reveals some shaky science, said Dr. Peter Schalock, a dermatologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston who isn’t affiliated with Laboratoires Inneov.

“Scientifically there are no data there,” he said about one of the company’s experiments. “It sounds like opinion and nothing more.”

The only published data on the tanning pill’s ability to reduce sunburns came out last month in the British Journal of Dermatology. To test the pill, scientists had dozens of women expose their behinds or backs to strong UV light. They found an effect on immune cells in the skin, but the question was, would the women also get fewer sunburns and better tans?

To answer that, Laboratoires Inneov conducted a so-called randomized controlled trial — the most powerful kind of study in the scientific toolbox — in which women were randomly assigned to take Inneov Sun Sensitivity or a placebo pill.

But the researchers never compared the response directly between the two groups, the whole point of a randomized controlled trial. Instead, they used a weaker method comparing the before-and-after differences within each group.

While Piccardi said she thought this method was appropriate, it means the company can’t claim women taking their product had a higher threshold for sunburns than those taking a placebo pill. The same goes for the tan.

As a result, said Schalock, the company’s claim that women taking their product can sunbathe with less concern of getting burned might be a stretch.

Schalock told Reuters Health he has a “hard time seeing that statistically or scientifically they have proven it.”

The fact that the company did the testing itself could also raise a red flag.

“There is some evidence to indicate that we are right to be concerned about the quality of research when there is a conflict of interest,” said Josephine Johnston, a bioethicist at the Hastings Center in Garrison, New York.

Johnston, who said she could not speak to the scientific merits of the Inneov report, said other studies had shown industry-funded research is more likely to have positive outcomes, and that people could be influenced by financial interests even if they didn’t realize it.

“The major problem,” she told Reuters Health, “is that it has an impact of trustworthiness.”

Branding personal care products with clinical claims is a very common strategy, an expert who studies consumer marketing told Reuters Health.

“Claiming that kind of a benefit is certainly something people respond to,” said the expert, a professor at an East Coast university who asked to remain anonymous because his institution receives funding from the cosmetics industry.

While some people will want to see and feel an impact, he said, for many the clinical claim alone suffices. “The key question is, will the consumer view as credible that ingesting a pill will prevent (sun) damage?”

In another experiment, Laboratoires Inneov scientists gave the tanning pill to 80 women and asked them to sunbathe as they normally would over the summer, applying sunscreen at their discretion.

Then they asked dermatologists, recruited by a company paid by Laboratoires Inneov, a series of questions about how these women fared. According to the report, the dermatologists told Laboratoires Inneov the product prevented sunburns.

“We truly believed that this kind of study, taking into account consumers’ opinion, complements experimental and control studies,” said Piccardi.

But the study did not answer a number of questions: How did the women usually do in the summer? Did they end up like boiled lobsters or were they careful not to get burned? Might they have been extra cautious because they were part of a skin protection study?

“It would have been nice to really know that it worked, and that it’s not just a placebo effect,” Schalock said.

He pointed out it was hard to draw any conclusions from this part of the study because it didn’t include any data. What kind of evaluations did the dermatologists do? What exactly did they tell Laboratoires Inneov?

Of more than a dozen researchers and dermatologists contacted about the quality of this study, only Schalock agreed to comment.

Dr. Tobias W. Fischer, a dermatologist at the University Lubeck in Germany, offered this rationale for why he didn’t: “I don’t give interviews, criticizing other researchers’ work, even if industrial.”

The editor of the journal that published the study, Dr. Tanya Bleiker, said it had been reviewed by experts before acceptance, as are all the journal’s reports.

While there had been some concerns about the methods, “on balance there was enough interest to publish it,” she told Reuters Health.

The journal does ask researchers if they have financial ties to the products they are studying. According to Bleiker, “the authors stated very clearly that there was no conflict of interest.”

However, more than half of the authors work for Laboratoires Inneov, as indicated on the cover page of the report.

“It wasn’t being hidden that they worked for the company,” Johnston told Reuters Health. “The journal knew it.”

“The question for the journal, given that the authors worked for the company, is, ‘Do we publish something like that?’”

Johnston said there was an ongoing debate about whether or not scientists who review studies should know about potential industry interests.

The question then becomes what, if anything, to do when there is a conflict of interest.

“The reader can’t do anything,” said Johnston. “It needs to be done by people higher up in the food chain.”

Whether or not Inneov Sun Sensitivity has been “clinically proven” to protect against sunburns, “We have to deal with the fact that the scientific literature contains research from people with financial conflicts,” Johnston said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is the core of the story, executed with excellence.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Pill That Hits A Cause Of Cystic Fibrosis Beats Expectations

More than 20 years after the gene behind cystic fibrosis was identified, a pill that could fix the problem in some people is getting closer to reality.

The experimental medicine, taken twice a day, goes by the code name VX-770. Now there are some promising results from a study in 161 people with a specific genetic mutation that affects about four percent of cystic fibrosis patients.

Lung function got 10 percentage points better, on average, in people who got the drug compared with those taking a placebo. The improvement at six months was still present almost a year after the study's start.

That much improvement is "a big deal for CF patients," Robert Beall, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation told Shots. "It is larger than any other clinical intervention we've ever had in cystic fibrosis." Beall said there were no significant side effects.

The foundation has championed the development of drugs, including VX-770, and has provided $75 million to Vertex to get the medicine this far. If the drug makes it to market, the foundation will receive royalties from sales.

This pill, for people with the G551D mutation of the cystic fibrosis gene, helps a defective protein in cell membranes do a better job moving things around. Lisa Jarvis has more details on that at the Haystack blog. But a key takeaway is that the medicine gets at a root cause of cystic fibrosis in some people rather than just relieving their symptoms.

Now, to be perfectly clear, all we know about the latest data is from press releases. And the drug hasn't been submitted for review by the Food and Drug Administration, though Vertex expects to do that later this year.

But these results, even with plenty of caveats, suggest the drug is on the right track. Vertex's shares jumped 15 percent Wednesday as investors figured VX-770 looks even better than they'd expected.

"Wow!" wrote Dr. Mark Schoenebaum, a biotech and drug analyst ISI Group, in a note to investors. The effectiveness of VX-770 looks "best case," he wrote. Ultimately, the drug might be used by around 3,000 patients worldwide, if approved, and Schoenebaum expects it would be command a very high price, perhaps $250,000 a year.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: in just 369 words, the story did an adequate job evaluating the evidence, including the important caveat: “Now, to be perfectly clear, all we know about the latest data is from press releases.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Question Does treatment with cetuximab and radiotherapy (CRT) increase the rate of laryngeal preservation and laryngectomy-free survival compared with radiotherapy alone in patients with hypopharyngeal and laryngeal carcinoma?

Findings In this secondary analysis of a randomized clinical trial comparing CRT vs radiotherapy alone in 168 treated patients, there was no difference in the rates of laryngeal preservation at 2 years. There was a 4.0% and 8.9% absolute improvement in laryngectomy-free survival at 2 and 3 years, respectively, for CRT vs radiotherapy alone.

Meaning The results of this secondary subset analysis reveal a possible cetuximab-related benefit in laryngeal preservation.

Importance The appropriate use of surgery or radiotherapy-based approaches for organ preservation has been the subject of much debate. Unfortunately, there has been a lack of improvement in overall survival for patients with laryngeal carcinoma in the last 30 years.

Objective To assess the rates of laryngeal preservation and laryngectomy-free survival in patients receiving cetuximab and radiotherapy (CRT) and patients receiving radiotherapy alone.

Design, Setting, and Participants Patients were enrolled in a multicenter, open-label, stratified, randomized, phase 3 study from April 1, 1999, through March 31, 2002, from 73 centers in the United States and 14 other countries. A secondary subgroup analysis of patients with hypopharyngeal and laryngeal carcinoma was undertaken. Rates of laryngeal preservation and laryngectomy-free survival were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. The hazard ratios (HRs) were calculated using a Cox proportional hazards regression model. Quality of life was evaluated using the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer core questionnaire and head and neck module.

Results Of the 424 patients included in the trial, 168 treated patients with cancer of the larynx or hypopharynx were included in this analysis (90 in the CRT group and 78 in the radiotherapy alone group). The median (range) age of the patients was 59 (40-80) years in the CRT group and 61 (35-81) years in the radiotherapy alone group. In the CRT group, 72 patients (80.0%) were male and 18 (20.0%) were female. In the radiotherapy alone group, 62 (79.5%) were male and 16 (20.5%) were female. The rates of laryngeal preservation at 2 years were 87.9% for CRT vs 85.7% for radiotherapy alone, with an HR of 0.57 (95% CI, 0.23-1.42; P = .22). Similarly, the HR for laryngectomy-free survival comparing CRT vs radiotherapy alone was 0.78 (95% CI, 0.54-1.11; P = .17). This study was not powered to assess organ preservation. Median overall survival was 27 (95% CI, 20-45) vs 21 (95% CI, 17-35) months for the CRT and radiotherapy alone groups, respectively, with an HR of 0.87 (95% CI, 0.60-1.27). No differences between treatments were reported regarding overall quality of life, need for a feeding tube, or speech.

Conclusions and Relevance The results of a possible cetuximab-related laryngeal preservation benefit for patients with hypopharyngeal or laryngeal cancer are intriguing; these results need to be interpreted in the context of a retrospective subset analysis with limited sample size.

Historically, locoregionally advanced squamous cell cancers of the larynx or hypopharynx have been treated with surgical resection, usually involving laryngectomy with or without postoperative radiotherapy.1 Although laryngectomy is an effective treatment, investigators have sought therapeutic strategies that result in voice preservation. Various modifications of surgical techniques have been explored.2-5 Alternatively, in the early 1980s, investigators evaluated curative primary radiotherapy with salvage surgery as an option for these patients.6,7 Retrospective studies8,9 that compared primary radiotherapy with salvage surgery to initial surgery with postoperative radiotherapy found similar rates of survival in patients with advanced laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancers.

After the realization that many patients could avoid total laryngectomy with the use of primary radiotherapy, several combination chemoradiotherapy strategies were introduced for patients with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancers. In large phase 3 randomized clinical trials, induction chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy demonstrated equivalent overall survival compared with surgical resection and postoperative radiotherapy in patients with laryngeal10,11 and hypopharyngeal cancers.12 More recently, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 91-11 trial revealed that radiotherapy with concomitant cisplatin resulted in a superior laryngeal preservation rate compared with induction with cisplatin and fluorouracil followed by radiotherapy or radiotherapy alone for these advanced laryngeal cancers.13,14 However, this treatment did not produce a survival benefit.

The appropriate use of surgery or radiotherapy-based approaches for organ preservation has been the subject of much debate.15-18 Unfortunately, there has been a lack of improvement in overall survival for patients with laryngeal carcinoma in large database studies19-21 examining the last 30 years of care. Investigators have reported that poor follow-up may contribute to the potential for larger and less curable recurrences, and surgeons experienced with radiotherapy with salvage surgery need to be involved as early as possible.20,21

The analysis described in this report was performed to assess the laryngeal preservation rates of patients with locoregionally advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers who were entered into a randomized clinical trial of cetuximab and radiotherapy (CRT) compared with radiotherapy alone.22,23 This group of patients represents a subgroup (168 patients) of a larger population (424 patients) that also included patients with oropharyngeal cancers. It is noteworthy that this randomized clinical trial was not designed to enroll a sufficient number of patients to definitively and prospectively address the subject of the analysis reported herein. Previous reports22,23 of the overall randomized clinical trial found locoregional control and survival advantages associated with the addition of cetuximab to radiotherapy.

Patients were enrolled in the multicenter, open-label, stratified, randomized, phase 3 study from April 1, 1999, through March 31, 2002, from 73 centers in the United States and 14 other countries. Patients who entered the trial had stage III or IV nonmetastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx, hypopharynx, or larynx (Figure 1 and Table 1). Patients were eligible if they had pathologically confirmed stage III or IV squamous cell carcinoma, had measurable disease, had no distant metastases, had no prior therapy for the tumor under study, and were medically suitable to undergo definitive radiotherapy. This subgroup includes the patients with hypopharyngeal and laryngeal cancers. The protocol was approved by the ethics review boards at the participating institutions, and all the patients provided written informed consent.

Patients were initially evaluated with a comprehensive head and neck examination, which included panendoscopy. The primary tumors and lymph nodes were staged by the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging classification of 1998. Initial evaluation included computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of the head and neck region and chest radiography. Patients began treatment within 2 weeks after this initial evaluation, as determined by the randomization procedure.22 Patients who underwent no surgery or less extensive operations were censored at death or date of last contact.

The primary radiotherapy was delivered with curative intent. Investigators selected 1 of 3 radiation fractionation regimens: once daily, twice daily, or concomitant boost regimen (Figure 1). Cervical lymph node drainage regions, considered to be at high risk for subclinical disease, were treated with a dose of 50 to 54 Gy. The primary tumor and gross nodal disease received full-dose radiotherapy (70-76.8 Gy, depending on fractionation). However, if a postoperative neck dissection was planned, gross nodal disease could be treated with 60 Gy.

For patients randomized to CRT, cetuximab treatment consisted of an initial dose of 400 mg/m2 and was delivered as a 120-minute intravenous infusion. This initial dose was delivered 1 week before the initiation of CRT. Patients received weekly cetuximab infusions during the radiotherapy treatment. Seven weekly infusions were delivered at a dose of 250 mg/m2 for a period of 60 minutes each.

For patients who were scheduled to have a planned neck dissection, surgery was scheduled to take place 4 to 8 weeks after completion of CRT or radiotherapy alone.

Evaluations, including physical examination, hematologic testing, and chemical profiles, were performed weekly for the duration of the study. A pharmacologic profile was also performed weekly on patients receiving cetuximab infusion (CRT group). Patients provided a history and underwent a physical examination, which included a fiberoptic examination of the tumor, as well as an assessment of all study end points at required time points after the completion of treatment.22 Posttreatment assessments were performed 4 and 8 weeks after completion of radiotherapy. Patients who were scheduled for a planned postoperative neck dissection could have their 8-week assessment at the 6-week time point, along with posttreatment computed tomography. Subsequently, patients were evaluated every 4 months during the first and second years. They were evaluated semiannually during years 3 to 5. These follow-up assessments included imaging studies, consisting of computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of the head and neck region.

The instruments used in this study were the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Core 30 version 3.0 and the Quality of Life Head and Neck Module 35. The self-administered core questionnaire consisted of 30 questions and incorporated 5 functional scales, 3 symptom scales, and a global health and quality-of-life scale. The remaining single items assessed additional symptoms commonly reported by patients with cancer, as well as the perceived financial effect of disease and treatment. All scales and single items met the standards for reliability. The 35-item module comprised 1 multi-item scale and a series of single items assessing head and neck–associated symptoms and adverse effects from conventional therapy.

The randomization was not stratified by primary site of cancer; hence, the results presented below are a retrospective analysis of the selected subset of patients. A CONSORT flow diagram was included with the original publication of the trial.23 A trial profile for the analysis presented here is shown in Figure 1. The primary end point of the study was to examine differences in the rate of locoregional disease control maintained for 1 year. The duration of locoregional control was defined as the absence of locoregional disease progression at the scheduled follow-up visits and was determined through a masked review of the investigator-generated data by an independent committee of experts. The duration of locoregional control was from randomization to the first documented progression or recurrence of locoregional disease or death from any cause. Overall survival was calculated from randomization to death from any cause. Tumor present in a neck dissection, which was performed for any reason after 15 weeks after radiotherapy, constituted locoregional progression. Distribution of time-to-event parameters was estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method, and treatment effects were compared using a log-rank test. The Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to calculate the nonstratified hazard ratio (HR). The Kaplan-Meier method was also used to estimate the rate of preservation of larynx.24 Patients who underwent no surgery or lesser operations were censored at death or date of last contact.

A total of 424 patients participated in the study and 168 were included in the subanalysis (90 in the CRT group or 78 in the radiotherapy alone group). Most patients from both treatment groups were treated with the concomitant boost fractionation regimen. The 2 treatment groups were well balanced with respect to sex, tumor stage, node stage (Table 1), and the rate of neck surgery (16% in the CRT group and 14% in the radiotherapy alone group).

The median durations of treatment were 52, 46, and 43 days for once daily, twice daily, or concomitant boost, respectively, for patients treated with CRT and 52, 44, and 43 days, respectively, for patients treated with radiotherapy alone. For patients who received cetuximab, the median number of cetuximab infusions was 8 (range, 1–11). The median cumulative cetuximab dose was 2154 mg/m2 (range, 14-2887 mg/m2). The number of patients who received 7 or more cetuximab infusions was 80 (88.9%). The radiotherapy quality assurance review found that the mean and median doses for the once daily, twice daily, and concomitant boost regimens were 68.7 and 70.0 Gy, 74.3 and 74.4 Gy, and 70.8 and 72.0 Gy, respectively; these doses were similar in both treatment groups. Radiotherapy adherence for patients who received CRT or radiotherapy alone was balanced; 65 (72.2%) received CRT and 56 (71.8%) received radiotherapy alone as planned or with minor deviation. A total of 121 patients (72%) were treated as planned or with minor deviation. Major acceptable deviations in the CRT and radiotherapy alone groups were found in 13 (14.4%) and 13 (16.7%) patients, and major unacceptable deviations were observed in 3 (3.3%) and 5 (6.4%) patients, respectively. A total of 9 (10.0%) and 4 (5.1%) patients in these respective groups were not evaluable for a radiation quality assurance review. The differences in radiotherapy adherence between the 2 treatment groups were not statistically significant. Neck dissections were performed in 14 patients (15.6%) treated with CRT and 11 patients (14.1%) treated with radiotherapy alone.

Locoregional control was the primary end point of the phase 3 study. For this subgroup of patients with laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers, locoregional control was slightly improved for patients who received CRT compared with radiotherapy alone (HR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.56-1.13) (Table 2). The 2-year rates of locoregional control were 36.9% in the CRT group and 25.7% in the radiotherapy alone group. Survival was also slightly improved for patients who received CRT compared with radiotherapy alone (HR, 0.87; 95% CI, 0.60-1.27) (Table 2). The 3-year survival rates were 41.9% in the CRT group and 39.0% in the radiotherapy alone group.

The rates of laryngeal preservation (no need for salvage laryngectomy) were 87.9% at 2 and 3 years in the CRT group compared with 85.7% at 2 years and 76.8% at 3 years in the radiotherapy alone group. The 2.2% and 11.1% absolute improvements in the rates of laryngeal preservation, at 2 and 3 years, respectively, favored CRT compared with radiotherapy alone (Figure 2). However, this improvement was not statistically significant (HR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.23-1.42; P = .22). In addition, there was a 4.0% and 8.9% absolute improvement in laryngectomy-free survival at 2 and 3 years, respectively. Again, these differences did not reach statistical significance (HR, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.54-1.11; P = .17) (Figure 2).

The most frequently reported adverse events are given in Table 3. The frequency of grades 3 and 4 mucositis/stomatitis and odynophagia was not significantly different among patients who received CRT compared with radiotherapy alone. Patients who received CRT had a greater rate of acneiform rash compared with patients who received radiotherapy alone (Table 3). Chills, fever, and headache were the only toxic events reported to occur at any grade with significantly higher frequency (P = .002, P = .01, and P = .004, respectively) in patients in the CRT group than in the radiotherapy alone group; however, their incidences were low (chills, 16 [17.8%] vs 2 [2.6%]; fever, 20 [22.2%] vs 6 [7.7%]; headache, 20 [22.2%] vs 5 [6.4%]).

The quality-of-life responses were evaluated in a longitudinal design in all patients. Baseline assessment was performed at or just after randomization. Subsequent assessments took place before the beginning of the fourth week of radiotherapy, at the 8-week posttreatment evaluation, and at the 2 every-4-month follow-up evaluations of year 1. Plots of mean changes in global health status, use of a feeding tube, or speech problems reveal no differences between the treatment groups (Figure 3). A positive value in change indicates an improvement for the patient.

Differences in mean changes in swallowing at radiotherapy week 4 (−15 in the CRT group and −25 in the radiotherapy alone group, P = .02), loss of appetite at radiotherapy week 4 (−11 in the CRT group and −18 in the radiotherapy alone group, P = .03), nausea at week 8 after radiotherapy (−7.3 in the CRT group and 0.3 in the radiotherapy alone group, P = .04), coughing at radiotherapy week 4 (7.4 in the CRT group and −5.6 in the radiotherapy alone group, P = .02) and at week 8 after radiotherapy (−3.2 in the CRT group and 1.1 in the radiotherapy alone group, P = .04), constipation at month 8 (2.6 in the CRT group and −19 in the radiotherapy alone group, P < .001), and cognitive functioning at month 12 (−7.0 in the CRT group and 4.6 in the radiotherapy alone group, P = .04) were not seen at the other time points.

When laryngectomy is the primary treatment for locoregionally advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers, patients gradually adjust to the loss of natural phonation, but the condition substantially interferes with normal communication and social interactions.25 In addition, although the effect of the procedure on voice frequently receives the greatest consideration, the presence of the stoma may also adversely affect patients’ quality of life.26

In the analysis reported herein, laryngeal preservation rates were studied in a subgroup of patients who were part of a large phase 3 trial that compared primary radiotherapy with or without the antiepidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody cetuximab. The use of CRT produced a higher rate of laryngeal preservation compared with radiotherapy alone for patients with locoregionally advanced laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancers. Although the difference in the rates of laryngeal preservation between the 2 groups did not reach statistical significance, the initial trial was not powered to assess this subgroup question. The HR of 0.57 is a strong indicator that cetuximab, when added to radiotherapy, may improve laryngeal preservation. The 87.9% rate of laryngeal preservation at 2 years for CRT found in this trial is similar to the rate reported for the use of radiotherapy and concomitant cisplatin in Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 91-11 trial (n = 547).13

Patients who undergo a laryngectomy often experience a difficult adjustment process. Even when the patient achieves a certain level of comfort with various techniques of artificial speech,27 the ability to communicate with others is hampered.26,28,29 Investigations have explored both the patient’s and the interviewer’s perceptions of the patient’s difficulty with communication after laryngectomy.26 Of interest, the interviewers perceived the patients’ impairment with communication as a much greater infringement on quality of life compared with the patients’ perceptions. Patients who underwent laryngectomy believed that interference with social activities resulted in a greater detrimental effect regarding their quality of life compared with the interviewers’ perception of this factor. Therefore, patients have their own perceptions, as well as the perceptions of others, as potential hurdles to normal activities after laryngectomy.

The perception of life without a larynx plays an important role in a patient’s treatment decision. In a recent trial from France, 269 patients were queried about the treatment choices they might make if they faced the diagnosis of advanced laryngeal cancer.30 Only 29% stated that they would not consider options with a lower chance of cure if told that the best option, with respect to survival, was total laryngectomy. However, their enthusiasm for seeking laryngeal-preserving options waned when told about potential adverse effects, such as tracheostomy or permanent gastrostomy. An older report31 of interviews with firefighters and executives who were asked to envision that they had advanced laryngeal cancer determined that they were willing to accept a 15% to 30% reduction in life expectancy for a laryngeal-preserving treatment compared with total laryngectomy. These studies30,31 demonstrate the importance of reviewing options and potential adverse effects with patients before making a decision regarding the best treatment.

Considering the importance of laryngeal function, many head and neck cancer treatments have been directed toward the goal of laryngeal preservation. One of the largest randomized clinical trials was designed to evaluate laryngeal preservation compared with radiotherapy alone, concomitant chemoradiotherapy, and induction chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy.13,14 Each treatment group included at least 180 patients, thus providing much greater statistical power than the current communication. The use of concomitant cisplatin and radiotherapy resulted in a statistically significant improvement in laryngeal preservation compared with radiotherapy alone, with a hazard ratio of 0.46. However, the induction regimen of cisplatin and fluorouracil did not improve laryngeal preservation over radiotherapy alone. Neither concomitant chemoradiotherapy nor induction chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy resulted in improved overall survival compared with radiotherapy alone. Furthermore, there were greater severe acute toxic effects from the chemoradiotherapy treatments compared with radiotherapy alone,13 but no significant differences in severe late toxic effects were noted in the comparison of the 3 treatment arms.14 Unfortunately, the concomitant chemoradiotherapy arm had an increase in deaths not attributable to cancer compared with the other 2 arms; this finding needs to be explored further to determine whether undetected fatal late treatment toxic effects are greater with concomitant regimens.

Although induction chemotherapy was not used in this trial, it has been the subject of many past and recent assessments involving laryngeal preservation, as well as other efficacy and safety outcomes.10-14 A retrospective review32 of the phase 3 TAX 324 trial (Induction Chemotherapy Comparing Taxotere Cisplatin and 5-Fluorouracil With Standard Cisplatin and 5-Fluorouracil Followed by Chemoradiation in Locally Advanced Head and Neck Cancer) in patients with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancers revealed that induction chemotherapy of docetaxel, cisplatin, and fluorouracil (n = 90) compared with cisplatin plus fluorouracil (n = 76) followed by chemoradiotherapy with weekly carboplatin resulted in significantly improved overall survival (P = .02) and progression-free survival (P = .03) for the docetaxel, cisplatin, and fluorouracil group. Among patients undergoing surgery, laryngectomy-free survival was also significantly greater with docetaxel, cisplatin, and fluorouracil (P = .03).

The TREMPLIN (Radiotherapy With Cisplatin Versus Radiotherapy With Cetuximab After Induction Chemotherapy for Larynx Preservation) trial compared the efficacy and safety of induction chemotherapy using docetaxel, cisplatin, and fluorouracil, followed by chemoradiotherapy with cisplatin (n = 60) or cetuximab (n = 56), for laryngeal preservation.33 No differences were found in laryngeal preservation, laryngeal function preservation, or overall survival between the 2 regimens. Newer studies, such as DeCIDE (Docetaxel-Based Chemotherapy Plus or Minus IC to Decrease Events in Head and Neck Cancer)34 and PARADIGM (Combination Chemotherapy and Radiation in Treating Patients With Stage III or IV Head and Neck Cancer),35 suggest no overall benefit from the addition of induction chemotherapy vs concomitant chemoradiotherapy alone.

The higher rate of laryngeal preservation that was achieved with the use of CRT compared with radiotherapy alone was encouraging. Furthermore, no significant increases in the most debilitating radiotherapy-induced toxic effects, such as mucositis/stomatitis and dysphagia, were observed. This treatment approach warrants further evaluation in larger populations to fully assess the potential value of cetuximab or other molecular targeting agents to augment laryngeal preservation rates.

Correction: This article was corrected on October 26, 2018, to correct an inaccurate conflict of interest disclosure; it was previously corrected on December 15, 2016, to correct errors in number at risk in Figure 2A.

Corresponding Author: James A. Bonner, MD, Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1700 Sixth Ave S, Hazelrig-Salter Radiation Oncology Center, Ste 2262, Birmingham, AL 35249 (jabonner@uabmc.edu).

Author Contributions: Dr Chin and Mr Hossain had full access to all the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.

Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All authors.

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Dr Bonner reported working as a consultant for Eli Lilly and Company, Merck Serono, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Dr Schulten reported being an employee of Merck KGaA. Dr Chin and Mr Hossain reported being employees of Eli Lilly and Company. Dr Chang reported being a former employee of Eli Lilly and Company and currently owning Lilly stock. Dr Baselga reports nonfinancial support and reasonable reimbursement for travel from Roche/Genentech; receiving fees from and stock ownership in the following companies: Aura Biosciences (including serving on the board of directors from 2013-2017), Infinity Pharmaceuticals (including serving on the board of directors from 2013-2017), PMV Pharma Biotechnologies (including serving on the scientific advisory board from 2014-present), Juno Therapeutics (acquired by Celgene) (including serving on the scientific advisory board from 2014-2017), Grail (including serving as member or chair of the scientific advisory board from 2016-2018), Varian Medical Systems (including serving on the board of directors from 2017-2018), Bristol-Myers Squibb (including serving on the board of directors from March to September 2018), Seragon (acquired by Roche) (including serving on the scientific advisory board of directors from 2013-2014); stock ownership in ApoGen Biotechnologies (including serving on the scientific advisory board from 2014-present), and Foghorn Therapeutics (including serving on the board from 2017-present); serving as cofounder, receiving fees from, and stock ownership in Tango (formerly Synthetic Lethal) from 2016-present and Northern Biologics (formerly Mosaic Biomedicals) (including serving on the scientific advisory board from 2013-present); receiving consulting and travel fees from Novartis and Eli Lilly; serving as cofounder of Venthera; and serving as investigator on a patent licensed to Memorial Sloan Kettering for use of phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitors for treatment of vascular malformations and serving as investigator for patents pending assignment to Memorial Sloan Kettering for combination therapy using PDK1 and PI3K inhibitors and inhibition of KMT2D for the treatment of breast cancer. No other disclosures were reported.

Funding/Support: Research funding was provided by Eli Lilly and Company.

Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding source had a role in the design and conduct of the study.

Additional Contributions: Nathalie Godinot, MS, of Eli Lilly and Company, provided medical writing support. Anastasia Perkowski, MBA, of Eli Lilly and Company, provided medical editing assistance. Neither was compensated outside their usual salary.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a close one. In many ways, the release does an exemplary job of characterizing the research: it clearly notes that this was a “secondary subgroup analysis” and tells readers the number of patients involved (160 patients: 90 got CRT, 78 got only radiation therapy). The release also explicitly states that “These results need to be interpreted in the context of a retrospective subset analysis with limited sample size.” Kudos to them for writing that. The release also states that “This treatment approach warrants further evaluation in larger populations to fully assess the potential value of cetuximab or other molecular targeting agents to augment laryngeal preservation rates.” That sentence makes clear that more work is needed, in a bigger study, to address a very specific benefit. So, kudos again. However, there are three things the release doesn’t tell us. First, we aren’t told that the differences between the compared therapies were statistically insignificant. Secondly, the reader has no way of knowing what stage of cancer the patients had. Did all the patients have localized cancers? Did they all have metastasized cancers? Was it a mix? And, if it was a mix, how were patients with different stages of cancer divided between the CRT and radiation therapy groups? This can make a huge difference in how to interpret the results. Thirdly, while the release notes that this research evaluated only a subgroup of a larger study, it doesn’t tell us much about the larger study. What was the larger study designed to evaluate? That would be good to know.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A music legend fights Alzheimer's disease on his unforgettable farewell tour. CNN Films Presents:" Glen Campbell ... I'll Be Me ," Saturday, November 7, at 8 p.m. ET.

(CNN) Over the years, resveratrol, an antioxidant found in grapes, chocolate and red wine, has been touted as a possible antidote to Alzheimer's disease, cancer, diabetes and many other conditions. Now, the first study in people with Alzheimer's suggests that the compound, when taken in concentrated doses, may actually have benefit in slowing progression of this disease.

Researchers at 21 medical centers across the United States looked at the safety and effectiveness of taking high doses of resveratrol in an experimental pill -- equal to the amount found in 1,000 bottles of red wine -- in people with mild to moderate Alzheimer's.

The researchers looked at several biomarkers of Alzheimer's, and found that people who took up to four pills a day for a year had higher levels of amyloid-beta proteins in their spinal fluid than those who took a placebo (control) pill.

Although accumulation of amyloid-beta in the brain is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease, patients actually have lower levels of this protein outside of the brain. The study finding suggests that resveratrol could help change the balance from amyloid-beta buildup in the brain to circulating protein in the body.

Even if concentrated forms of resveratrol pills like the kind used in this study were available, it's too soon to recommend going out and getting some just yet.

"The study is encouraging enough that we should certainly go ahead and do a [larger] clinical trial because we showed that it is safe and does have significant effects on Alzheimer's biomarkers," said Dr. R. Scott Turner, professor of neurology at Georgetown University Medical Center and lead investigator of the study, which was published on Friday in the journal Neurology.

The main goal of the current study, which included 119 patients, was to find out whether high doses of resveratrol could be safe. The only small concern they found was that patients taking resveratrol lost about two pounds during the one-year study, and weight loss is already a problem with Alzheimer's, Turner said. In comparison, the control group gained about 1 pound.

Much more research is needed

The study was not big enough to answer some important questions, such as whether patients taking resveratrol actually had lower levels of amyloid-beta plaques in their brain, and most importantly, whether they experienced less decline in their mental faculties.

A large, phase 3 clinical trial getting at these issues could start in as soon as a year, Turner said. (The current study was a phase 2 trial, typically meant to evaluate safety and get an early look at efficacy of a new drug.)

Even for the relatively small number of participants in the study, the researchers did see indication that resveratrol could improve cognition. Patients in this group had slight improvements in their ability to carry out daily tasks, such as remembering to brush their teeth. And anecdotally, patients who took resveratrol told the researchers that they felt like they were maintaining their mental ability. (Neither the participants nor the researchers knew who was taking resveratrol and who was taking placebo.)

"To really get a better feel of how effective this could be you really need to do larger studies for longer periods of time (such as several years)," said James A. Hendrix, director of global science initiatives at the Alzheimer's Association, a research and advocacy organization. "Other potential therapies we've had had some early exciting results and then they didn't pan out in later trials," he added.

If resveratrol does pan out in further research, it may add to the medications that are currently available, such as Aricept and Exelon, which slow, but do not halt, progression of the disease, Hendrix said.

Ultimately, it will probably be a combination of several drugs, as well as diet, exercise and social and mental stimulation that help stave off the rapid mental decline that is often associated with Alzheimer's, he added.

Antioxidant may be most effective in combination

This is one of the first studies to look not only at these biomarkers, but also the metabolites of resveratrol in spinal fluid, to show that resveratrol is probably getting into the brain, said Dr. Giulio M. Pasinetti, who is the Saunders Family Chair and professor in neurology at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. However, he added that changes in biomarkers may not necessarily lead to mental and behavioral improvements, which larger studies will address.

In addition, resveratrol on its own might not end up working as well as a combination of resveratrol and other polyphenol compounds found in red wine, grape juice and grape seed extract, which could help people at risk of Alzheimer's and those who already have mild symptoms, Pasinetti said.

The current study used high doses of resveratrol to increase the chances that enough of the compound got into the brain to have an effect. But for now, the best way to get resveratrol is probably through diet. One glass of red wine a day could help those with mild Alzheimer's, "but no more than that," Turner said.

There is probably little benefit in taking currently available resveratrol supplements, even if they claim to contain levels similar to the ones used in this study. "The things that are on the market are not regulated, and you don't know how much is in them," Turner said. "There could be 500 milligrams, which is what they advertise [researchers gave participants in the study four 500 milligram pills a day] or there could be zero," he said.

Previous research has suggested that people who consume diets rich in resveratrol do not have lower rates of cancer, heart disease and other conditions.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does note that size of the study, and the maximum dosage that patients received. But, more importantly, the story repeatedly stresses that a great deal of additional work needs to be done in order to determine whether resveratrol could affect Alzheimer’s, and — if so — how it might fit into treatment plans. That said, there was one point where the story could have been much better. The story mentions the “slight improvement” in patients’ ability to do daily tasks. But the story does not mention that the study included five tests that measured patient’s mental processes — and found slight improvements in only one of them. There was no difference between the resveratrol group and the placebo group on the other four tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There’s another type of prescription drugs, besides opioid painkillers, that’s involved in thousands of drug overdose deaths in the US every year.

The drugs are benzodiazepines, which are widely known by their brand names Xanax and Valium and commonly prescribed to help treat anxiety. These drugs were involved in nearly 9,000 overdose deaths in 2015, according to federal data. But there’s a catch: Such overdoses seem to be very closely tied to the opioid epidemic, with the majority of benzodiazepine overdose deaths involving both benzodiazepines and opioids.

A new study published in BMJ looked at just how much the concurrent use of these two drugs increases the risk of overdose versus the risk of only using opioids. Drawing on a huge sample of nearly 320,000 patients who were continuously enrolled in private health insurance plans from 2001 and 2013, researchers compared those who were prescribed just opioids versus those who were prescribed both, and what their additional risk of an emergency room visit or inpatient admission was in the period they were prescribed both.

The study found that among all opioid users, concurrent use of benzodiazepines more than doubled the risk of an emergency room or inpatient visit for a drug overdose.

The study also found that eliminating concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid use could reduce the risk for an opioid overdose–related emergency room or inpatient visit by 15 percent. If that reduced risk applies to overdose deaths as well, eliminating concurrent opioid and benzodiazepine use could have prevented up to 2,630 opioid painkiller–related overdose deaths in 2015.

Keith Humphreys, a drug policy expert at Stanford University and one of the authors of the study, said this reveals an underappreciated policy lever for reducing drug overdoses: making sure patients prescribed to opioids aren’t also prescribed to benzodiazepines, and vice versa. “Even if we didn’t change opioid prescribing at all, the data here suggest that we could cut overdoses dramatically just [by] getting prescribers to not put people on a benzodiazepine at the same time,” Humphreys said.

Yet the study suggests the opposite has happened. From 2001 to 2013, co-prescriptions to opioids and benzodiazepines among the studied pool of patients increased from 9 percent to 17 percent — a nearly 89 percent jump.

For some patients, eliminating these co-prescriptions could involve some tough trade-offs. If someone genuinely suffers from pain and anxiety, doctors and patients will need to work out which condition is more important to treat and which one can be treated with alternatives — to avoid a potentially deadly overdose. (Hopefully while keeping in mind that there’s no good scientific evidence that opioids can treat chronic pain, so opioids aren’t the right treatment for chronic pain in the first place.)

There are some caveats to the study. For one, emergency room visits and inpatient admissions for opioid overdoses likely aren’t a perfect one-to-one proxy for overdoses that didn’t involve a trip to a doctor. The study also only looked at legally prescribed opioid painkillers and benzodiazepines, missing the effects of concurrent use of illegally obtained pills or drugs. And since the research relied on patients who were continuously insured throughout the study period, it’s possible the findings don’t exactly apply to people with spottier coverage. (Although sensitivity analyses in the study for people who had lapses in insurance produced similar results.)

Finally, since the study looked at correlation (not causation), it’s possible that it missed some other factor driving up overdose deaths among concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid users — perhaps, for whatever reason, these users may be more likely to misuse their drugs.

Still, it’s well established that benzodiazepine and opioids compound each other’s overdose risk. So it’s not really controversial to conclude that simultaneously using opioids and benzodiazepines dramatically increases the risk of drug overdose — or, conversely, that stopping the concurrent use of these two drugs could reduce the risk of overdose.

Given that the opioid epidemic has quickly turned into the deadliest drug crisis in US history, it’s important — and potentially lifesaving — for doctors and policymakers to at least consider the study’s findings.

For more on the opioid epidemic, read Vox’s in-depth explainer, the abridged explainer, or the maps and charts explainer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job describing the potential weaknesses in the findings:
There are some caveats to the study. For one, emergency room visits and inpatient admissions for opioid overdoses likely aren’t a perfect one-to-one proxy for overdoses that didn’t involve a trip to a doctor. The study also only looked at legally prescribed opioid painkillers and benzodiazepines, missing the effects of concurrent use of illegally obtained pills or drugs. And since the research relied on patients who were continuously insured throughout the study period, it’s possible the findings don’t exactly apply to people with spottier coverage. (Although sensitivity analyses in the study for people who had lapses in insurance produced similar results.) Finally, since the study looked at correlation (not causation), it’s possible that it missed some other factor driving up overdose deaths among concurrent benzodiazepine and opioid users — perhaps, for whatever reason, these users may be more likely to misuse their drugs.
We did take issue with this sentence: “For one, emergency room visits and inpatient admissions for opioid overdoses likely aren’t a perfect one-to-one proxy for overdoses that didn’t involve a trip to a doctor.” Isn’t it, instead, that the researchers only measured ER visits and admissions, therefore not capturing overdoses that didn’t involve a trip to a doctor?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Anti-inflammatory drugs similar to those used to treat conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis could in future be used to treat some cases of depression, concludes a review led by the University of Cambridge, which further implicates our immune system in mental health disorders.

Researchers from the Department of Psychiatry at Cambridge led a team that analysed data from 20 clinical trials involving the use of anti-cytokine drugs to treat a range of autoimmune inflammatory diseases. By looking at additional beneficial side-effects of the treatments, the researchers were able to show that there was a significant antidepressant effect from the drugs compared to a placebo based on a meta-analysis of seven randomised controlled trials. Meta-analyses of the other types of clinical trials showed similar results.

When we are exposed to an infection, for example influenza or a stomach bug, our immune system fights back to control and remove the infection. During this process, immune cells flood the blood stream with proteins known as cytokines. This process is known as systemic inflammation.

Even when we are healthy, our bodies carry trace levels of these proteins - known as 'inflammatory markers' - which rise exponentially in response to infection. Previous work from the team found that children with high everyday levels of one of these markers are at greater risk of developing depression and psychosis in adulthood, suggesting a role for the immune system, particularly chronic low-grade systemic inflammation, in mental illness.

Inflammation can also occur as a result of the immune system mistaking healthy cells for infected cells and attacking the body, leading to autoimmune inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and Crohn's disease. New types of anti-inflammatory drugs called anti-cytokine monoclonal antibodies and cytokine inhibitors have been developed recently, some of which are now routinely used for patients who respond poorly to conventional treatments. Many more are currently undergoing clinical trials to test their efficacy and safety.

The team of researchers carried out a meta-analysis of these clinical trials and found that the drugs led to an improvement in the severity of depressive symptoms independently of improvements in physical illness. In other words, regardless of whether a drug successfully treated rheumatoid arthritis, for example, it would still help improve a patient's depressive symptoms. Their results are published today in the journal Molecular Psychiatry.

Dr Golam Khandaker, who led the study, says: "It's becoming increasingly clear to us that inflammation plays a role in depression, at least for some individuals, and now our review suggests that it may be possible to treat these individuals using some anti-inflammatory drugs. These are not your everyday anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen, however, but a particular new class of drugs."

"It's too early to say whether these anti-cytokine drugs can be used in clinical practice for depression, however," adds Professor Peter Jones, co-author of the study. "We will need clinical trials to test how effective they are in patients who do not have the chronic conditions for which the drugs have been developed, such as rheumatoid arthritis or Crohn's disease. On top of this, some existing drugs can have potentially serious side effects, which would need to be addressed."

Dr Khandaker and colleagues believe that anti-inflammatory drugs may offer hope for patients for whom current antidepressants are ineffective. Although the trials reviewed by the team involve physical illnesses that trigger inflammation - and hence potentially contribute to depression - their previous work found a connection between depression and baseline levels of inflammation in healthy people (when someone does not have an acute infection), which can be caused by a number of factors such as genes and psychological stress.

"About a third of patients who are resistant to antidepressants show evidence of inflammation," adds Dr Khandaker. "So, anti-inflammatory treatments could be relevant for a large number of people who suffer from depression.

"The current approach of a 'one-size-fits-all' medicine to treat depression is problematic. All currently available antidepressants target a particular type of neurotransmitter, but a third of patients do not respond to these drugs. We are now entering the era of 'personalised medicine' where we can tailor treatments to individual patients. This approach is starting to show success in treating cancers, and it's possible that in future we would use anti-inflammatory drugs in psychiatry for certain patients with depression."

The research was mainly funded by the Wellcome Trust, with further support from the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre.

Kappelmann, N et al. Antidepressant activity of anti-cytokine treatment: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials of chronic inflammatory conditions. Molecular Psychiatry; 18 Oct 2016; DOI: 10.1038/mp.2016.167
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release notes at the very beginning that the information comes from a review of 20 clinical trials. While the release could have done more to discuss the limitations as well as the strengths of the meta-analysis, it does include a pretty clear statement about what the study can and can’t tell us.
“It’s too early to say whether these anti-cytokine drugs can be used in clinical practice for depression, however,” adds Professor Peter Jones, co-author of the study. “We will need clinical trials to test how effective they are in patients who do not have the chronic conditions for which the drugs have been developed, such as rheumatoid arthritis or Crohn’s disease.”
We’ll reward that cautionary note with a Satisfactory grade.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 11, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Colonoscopy can save lives, but experts agree that testing rates remain too low. Now, researchers say a special scoring system might point to those people at highest risk for colon cancer, who may need the test the most.

The system might also make colon cancer screening more efficient and boost the number of people who get checked for the disease, said a team led by Dr. Thomas Imperiale of Indiana University Medical Center, in Indianapolis.

One expert said more efforts are needed to get people to undergo colonoscopy, which is currently recommended once every 10 years beginning at age 50.

"Five percent of the U.S. population will be diagnosed with colon cancer within their lifetimes," said Dr. Arun Swaminath, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. He was not involved in the new research.

Swaminath noted that one study published in 2012 found that "colonoscopy reduced the risk of death from colon cancer by 53 percent, by removing polyps. No other procedure is available to remove polyps from anywhere in the colon."

And while some areas of the United States have rates of compliance with colonoscopy guidelines of 75 percent or more, "many areas have poor colon cancer screening rates," he added.

Imperiale's team noted that not all people deemed to be at "average risk" for colon cancer face the same risk of the disease, and so some might benefit more from invasive colonoscopy than others.

In the new study, the Indiana researchers looked at more than 4,400 Americans who were scheduled to undergo their first screening colonoscopy. They calculated a clinical "score" for each of these patients, based on their health information, and the five most common risk factors for colon cancer: age, sex, waist size, smoking and family history.

Then they looked at the results of each patient's colonoscopy. The study found that patients classified under the scoring system as low-risk did, in fact, have far fewer advanced abnormal growths that might develop into cancer, compared to patients classified as high-risk.

So, patients scoring at the lower end of risk for colon cancer might be able to have less invasive screening tests (such as the fecal occult blood test), while those at higher risk would require a colonoscopy, Imperiale's team concluded.

However, Swaminath wasn't fully sold on the notion.

He believes that the scoring system "was only modestly able to separate people within the risk groups." Swaminath pointed out that even the new study found that "low- to intermediate-risk patients still have a risk between of between 1.9 percent to 9.9 percent of harboring a polyp that can develop into cancer."

For now, he said, the data from this study is not strong enough to spur any changes in current screening recommendations.

Dr. Jules Garbus is co-chief of colon and rectal surgery at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y. He seemed more supportive of the new scoring system.

"A risk stratification tool is critical in helping physicians make appropriate screening recommendations for patients," Garbus said. "While high-risk patients may ultimately require a screening colonoscopy, many average- and low-risk patients could undergo less invasive screening procedures. This can improve patient compliance with screening, as well as address escalating health care cost issues.

The study is published Aug. 10 in the Annals of Internal Medicine.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about colorectal cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story accurately explains that the research was about predictive modeling, and explains the components of the risk score as well as the study design. There are some cautionary notes in the text, including a statement from outside expert that “the data from this study is not strong enough to spur any changes in current screening recommendations,” an opinion shared by an editorialist on the study. We think this is sufficient for a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, May 4, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Among men under 65 with early stage prostate cancer, those who have the prostate gland removed are less likely to die than those who adopt a "watchful waiting" approach, according to a new long-term study out of Europe.

But the findings are not likely to be practice-changing, said Dr. Richard E. Greenberg, chief of urologic oncology at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, who was not involved with the study.

"This is relatively early stage disease, and it shows what we would expect it to show: that those who have more years [to live] have better survival if treated aggressively," he said.

Men with prostate cancer face a confusing maze of options today, including not only surgery but hormone therapy, different kinds of radiation therapy and even simply foregoing medical treatment while monitoring the cancer closely ("watchful waiting," also known as "active surveillance").

"Watchful waiting" is often recommended when a man is not expected to die of the cancer and would like to avoid the risk of the debilitating side effects associated with prostate cancer treatment. These may include: incontinence and erectile dysfunction (surgery); erectile dysfunction and secondary cancers (radiation therapy); nausea, breast growth, liver problems (hormonal therapy); and weakness, hair loss, fluid retention (chemotherapy).

The data presented in the May 5 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine is a 15-year follow-up of a study for which three-years of follow-up had previously been reported.

The earlier study also found that undergoing a radical prostatectomy lowered the risk of the cancer spreading, as well as the death rate from prostate cancer or any other cause.

The researchers, Drs. Anna Bill-Axelson and Lars Holmberg of University Hospital, Uppsala, and colleagues, enrolled nearly 700 men with early prostate cancer under the age of 75 who were randomly selected either to undergo a radical prostatectomy or to stay in "watchful waiting" mode.

After an average follow-up of about 13 years, 14.6 percent of the men who had undergone surgery had died, versus 20.7 percent in the watchful waiting group, a 38 percent reduced risk.

The benefit was primarily seen among men younger than 65 and the authors estimated that seven men under the age of 65 and 8 over the age of 65 would need to be treated to save one life.

There was also a benefit in men whose tumors had low-risk characteristics.

Men whose cancer had moved outside of the prostate gland and who underwent removal of the prostate had a seven times higher risk of dying than men whose tumors hadn't spread.

Radical prostatectomy can come with a price -- including erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence and even bowel incontinence -- although these effects are not as common as techniques improve. A nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy, for example, may be able to prevent erectile dysfunction.

Also, the men in this study were diagnosed only after they had symptoms, unlike the majority of men in the United States, Greenberg said.

"The advantage of screening is that men are more likely to be cured of cancer but they also have a greater chance of not succumbing to the consequences of the surgical complications, whether [those] be erectile dysfunction or urinary incontinence," Greenberg said.

Also, he said, erectile dysfunction can also be a factor of aging and can be treated in most cases.

But much remains to be known about how best to treat different types of prostate cancer.

"The management of early stage prostate cancer continues to require further randomized controlled studies, which are underway, to determine the true benefit of treatment versus expectant management," said Dr. Marc Danziger, an attending urologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, who was not involved with the study.

"Currently, the potential benefit and side effects of treatment needs to be addressed on an individual basis in relation to the risk stratification of disease, patient desires, health status and risk tolerance," Danziger added.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on prostate cancer treatments.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a laudable job of providing information about the study reported on including the fact that the results most recently published basically expand the timeframe of followup on these men which have previously been published.  It provided insight about the number of men involved in the study, how their prostate cancer was detected and that the men had been randomly assigned to their treatment group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 7, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Evidence is mounting that a marijuana-derived oil might benefit some children with epilepsy whose seizures aren't controlled by approved medications, two new studies show.

Cannabidiol (CBD) significantly reduced seizures in as many as half of children with epilepsy, researchers planned to report Monday at the American Epilepsy Society's annual meeting, in Philadelphia.

But experts say these positive findings may have been influenced by a "placebo effect." All participants in these studies knew they were taking the oil, which could have affected reports of its effectiveness.

"We know that our placebo rates can be as high as 30 percent, and sometimes higher," said Dr. Amy Brooks-Kayal, American Epilepsy Society president, who wasn't involved in the studies.

"We don't know the real effect of the cannabidiol, and we won't until we complete the studies that are ongoing that are placebo-controlled and blinded," added Brooks-Kayal, who is also a professor of pediatrics, neurology and pharmaceutical sciences at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.

There also are concerns that cannabidiol may interact badly with some anti-seizure medications approved for epilepsy treatment, according to another study scheduled for presentation at the meeting.

Cannabidiol is a major chemical component of marijuana, said Dr. Orrin Devinsky, a neurologist at NYU Langone Medical Center's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center in New York City and co-author of one of the studies.

CBD doesn't produce intoxication like pot's other major chemical compound, THC. But, researchers believe it may interact with a brain receptor that plays a role in the development of seizures, Devinsky said.

"This receptor has several effects, but one of them may be to modulate the calcium inside and outside the neuron, which is very much related to the excitability of nerve cells," he explained.

Previous studies have shown some benefit in adults, and word has spread. Families with adults and children with epilepsy have flocked to states where medical marijuana is legal to seek treatment, Brooks-Kayal said.

"There is a fairly active and vocal group of families in Colorado who are using cannabidiol oils that are made artisanally," she said.

To see whether children with epilepsy would benefit from cannabidiol treatment, Devinsky led a study involving 261 people, mostly children, whose seizures had not been controlled using current anti-seizure medications. The average age of the participants was 11.

Everyone received a British-made cannabidiol oil called Epidiolex, which was administered as a drop on the tongue, Devinsky said. This was in addition to their current drug therapy.

After three months, seizure frequency declined by an average 45 percent in all participants. Almost half experienced a 50 percent or greater reduction in seizures, and about one of every 10 patients became seizure-free, the study found.

"This was a very, very treatment-resistant group, and the response was very promising," Devinsky said.

A second study from the University of California, San Francisco, explored the long-term effectiveness of cannabidiol for children with epilepsy, by adding the marijuana-derived oil to the regular drug regimen of about 25 kids for one year.

The study found that after a year, the treatment resulted in a 50 percent reduction in seizures for 10 participants -- about 40 percent of the group. One child remained seizure-free, but 12 of the initial participants dropped out of the study because the cannabidiol didn't seem to do them any good.

Although he said he would prescribe CBD to people with uncontrolled seizures, Devinsky said he is "very anxious" to see the results of ongoing randomized, controlled clinical trials. The results of one major trial are expected in the first quarter of 2016, he added.

If CBD proves effective in controlled trials, it could be two to five years before the drug is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Devinsky noted.

Federal regulators also will have to weigh potential interactions of cannabidiol with other anti-seizure drugs. Another study scheduled for presentation at the meeting found that CBD appeared to enhance the effects of the epilepsy medication levetiracetam (Keppra), when given to lab mice.

However, the oil appeared to interact negatively with two other drugs, clobazam (Onfi) and carbamazepine (Tegretol), the University of Utah researchers found.

Data and conclusions presented at meetings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more on medical marijuana, visit the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story makes an early point that neither of the studies that received most of the attention was blinded; that is, both patients and scientists were aware of the procedures. The story also prominently reflects the views of an independent researcher who reminds readers that (1) placebo rates can be quite high and (2) the field won’t know the “real” effects until well-designed clinical studies are conducted.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Yoga enthusiasts link the practice to a long list of health benefits, including greater flexibility and range of motion, stronger muscles, better posture and balance, reduced emotional and physical stress, and increased self-awareness and self-esteem.

But definitively proving these benefits is challenging, requiring years of costly research. A pharmaceutical company is unlikely to fund a study that doesn’t involve a drug, and in any event, the research requires a large group of volunteers tracked over a very long time.

The subjects must provide health measurements at the outset, learn the proper poses, continue to do them regularly for years and be regularly evaluated.

No one knows these challenges better than Dr. Loren M. Fishman, a physiatrist at Columbia University who specializes in rehabilitative medicine. For years, he has been gathering evidence on yoga and bone health, hoping to determine whether yoga might be an effective therapy for osteoporosis.

The idea is not widely accepted in the medical community, but then, researchers know comparatively little about complementary medicine in general. So in 2005, Dr. Fishman began a small pilot study of yoga moves that turned up some encouraging results. Eleven practitioners had increased bone density in their spine and hips, he reported in 2009, compared with seven controls who did not practice yoga.

Knowing that more than 700,000 spinal fractures and more than 300,000 hip fractures occur annually in the United States, Dr. Fishman hoped that similar findings from a much larger study might convince doctors that this low-cost and less dangerous alternative to bone-loss drugs is worth pursuing.

Those medications can produce adverse side effects like gastrointestinal distress and fractures of the femur. Indeed, a recent study published in Clinical Interventions in Aging found that among 126,188 women found to have osteoporosis, all of whom had Medicare Part D drug coverage, only 28 percent started bone drug therapy within a year of diagnosis.

Many of those who avoided drugs were trying to avoid gastrointestinal problems.

On the other hand, yoga’s “side effects,” Dr. Fishman and colleagues wrote recently, “include better posture, improved balance, enhanced coordination, greater range of motion, higher strength, reduced levels of anxiety and better gait.”

Weight-bearing activity is often recommended to patients with bone loss, and Dr. Fishman argues that certain yoga positions fit the bill.

“Yoga puts more pressure on bone than gravity does,” he said in an interview. “By opposing one group of muscles against another, it stimulates osteocytes, the bone-making cells.”

Most experts argue that it’s difficult, perhaps impossible, for adults to gain significant bone mass. Undeterred, Dr. Fishman invested a chunk of his own money and with three collaborators — Yi-Hsueh Lu of The Rockefeller University, Bernard Rosner of Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Dr. Gregory Chang of New York University — solicited volunteers worldwide via the Internet for a follow-up to his small pilot study.

Of the 741 people who joined his experiment from 2005 to 2015, 227 (202 of them women) followed through with doing the 12 assigned yoga poses daily or at least every other day. The average age of the 227 participants upon joining the study was 68, and 83 percent had osteoporosis or its precursor, osteopenia.

The 12 poses, by their English names, were tree, triangle, warrior II, side-angle, twisted triangle, locust, bridge, supine hand-to-foot I, supine hand-to-foot II, straight-legged twist, bent-knee twist and corpse pose. Each pose was held for 30 seconds. The daily regimen, once learned, took 12 minutes to complete.

The researchers collected data at the start of the study on the participants’ bone density measurements, blood and urine chemistry and X-rays of their spines and hips. They were each given a DVD of the 12 yoga poses used in the pilot study and an online program in which to record what they did and how often.

A decade after the start of the study, bone density measurements were again taken and emailed to the researchers; many participants also had repeat X-rays done. The findings, as reported last month in Topics of Geriatric Rehabilitation, showed improved bone density in the spine and femur of the 227 participants who were moderately or fully compliant with the assigned yoga exercises.

Improvements were seen in bone density in the hip as well, but they were not statistically significant.

Before the study, the participants had had 109 fractures, reported by them or found on X-rays.

At the time the study was submitted for publication, “with more than 90,000 hours of yoga practiced largely by people with osteoporosis or osteopenia, there have been no reported or X-ray detected fractures or serious injuries of any kind related to the practice of yoga in any of the 741 participants,” Dr. Fishman and his colleagues wrote.

“Yoga looks like it’s safe, even for people who have suffered significant bone loss,” Dr. Fishman said in an interview.

Furthermore, a special study of bone quality done on 18 of the participants showed that they had “better internal support of their bones, which is not measured by a bone density scan but is important to resisting fractures,” Dr. Fishman said.

The study has many limitations, including the use of self-selected volunteers and the lack of a control group. But all told, the team concluded, the results may lend support to Dr. Fishman’s long-held belief that yoga can help reverse bone loss.

Even if bone density did not increase, improvements in posture and balance that can accrue from the practice of yoga can be protective, Dr. Fishman said.

“Spinal fractures can result from poor posture, and there’s no medication for that, but yoga is helpful,” he said.

In addition, “Yoga is good for range of motion, strength, coordination and reduced anxiety,” he said, “all of which contribute to the ability to stay upright and not fall. If you don’t fall, you greatly reduce your risk of a serious fracture.”

For more fitness, food and wellness news, follow us on Facebook and Twitter, or sign up for our newsletter.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Appropriate caveats about the lack of control group and the fact the study was among self-selected volunteers (perhaps a hint of ‘healthy-people bias’) were helpful.  Other limitations of the research, such as the dependence on self-reporting of the participants’ daily yoga practice (people often either forget or give socially appropriate responses in surveys) could have been discussed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Cardiac arrest patients who get cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) from a bystander at the scene may have better survival odds even when an ambulance takes a long time to arrive, a Danish study suggests.

Researchers examined data on 7,623 cardiac arrest patients and found when an ambulance arrived within five minutes of a 911 call, patients were 2.3 times more likely to survive at least 30 days if they received bystander CPR than if they didn’t get this aid at the scene.

When ambulances took up to 10 minutes to arrive, bystander CPR was associated with tripled survival odds, the study also found. After 13 minutes, patients who got CPR at the scene continued to have better survival odds but the difference was no longer statistically meaningful.

“Early CPR saves lives, and the lack of CPR efforts from bystanders could result in significantly decreased chances of survival,” said lead study author Dr. Shahzleen Rajan of Copenhagen University Hospital in Denmark.

Cardiac arrest involves the abrupt loss of heart function, breathing and consciousness. Unlike a heart attack, which happens when blood flow to a portion of the heart is blocked, cardiac arrest occurs when the heart’s electrical system malfunctions, often due to irregular heart rhythms. Cardiac arrest may occur with no warning and is often fatal.

Chest compressions or CPR can help restore circulation, increasing the odds of survival. Bystander CPR generally won’t restore a normal heart rhythm but it can buy time by maintaining blood flow to vital organs.

“We know from previous research that 1 in 8 people survive after a cardiac arrest if a bystander initiates CPR before the arrival of the emergency medical services,” Rajan said by email. “In contrast, if CPR is not initiated before the arrival of the emergency medical services, only 1 in 30 people survive a cardiac arrest.”

For the current study, researchers looked at 30-day survival for patients who had cardiac arrests outside of a hospital between 2005 and 2011.

When the ambulance arrived within five minutes, 14.5 percent of patients in the bystander CPR group survived at least 30 days, compared with 6.3 percent in the group that didn’t get this help.

For ambulance arrival times up to ten minutes, 6.7 percent in the CPR group and 2.2 percent of the other patients survived. If the ambulance took more than 13 minutes, the survival rate was 3.7 percent in the CPR group and 1.5 percent for the others - a difference that wasn’t statistically meaningful.

The study is observational and doesn’t prove bystander CPR increases survival odds, the authors note in Circulation. Researchers also lacked data on how quickly bystanders intervened after the start of cardiac arrest, which could influence outcomes, the authors note.

“Once a victim has sustained a cardiac arrest with little or no blood supply going to the heart or brain, the time to reestablishing blood flow with oxygenated blood is critical,” said Dr. Lenworth Jacobs, director of trauma and emergency medicine at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut.

“It is generally thought that the sooner this is implemented the better,” Jacobs, who wasn’t involved in the study, added by email.

The biggest obstacle to bystander CPR remains that too few people know how to do it, said Dr. Peter Pons, an emergency physician in Denver and professor emeritus at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.

“Clearly, if someone has been motivated to learn and has been taught CPR, they will often assist,” Pons, who wasn’t involved in the study, said by email. “When someone does not have that knowledge, they tend to be more reluctant to act and may fear making things worse.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: In this story, important limitations of study findings are explained to some degree, enough to be satisfactory. An author of the study is cited explaining that the findings do not definitely establish that CPR is actually the direct cause of the higher survival rates reported. The reason for that, unstated, is that this study reports the correlation between cases in which bystander CPR was administered and patient survival rates. It wasn’t an experiment that could prove one caused the other–that could have been made clearer.
Granted, at the end of the story we learn “the study is observational and doesn’t prove bystander CPR increases survival odds, the authors note in Circulation. Researchers also lacked data on how quickly bystanders intervened after the start of cardiac arrest, which could influence outcomes, the authors note.”
But since some readers may not know what “observational” means, this could have been spelled out more.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An emerging treatment for a common hospital-acquired infection could be (slightly) less gross in the future. Researchers have found that delivering a fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) in a pill—a poop pill, basically—is no worse than a similar procedure done with a colonoscopy.

Neither option may sound particularly enticing, but FMTs are wildly effective at treating a very nasty infection called Clostridium difficile. One of the first controlled clinical trials for FMTs in 2013 ended early because the patients who received the treatment were doing so much better than patients who didn’t. In the new study, almost 90 percent of adults treated with the capsules were cured.

“It’s absolutely insane. We just don’t see kind of efficacy with drugs,” Dr. Dina Kao told Newsweek. Kao is one of the authors of the paper and a gastroenterologist at the University of Alberta. Kao and her colleagues published the findings in the Journal of the American Medical Association on Tuesday.

C. difficile infections can set in after a course of broad-spectrum antibiotics, which can wipe out some of the bacterial populations normally found in people’s gut. The transplants work by replacing those “healthy” bacteria. “C. difficile is the single biggest cause of diarrhea in a health care setting,” Kao said. “It is our public enemy No. 1 in hospitals.”

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, C. difficile infects half a million people in the United States per year and kills 15,000 people. But patients may be hesitant to accept this potentially life-saving treatment because there are feces involved. Previous research found that while every part of this treatment was unappealing to most people, being offered the treatment in a pill form made patients significantly more open to the idea. Other efforts to take the “poop” out of the poop pills—to just include the bacteria thought to be behind the benefits—have failed.

The 116 patients used in this study may have been selected in part because they were ideal candidates for FMTs, Dr. Elizabeth Hohmann noted, but she said the paper is solid overall. (Hohmann, a researcher at Massachusetts General Hospital who has also done research on FMTs, was not involved in his research.) “The results are sort of a best-case scenario,” she said. “What I like about this paper is that it validates the upper-GI route and demonstrates that you can get very good cure rates without doing a colonoscopy.”

That’s important because colonoscopies and the anesthesia required for the procedure can put a lot of stress on a person’s body and can be complicated for the people most at risk for C. difficile infections, Hohmann noted

Kao’s study also showed that people found FMTs far less unpleasant when the poop came in a pill. Two-thirds of the 57 patients who got the pills said their experiences were “not at all unpleasant,” while just 44 percent of the 59 patients who received the FMT via a colonoscopy could say the same.

But most importantly, the study found no difference in effectiveness between the two therapies. There was a significant difference in cost. Though the procedures were done in a Canadian hospital, the FMTs delivered by colonoscopy cost nearly $500 USD more than the capsules, which cost about $300.

FMTs are not yet common practice, though Kao noted that it is becoming the standard of care for C. difficile infections. “For this group of patients, nothing else really works,” she said. However, the same cannot be said yet for other conditions. While the FDA said in 2013 that doctors can try fecal transplants in patients with C. difficile infections, the agency noted doctors should only use FMT for other conditions in clinical trials. Over 100 clinical trials are ongoing for various FMT therapies, including ones to treat ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease in children. (New FDA guidelines have been in the works since 2016 but aren’t finalized.)

Despite the FDA’s advice, some people have set up shop as FMT providers anyway. Buzzfeed reported in June that one clinic in Tampa was even providing FMTs as a treatment for autism.

Though physicians think they know how FMTs work, it remains somewhat mysterious. One recent, small study found that even stool samples that are entirely free of bacteria can be effective, perhaps because there are non-bacterial organisms that also help.

“We still don’t understand what’s going on, and in these other conditions it’s not as clear-cut that the disturbance in the bacterial composition is the cause,” Kao said. “Stool is such a complex mixture.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story comments on the size of the study and quotes a researcher about strengths (a randomized, controlled trial) and limitations (selection bias) of the study. Selection bias, in this case, means many people were excluded from the clinical trial if they had any number of issues (patients with severe or complicated cases were excluded, for example), potentially biasing the results. In a more real-world setting, the effectiveness rate may drop once it’s tried on a wider range of people.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic condition that affects 422 million people worldwide. For decades, doctors have treated it with medications designed to keep blood sugar levels down.

But in a paper published in the , researchers in the UK describe a landmark study in which people with diabetes went into remission—just by losing weight.

Nearly half of people in the study who were given a six-month diet plan and lost an average of 30 pounds went into remission and no longer had diabetes. None took any medications during that time to control their disease and relied on weight loss alone.

Type 2 diabetes is caused by the body’s in ability to break down sugars from the diet. Normally, cells in the pancreas work to release insulin, a hormone that can process sugar and either send it to cells that need it for energy or store it as fat for future energy needs. Cells in the liver are responsible for clearing insulin from the circulation. But excess fat in the pancreas and liver can start to shut down these insulin-producing cells, leading to spikes in blood sugar levels. Diabetes medications can bring sugar levels down but do not address the compromised insulin machinery.

In the study, Dr. Roy Taylor, professor of medicine and metabolism at Newcastle University, and his colleagues randomly assigned nearly 300 people to either a weight management program or their usual treatments, including diabetes medications. All of the people had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes in the six years preceding the study. The people assigned to the diet group stopped any diabetes drugs they were taking on the same day they began the diet.

The diet, which was designed to help people lose up to 30 pounds, involved three to five months of a strict low-calorie liquid formula diet averaging no more than 850 calories a day, followed by two to eight weeks of reintroducing food, along with nutritional education and cognitive behavioral therapy to help people stick with the new eating plan.

Taylor and his team tracked outcomes including weight loss, diabetes remission and level of fat in the pancreas and liver. After a year, most of the people in the diet group lost about 22 pounds, compared to two pounds in the control group. Nearly a quarter of the people who managed their weight were able to lose 33 pounds or more, while none in the control group were able to lose that much. Most importantly, 46% of the people in the diet group went into remission with their diabetes, compared to just 4% in the control group.

MORE: Antibiotics Are Linked To Type-2 Diabetes

“People newly diagnosed with diabetes for the first time can look at this and know it isn’t necessarily for life,” says Taylor. “It isn’t an irreversible, inexorable condition that you can never escape from — at the moment, people are told that.”

Previous studies have suggested that lifestyle changes, including diet and exercise, can be powerful ways to lose weight and combat diabetes. The Diabetes Prevention Program in the U.S. revealed in 2002 that diet and exercise alone can prevent people from progressing from pre-diabetes to diabetes, in some cases better than medications designed to control blood sugar. Gastric bypass surgery, which can result in dramatic weight loss, can also help to reverse diabetes, but the procedure is costly and carries a high risk of complications.

The current study takes that work a step further and shows that it’s possible to actually reverse the disease in people who have been diagnosed. Taylor stresses that the study only addressed people diagnosed relatively recently — within the past six years — and that the effect may not apply to more long-term patients. That’s because as the disease continues, he says, insulin-producing cells start to die off. Initially, the cells slowly shut down, entering a so-called resting state. Those are the cells that weight loss can re-activate.

But left in this state too long, the cells eventually die and cannot be revived. Studies suggest that people living with diabetes for more than 10 years, for example, may not be able to rely on weight loss alone to push them into remission.

That points to an important lesson that Taylor hopes doctors and patients will learn from the results. He says that it’s critical to discuss from the start — when people are diagnosed with diabetes — the possibility of using diet and weight loss to treat their disease. If more people can benefit from losing weight alone, then that would mean less cost to the health care system, as fewer people will suffer the serious complications of advanced disease, which can include heart problems, neuropathy, vision issues and even amputations.

Taylor says he intends to follow up on the people in the study for another four years to see if they are able to maintain their weight, and, if they are, whether they continue to remain in remission. “From the very clear data we produced in this trial, yes, this is a watershed moment for diabetes,” he says. “We can offer people hope from the start.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adeptly described the size, randomization of subjects, and control group nature of the study.
The story mentions several difference outcomes in terms of weight loss —  “most of the people in the diet group lost about 22 pounds” and “nearly a quarter of the people who managed their weight were able to lose 33 pounds or more.” We found this phrasing vague and a bit confusing and still don’t know what the average weight loss was in the diet group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"This new drug could be a game changer for future treatment of asthma" - Professor Chris Brightling, NIHR Senior Research Fellow at the University of Leicester

The first new asthma pill for nearly 20 years has the power to significantly reduce the severity of the condition, a study led by the University of Leicester has found.

The research was funded by Novartis Pharmaceuticals, National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) and the EU (AirPROM), and is described by the lead researcher as "a game changer for future treatment of asthma."

Three people die every day because of asthma attacks and research shows that two thirds of asthma deaths are preventable, according to Asthma UK.

Fevipiprant (QAW039) significantly decreased the symptoms of asthma, improved lung function, reduced inflammation and repaired the lining of airways.

The drug is currently being evaluated in late stage clinical trials for efficacy in patients with severe asthma, according to ClinTrials.gov.

A total of 61 people took part in the research. One group was given 225mg of the drug twice a day for 12 weeks and the other participants were assigned to a placebo group. Fevipiprant and the placebo were added to the medications the participants were already taking.

The study was designed primarily to examine the effects on inflammation in the airway by measuring the sputum eosinophil count.

The sputum eosinophil is an inflammation measurement of a white blood cell that increases in asthma and is used to assess the severity of this condition.

People who do not have asthma have a percentage of less than one and those with moderate-to-severe asthma typically have a reading of about five per cent.

The rate in people with moderate-to-severe asthma taking the medication was reduced from an average of 5.4 percent to 1.1 percent over 12 weeks, according to the study published today in the prestigious The Lancet Respiratory Medicine journal.

Professor Christopher Brightling, who is a NIHR Senior Research Fellow and Clinical Professor in Respiratory Medicine at the University of Leicester, led the study at the NIHR Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, which is based at the Glenfield Hospital in Leicester.

Professor Brightling said: "A unique feature of this study was how it included measurements of symptoms, lung function using breathing tests, sampling of the airway wall and CT scans of the chest to give a complete picture of how the new drug works.

"Most treatments might improve some of these features of disease, but with Fevipiprant improvements were seen with all of the types of tests.

"We already know that using treatments to target eosinophilic airway inflammation can substantially reduce asthma attacks.

"This new treatment, Fevipiprant, could likewise help to stop preventable asthma attacks, reduce hospital admissions and improve day-to-day symptoms- making it a 'game changer' for future treatment."

Gaye Stokes from Grantham in Lincolnshire has had severe asthma for 16 years. She took part in the trial and was part of the Fevipiprant group.

The 54-year-old said: "I knew straight away that I had been given the drug. I felt like a completely different person. I had more get up and go, I was less wheezy and for the first time in years I felt really, really well.

"For me, it felt like a complete wonder drug and I can't wait for it to be available because I really think it could make a huge difference to me."

After the 12 week trial and Gaye stopped receiving the drug, she said her health started to "go downhill again very quickly".

Professor Brightling added that the latest advance underpinned the work of the Leicester Precision Medicine Institute, a Centre of Excellence that coalesces and aligns the research missions of the University of Leicester and the NHS in Leicester.

Future treatment of human disease will increasingly move from a 'one size fits all' approach to one of tailoring the treatment to the individual patient.

Asthma is a long-term condition that affects the airways. When a person with asthma comes into contact with something that irritates their sensitive airways it causes the body to react in several ways which can include wheezing, coughing and can make breathing more difficult.

The NIHR Leicester Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit - a partnership between the University of Leicester and Leicester's Hospitals - focuses on promoting the development of new and effective therapies for the treatment of respiratory diseases including severe asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

This is the technical name for the five year Europe-wide, EU funded project, which aimed to produce computer and physical models of the whole human airway system for people with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

AirPROM has demonstrated how an integrated approach, involving modelling, measurement and clinical validation, can accelerate the development of new therapies and improve existing methods.

AirPROM is led by the University of Leicester and coordinated by Professor Brightling.

If media wish to link to the paper once it's published, they can use the following link, which will go live when the embargo lifts: http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanres/article/PIIS2213-2600(16)30179-5/abstract
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This release does a good job of explaining the nature of the research and the resulting data (as far as the sputum eosinophil count data goes). As mentioned above, it falls short in providing other indicators which would have strengthened it considerably. But readers are given a clear idea of the degree of improvement the drug provides to patients in terms of the reduction of eosinophil in sputum, compared to those receiving only a placebo.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Oct. 26, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- Blood thinners may pull double duty for people with the heart rhythm disorder atrial fibrillation: New research suggests they help prevent dementia as well as stroke.

Because atrial fibrillation increases the risk for stroke, people with the condition are often prescribed blood thinners (also known as anticoagulants) to prevent blood clots that can cause a stroke.

Atrial fibrillation also increases the risk for dementia. During the study, more than 26,000 of the 440,000 participants, all with atrial fibrillation, were diagnosed with dementia.

At the time they joined the study, about half of the participants were taking oral anticoagulants, such as warfarin, Eliquis (apixaban), Pradaxa (dabigatran), Savaysa (edoxaban) or Xarelto (rivaroxaban).

The researchers found that people taking anticoagulants were 29 percent less likely to develop dementia than were those who were not taking the blood thinners.

When the researchers focused on people who continued to take the drugs, they found an even larger reduction (48 percent) in the risk for dementia. They also found that the sooner people started taking blood thinners after their diagnosis of atrial fibrillation, the lower their risk for dementia.

Along with not taking blood thinners, the strongest predictors for dementia were age, Parkinson's disease and alcohol abuse, according to the study, published Oct. 25 in the European Heart Journal.

The findings strongly suggest that blood thinners reduce the risk for dementia in people with atrial fibrillation, but proving that would not be possible, the Swedish researchers said.

"In order to prove this assumption, randomized placebo-controlled trials would be needed, but such studies cannot be done because of ethical reasons," researchers Leif Friberg and Marten Rosenqvist, of the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, said in a journal news release. "It is not possible to give placebo to [atrial fibrillation] patients and then wait for dementia or stroke to occur."

However, the findings show that people with atrial fibrillation should start taking blood thinners as soon as possible after their diagnosis and continue to take the drugs, Friberg noted.

"Patients start on oral anticoagulation for stroke prevention but they stop after a few years at an alarmingly high rate," he said. "In the first year, approximately 15 percent stop taking the drugs, then approximately 10 percent each year."

"If you know that [atrial fibrillation] eats away your brain at a slow but steady pace and that you can prevent it by staying on treatment, I think most patients would find this a very strong argument for continuing treatment," he said.

The U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute has more on atrial fibrillation.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This was a mixed bag. The researchers noted the drawbacks of such a cohort study, pointing to the fact that it cannot provide definitive proof linking anticoagulant use and reduced risk of dementia. They noted that a randomized placebo-controlled trial would need to be done, yet doing those studies might be considered unethical.
While this is all helpful context, the story uses inappropriate language throughout the story, including in the headline and lead sentence, to suggest a cause-and-effect relationship between anticoagulants and dementia. For example: “New research suggests they help prevent dementia as well as stroke.” This statement goes beyond what an observational study like this one can tell us. 
We’ll give the benefit of the doubt on the rating, but note that these findings may simply be a manifestation of the “healthy user effect” rather than a true benefit of these drugs. A stronger story would have alerted readers to this possibility.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
BOSTON (Sept. 11, 2017)--Adding 48 minutes of moderate exercise per week is associated with improvements in overall physical functioning and decreases in risks of immobility in older adults who are sedentary, finds a new study led by researchers at the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging (USDA HNRCA) at Tufts University.

In the study, published in PLOS ONE on Aug. 18, the researchers evaluated how different doses of exercise for adults age 70-89 would impact the benefits. While the researchers saw improvements in all participants who added some physical activity to their routine, those who got more exercise saw greater changes. The work is part of the Lifestyle Interventions and Independence for Elders (LIFE) study.

"These are people who want to live healthy, independent lives and are at risk for losing that. Maintaining functional independence for older adults is an important public health issue. In our first LIFE study, we confirmed that regular exercise can help improve physical function and prevent mobility loss. Now we see that small increases can have big impacts," said first and corresponding author Roger A. Fielding, senior scientist and director of the Nutrition, Exercise Physiology, and Sarcopenia Laboratory at the USDA HNRCA.

For the LIFE study, the researchers analyzed data from 1,635 men and women age 70-89 over an average of 2.6 years. Half were randomly assigned to a program of walking and walking-based strength, flexibility and balance training; half participated in health education workshops. All had low levels of physical functioning at the start and reported fewer than 20 minutes per week of regular physical activity in the month prior to starting the study. Participants were evaluated at baseline, six, 12, and 24 months. The researchers relied on movement monitors and self-reporting to measure physical activity outside study sessions.

Changes in activity were significantly greater in the physical activity intervention group than the health education group from baseline through 24 months. There was a continuous, graded effect with the greatest benefits seen in the participants who engaged in at least 48 minutes of physical activity per week. The greater differences were also associated with prevention of major mobility loss.

"Our goal was to have participants walking up to 150 minutes per week. To see benefits at 48 minutes is encouraging. We wanted the physical activity sessions to include exercise that participants could do outside of the study, and we hope that learning of these results might motivate others to try to make safe, incremental changes to their activity levels. Reducing muscle loss, functional decline, and loss of independence are important to anyone, at any age, and at any physical ability," said Fielding.

The researchers acknowledge limitations of this study, including examining the different quantities of exercise participation achieved in the LIFE study participants and not specifically prescribing different amounts of exercise to different study groups. In addition, there were differences in the measured absolute amounts of exercise performed when comparing objective activity monitoring using a wearable "device" and self-report of physical activity.

Additional authors on this study are Jack M. Guralnik of the University of Maryland School of Medicine; Abby C. King of Stanford University Medical School; Marco Pahor of the University of Florida College of Medicine; Mary M. McDermott of Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine; Catrine Tudor-Locke of the University of Massachusetts Amherst, and Pennington Biomedical Research Center; Todd M. Manini of the University of Florida College of Medicine; Nancy W. Glynn of the Center for Aging and Population Health, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh; Anthony P. Marsh of Wake Forest University; Robert S. Axtell of Southern Connecticut State University; Fang-Chi Hsu of Wake Forest School of Medicine; and W. Jack Rejeski of the Center for Aging and Population Health, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh.

The Lifestyle Interventions and Independence for Elders Study is supported by a National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Aging Cooperative Agreement (U01AG22376) and a supplement from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (3U01AG022376-05A2S), and sponsored in part by the Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The research is partially supported by the Claude D. Pepper Older Americans Independence Centers at the University of Florida (1P30AG028740), Wake Forest University (1P30AG21332), Tufts University (1P30AG031679), University of Pittsburgh (P30AG024827), and Yale University (P30AG021342) and the NIH/NCRR CTSA at Stanford University (UL1RR025744). Tufts University is also supported by the Boston Rehabilitation Outcomes Center (1R24HD065688-01A1). Dr. Roger Fielding (Tufts University) is partially supported by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, under agreement No. 58-1950-4-003. Any opinions, findings, conclusion, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. For conflicts of interest disclosure, please see the study.

Fielding, R.A., Guralnik, J.M., King, A.C., Pahor, M., McDermott, M.M., Tudor-Locke, C., et al. (2017, August 18) Dose of physical activity, physical functioning and disability risk in mobility-limited older adults: Results from the LIFE study randomized trial. PLOS ONE 12(8): e0182155. https:/

About the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University

For three decades, the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University has studied the relationship between good nutrition and good health in aging populations. Tufts research scientists work with federal agencies to establish the Dietary Guidelines, the Dietary Reference Intakes, and other significant public policies. The Gerald J. and Dorothy R. Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy at Tufts University is the only independent school of nutrition in the United States. The school's eight degree programs,¬ which focus on questions relating to nutrition and chronic diseases, molecular nutrition, agriculture and sustainability, food security, humanitarian assistance, public health nutrition, and food policy and economics¬ are renowned for applying scientific research to national and international policy.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release noted some of the study limitations and we give them kudos for that. There was another limitation we wish they had highlighted: 14,831 elders were screened for participation with 13,196 excluded due to a variety of factors (health related as well as relocations). This suggests that the generalizability of the study conclusions to the general population should be tempered. It’s not clear that the interventions are widely applicable in the elderly population.
More information about the study group and the control group would have added context and clarity to the release.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Any artificial hip can occasionally make a variety of noises. But until Stryker, a medical products company, began marketing highly durable ceramic hips in the United States in 2003, squeaking was extremely rare.

Now, tens of thousands of ceramic hips later — from Stryker and other makers that entered the field — many patients say their squeaking hips are interfering with daily life. One study in the Journal of Arthroplasty found that 10 patients of 143 who received ceramic hips from 2003 to 2005, or 7 percent, developed squeaking. Meanwhile, no squeaks occurred among a control group of 48 patients who received hips made of metal and plastic. “It can interrupt sex when my wife starts laughing,” said one man, who discussed the matter on the condition that he not be named.

Beyond annoyance and embarrassment, many patients and their surgeons fear that the squeaky ceramic hips may signal that the joints are wearing out prematurely. That could force patients to undergo the very operation — a second replacement of the same hip joint — they had hoped to avoid by choosing ceramics.

Already, dozens of patients have elected to endure subsequent surgeries to replace the noisy hips. Some have sued Stryker, the pioneer and market leader, which some doctors say has been slow to take their patients’ concerns seriously.

Last fall, the Food and Drug Administration issued a warning to Stryker, saying it had failed to take the steps needed to prevent squeaking and other problems. Clouding things further, Stryker last year recalled ceramic hip parts made at its factory in Cork, Ireland, after determining that some did not meet its sterility specifications.

Stryker says that none of the problems underlying the recall or the warning letter from the F.D.A. reflect problems that cause squeaking, which it contends occurs in less than 1 percent of implants.

Whatever the actual frequency, some investigators who have looked at the problem say the squeaking seems to be associated with extreme flexing of the ceramic implants, but exactly how is unclear. In X-rays, many of the squeaking hips appear to be perfectly aligned. Nor is there a clear relationship between squeaking and hip pain or other conditions some patients say they have encountered, like the sensation that the hip disengages slightly when a patient walks.

Some patients squeak even they are walking normally, like Ms. O’Toole or Michael Mueller, a software executive in Scottsdale, Ariz. Mr. Mueller is so frustrated with squeaks, pain and popping noises for which he blames his ceramic hip that he has displayed his problem on YouTube.

While there have been no reported cases of serious mishaps, some surgeons fear that the ceramic material might shatter at some point, leaving a patient with so many inflammatory shards in the hip that a doctor could never find them all.

“Catastrophic failure has been a concern in the past, with older ceramic components,” said Dr. James M. Bried, a surgeon in Poway, Calif. Ceramic materials have been used since the 1960s. Dr. Bried, who implanted Mr. Mueller’s hip last year, said he was concerned that squeaking might be “a harbinger of something similar.”

Mr. Mueller said Dr. Bried had told him to consider getting the hip replaced “sooner rather than later.”

Stryker says such fears are overblown.

“It is important to keep this in perspective,” said Aaron R. Kwittken, a spokesman for Stryker. “Published research shows squeaking is rare compared with other total-hip-related risks like infection, dislocation and leaving patients with uneven leg length.”

But plaintiffs lawyers, who have already filed scores of lawsuits on behalf of ceramic hip patients, are gearing up to argue that squeaking is not a minor problem for many who experience it.

“We’re in the infancy of this,” said Douglass A. Kreis, a personal injury lawyer in Pensacola, Fla., whose clients include Ms. O’Toole and Mr. Johnson, who has had his ceramic hip replaced.

Most artificial hips, whatever material they are made of, share a basic design: a socket implanted in the pelvis, into which a spherical head is fitted. The head is attached to a spike that is driven into the femur, or thigh bone, to anchor it.

Durability is paramount with artificial hips. Patients worry that they will outlive their artificial hips and require a second, more extensive and even more expensive procedure at an age when their bodies may be less able to cope with the trauma. Ceramic hips were promoted as lasting much longer than the 15 years or so for conventional artificial joints made of steel and plastic.

Now that the squeaking has raised caution flags, researchers are weighing the noted durability of ceramic-on-ceramic hip joints like Stryker’s Trident model against products with other combinations of materials.

Each combination has known or suspected drawbacks. Metal-on-metal devices, for instance, slowly shed tiny ionized particles that some researchers say might promote cancer. And even the newest plastics are still not as durable as other materials, raising the risks of fragments that can lead to bone-destroying inflammations.

For patients who have already received ceramic hips that have started to squeak, many orthopedic surgeons advise nothing more than watchful waiting unless there are also signs that the hip is slipping out of place or that ceramic particles are breaking loose from the head or the socket. Doctors who have removed ceramic hips say they find dark stripes that indicate accelerated wear on the ceramic heads. But durability tests have suggested that even those extracted hips would have outlasted conventional metal-and-plastic replacement joints, according to researchers.

“There is no evidence that the wear associated with squeaking would lead systems to fail,” said Dr. James A. D’Antonio, an orthopedic surgeon outside Pittsburgh, who was a chief investigator on the clinical trials that led to regulatory approval for Stryker’s Trident.

Dr. D’Antonio, whose longstanding role in Stryker’s product development efforts earned him $1.1 million in consulting payments from the company last year, said he had implanted 400 Tridents since the clinical trials began in 1996. He said that only four of his patients had noticed squeaks and that none of them were able to reproduce them in his office.

But Dr. Fabio Orozco, a surgeon at the Rothman Institute, a major orthopedics group in Philadelphia, said that a recently completed review of about 1,500 Rothman patients with ceramic hips had found that the squeaking condition occurred in 49 of them, or about 3 percent.

“I’m very hesitant to use ceramic-on-ceramic now,” Dr. Orozco said, “unless we are talking about somebody very young.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news story makes it fairly clear that the research it is citing is from cohort studies. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 29, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's approval of a temporary, implanted balloon device for weight loss may have many wondering how -- and how well -- it works.

Called the ReShape Integrated Dual Balloon System, the device consists of two connected balloons filled with saline. The balloons take up space in the stomach, which presumably makes people feel fuller faster, the FDA said in its announcement Tuesday.

But the device can only be used for six months at a time, and it is not likely to be an alternative for people who require lap-band surgery, stomach stapling or other forms of bariatric surgery, said Dr. Mitchell Roslin, chief of obesity surgery for Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"It's going to be effective for short-term weight-loss," Roslin said, "but there is still an overwhelming question whether these devices provide any long-term benefit for obesity."

"I don't think it's going to be part of the medical algorithm for treating obesity," he added. "I think it's going to be for people who want to lose weight fairly rapidly."

In a clinical trial, the ReShape system helped people more than double their weight loss compared to those trying to lose weight through diet and exercise, an FDA news release said. That clinical trial was funded by the company that makes the ReShape system, according to a presentation from the Obesity Society annual meeting in Boston.

The device is available to obese people who often don't qualify for surgical weight-loss procedures, according to the FDA. Obese people who have a body-mass index (a rough estimate of body fat based on your height and weight) between 30 and 40 and at least one obesity-related health condition are eligible for the new procedure, the agency said. Obesity-related health conditions include high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol.

It's also intended for those who have been unsuccessful in trying to lose weight through diet and exercise alone, the agency said.

Doctors insert the balloons through a scope snaked down the throat and into the stomach, and then fill them with saline containing a blue dye. It takes about eight minutes to place the balloons, and about 14 minutes to remove them, according to Dr. Jaime Ponce, medical director of the bariatric surgery program at Hamilton Medical Center in Dalton, Ga. Ponce was the principal investigator of the clinical trial on the ReShape system.

The device doesn't change the stomach's natural anatomy, according to the FDA. Patients are told to follow a medically supervised diet and exercise plan, to help them lose weight while they have the device in their stomach and to maintain weight loss after the device is removed.

A pair of connected balloons are used because earlier single-balloon versions tended to dislodge and migrate down the digestive tract, blocking the bowels, Roslin explained.

With ReShape, if one of the balloons ruptures then the other balloon will keep it in the stomach. The blue dye that filled the balloon will turn a patient's urine blue, letting the person know that one of the balloons has ruptured. Doctors can then go back in and retrieve the entire device.

Nausea is a common side effect of the device. In the clinical trial, about 15 percent of patients had to have the balloons removed prematurely due to intolerable nausea, according to Ponce.

"The first few days are associated with a fair amount of nausea, and you will need some coaching to get through that," Roslin said.

Another troubling side effect is gastric ulcers caused by the balloons rubbing against the stomach wall. About 35 percent of patients in the clinical trial suffered ulcers, but researchers said most of the ulcers were small and superficial.

Roslin also believes that, for now, patients will have to pay cash for the ReShape. "It is not going to be reimbursed by insurance, at least for the first generation and certainly for the foreseeable future," he said.

The balloons have been available in Europe since 2011, where their average price is about $6,200, according to the manufacturer, ReShape Medical Inc. in California.

The people who initially will use the ReShape are people who can afford to pay for it out-of-pocket and need to drop some pounds quickly, Roslin said.

In the clinical trial, the 187 participants who used the device lost an average of more than 14 pounds, or about 7 percent of their total body weight. Patients who did not receive the device lost about half that amount of weight -- just over 3 percent of their total body weight, the FDA said.

For more information on how being overweight or obese affects your health, visit the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story correctly points out that this information is from an FDA news release, based on a summary of the clinical research. The story also identifies the research as funded by the device manufacturer.
 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Despite several safe drug therapies available to help smokers quit, three-quarters report relapsing within six months of a quit attempt. University of Pennsylvania researchers Rebecca Ashare and Heath Schmidt saw potential for a permanent cessation solution in a class of FDA-approved medications used to improve cognitive impairments from Alzheimer's disease.

In a study consisting of a rat trial and a human trial, Ashare and Schmidt studied the effects of two acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, or AChEIs, called galantamine and donepezil on overall nicotine intake. The rat component showed that pretreating the rodents with an AChEI decreased their nicotine consumption. Consistent with these effects, clinical trial participants taking the AChEI, not the placebo, smoked 2.3 fewer cigarettes daily, a 12 percent decrease, and noted feeling less satisfied with the cigarettes they did smoke.

"We're very interested in screening potential efficacy of anti-addiction medications in our models," said Schmidt, a professor in Penn's School of Nursing and Perelman School of Medicine. "For this study, we looked at potential smoking-cessation medications."

The research itself took a translational approach, what Ashare, a professor in Penn Medicine's psychiatry department, calls bi-directional. In other words, the preclinical data informed the clinical study and vice versa.

At Penn's Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Nicotine Addiction, work on smoking cessation has been ongoing since 2001. Specifically, research from Caryn Lerman, CIRNA's director and the Mary W. Calkins Professor in Psychiatry, concluded that people who quit smoking often report a decrease in what's commonly called their executive functions.

"They feel fuzzy. They're forgetful," Ashare said. "Those deficits are related to their ability to quit smoking. It was this clinical aspect of smoking cessation we thought would be useful to take further."

That's when they turned to the acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.

In the brain, the neurotransmitter called acetylcholine is important to cognitive functions like learning and short-term memory. When nicotine enters the body, it binds to the same receptors in the brain that acetylcholine binds to, resulting in smoking's rewarding and reinforcement effects. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors increase acetylcholine levels in the brain and, in effect, substitute nicotine's effects.

Schmidt had successfully employed such a model with other addictive substances like cocaine. He divided a group of rats into galantamine and donepezil cohorts. To mirror voluntary drug taking in humans, the rats self-administered nicotine using a lever pushed at will. Once nicotine-taking stabilized, the rats were pretreated with one of the two AChEIs.

For both drugs, "we were able to show a reduction in total nicotine self-administered," Schmidt said; however, there was a caveat.

"We know from the literature that upward of 30 percent of patients will report nausea and vomiting [when taking these drugs], and this will limit their compliance," he said. "We had seen that these drugs reduced nicotine self-administration, but we wanted to make sure it wasn't because the rats were sick."

Unlike humans who can verbally report when they don't feel well and whose bodies react to nausea, rats lack the reflex to vomit. In previous research, Matthew Hayes, who has appointments in Penn Medicine and Penn Nursing, had shown that in rats kaolin clay consumption coats the stomach like an antacid and quells any ill effects. Collaborating with Hayes, Schmidt offered the animals kaolin clay, then compared how much they ate normally and with the addition of the AChEIs.

"At the doses shown to reduce nicotine self-administration, the AChEIs did not make our animals sick," Schmidt said. The findings sparked the CIRNA clinical trial, which has to date studied 33 smokers ages 18 to 60.

People who were interested in quitting smoking signed on for 23 days. For the first two weeks, they continued to smoke but also took either galantamine or a placebo. Before the trial began, researchers assessed the smokers' cognitive function to get a baseline. Participants followed the regimen for two weeks and then were asked to not smoke for one full day. Two more assessments took place: after the two weeks on the cigarette-drug combination and again after that initial smoke-free day. Finally, the researchers asked the study subjects to do their best to not smoke for seven straight days, a time during which the participants still took either galantamine or a placebo.

"That week-long period is a proxy for longer-term cessation. The ability to quit smoking the first week after you make a quit attempt is highly predictive of long-term success," Ashare said.

She's still actively recruiting for the trial, with an aim of 80 people total. Once the trial reaches that number, she'll dig into overall quit data. What she's learned so far -- that smokers who used the FDA-approved galantamine smoked fewer cigarettes per day and enjoyed them less -- is promising, particularly given that those who don't smoke during that first crucial week are 32 times more likely to quit smoking permanently.

"Our goal in investigating these different repurposed medications is not to replace the medications that are already available," she said. "We know that they're effective. Our goal is to target different populations of smokers who may be more likely to experience these cognitive deficits."

There's no data to suggest that a clinician treating a smoker should prescribe one of these AChEIs now. But Ashare and Schmidt are forging a path, and, if it leads where they think it might, it could provide smokers yet another option to help them quit.

Ashare and Schmidt published their work in the Nature journal Translational Psychiatry.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release gives a fairly clear description of the study parameters. The study, while small with 33 volunteers, involved giving the still-smoking participants either the drug galantamine or a placebo for two weeks and then asked them to refrain from smoking for one week while on either their prescribed galantamine or placebo. The researchers measured cognitive abilities at baseline and after two weeks on the drug to determine if the drug helped reduce side effects people normally encounter while withdrawing off tobacco.
The release is clear that much more evidence will be available, including on overall quit rates (the most important and relevant outcome), when the full study is completed. There is really not much of a take-away at this point as the information is so incomplete.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 28, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Acupuncture can help alleviate the often-debilitating hot flashes that afflict many breast cancer patients, new Italian research says.

Noting that hot flashes are a fact of life for many women with breast cancer, the investigators found that pairing lifestyle advice with weekly acupuncture sessions dramatically improved the women's quality of life.

"Acupuncture together with enhanced self-care for three months is effective in reducing hot flashes in women with breast cancer," said study author Giorgia Razzini, a clinical trial project manager in the oncology unit of Ospedale di Carpi (Carpi Hospital), in Bologna, Italy.

And because hormone treatment for breast cancer typically makes the hot flash experience even worse, Razzini added, acupuncture could be a useful tool for helping such patients "stay on their therapy and improve their quality of life."

Razzini and colleagues published their findings online March 28 in the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

In the study, the Italian team focused on 190 breast cancer patients who had reported moderate (or worse) hot flashes while undergoing treatment at five cancer hospitals and one primary health care center in northern Italy between 2010 and 2013.

The patients, whose average age was 49, were randomly split into two groups. One group of 105 patients was offered a three-month regimen of self-care advice on diet, exercise and psychological support.

The second group, of 85, was offered the same advice in the same time frame along with 10 half-hour weekly sessions of "traditional" acupuncture.

All of the participants kept hot flash diaries. At the end of the three-month period (and for up to six months thereafter) daily hot flash experiences were assessed for changing severity and frequency.

The result: by the end of the treatment period, those in the acupuncture group were found to have hot flash scores that were 50 percent lower than those in the non-acupuncture group. The finding continued to hold up for a half-year after the acupuncture sessions ended.

Those in the acupuncture group also seemed to have a generally higher overall quality of life in terms of both physical and mental health, with no serious side effects, the study authors said.

So why does acupuncture seem to work?

Razzini cited several reasons, including acupuncture's ability to prompt blood vessel dilation in the patient's nervous system, while stimulating the release of endorphins -- a neurotransmitter that interacts with brain cells involved in the regulation of pain and emotion. It also triggers the release of the stress hormone norepinephrine, as well as the mood regulator serotonin.

Razzini didn't know how much American patients might have to pay for such treatment, but added, "Compared to other effective treatments such as antidepressants, (acupuncture) should be less expensive, and, for sure, more safe and feasible."

Dr. Courtney Vito, a breast oncologic surgeon at the City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center in Duarte, Calif., was pleased that a serious issue in breast cancer treatment is getting a closer look.

"Anyone who treats breast cancer struggles with this problem in their practice, because the hot flashes that some women experience with anti-hormonal treatment can be profound," she said.

"Almost all women experience them. For some it's a moderate situation, but for others it's a really significant problem. Some women -- I would say probably about 15 percent -- have such severe hot flashes that they even refuse to take medications that can cut their risk for cancer or cancer recurrence by 50 percent, simply because they can't handle the hot flashes," Vito explained.

"And I've actually had patients who have had acupuncture with good success, so I'm not surprised by the finding," she added. "But it is heartening that we now have scientific proof that this can work. Which, in the end, may help to encourage insurance companies to their expand coverage so this can become an affordable option for all patients in need."

There's more on cancer and hot flashes at the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a strong point for the story, which does a nice job of describing the study.
However, the story ideally would have discussed how the the control group wasn’t really comparable in intensity to what the acupuncture group received. It’s possible that the acupuncture benefits reflect a placebo effect. A more rigorous design would have compared acupuncture to a sham acupuncture treatment to minimize this.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
There is no significant difference between zinc acetate lozenges and zinc gluconate lozenges regarding their efficacy in shortening the duration of common colds according to a meta-analysis published in Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine Open. Seven randomized trials with zinc acetate and zinc gluconate lozenges found that the duration of colds was shortened on average by 33%.

Zinc lozenges appear to influence the common cold through the release of free zinc ions into the oro-pharyngeal region. However, zinc ions can bind tightly to various chemical complexes in such a way that little or no free zinc ions are released. Previously zinc lozenges containing citric acid were shown to be ineffective in treating colds because citric acid binds zinc ions very tightly and no free zinc is released.

Zinc acetate has been proposed as the most ideal salt for zinc lozenges since acetate binds to zinc ions very weakly. Zinc gluconate is another salt that has been frequently used in zinc lozenges. However, gluconate binds the zinc ion more tightly than acetate does. Because of the somewhat stronger binding, zinc gluconate has been proposed to be less suitable constituent for lozenges. Although the binding difference between zinc acetate and zinc gluconate is a fact, it is not evident whether that causes significant differences at the clinical level for treating the common cold.

In the meta-analysis, Dr. Harri Hemilä from the University of Helsinki, Finland, collected randomized trials on zinc acetate and zinc gluconate lozenges and compared their observed efficacies. Three trials had used zinc acetate lozenges and found that colds were shortened on average by 40%. Four trials had used zinc gluconate lozenges and colds were shortened on average by 28%. The 12% difference between the average effects of the two kinds of lozenges was explained purely by random variation. Furthermore, one of the zinc gluconate lozenge trials was an outlier inconsistent with all the other six zinc lozenge trials. If that outlier trial was excluded, the difference between the three zinc acetate and the three zinc gluconate trials shrinked to just 2%, i.e., a 40% vs. 38% reduction in common cold duration. Thus, properly composed zinc gluconate lozenges may be as effective as zinc acetate lozenges.

Dr. Hemilä also analyzed the dose response relationship between the elemental zinc dose and the observed efficacy in reducing common cold duration. There was no difference in the efficacy between five trials that used 80 to 92 mg of zinc per day and the two trials that used 192 and 207 mg of zinc per day. Thus, zinc doses of over 100 mg per day do not seem to provide any more benefit.

According to Dr. Hemilä, there is no justification for the popular phrase that "there is no cure for the common cold" because of the strong evidence that zinc lozenges can shorten common cold duration by over 30%. However, in future studies the optimal composition of zinc lozenges should be investigated. The optimum frequency of their administration also warrants further investigation. Nevertheless, he also considers that "the current evidence of efficacy for zinc lozenges is so strong that common cold patients should be encouraged to try them for treating their colds, but the patients should ascertain that the lozenges do not contain citric acid or its salt citrate."
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Strength of evidence in a meta-analysis depends on both the quality of the evaluation of the included studies by the researcher, and the quality of the original studies themselves. This news release explains that the original seven studies were randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials and gives some information about how the aggregate effectiveness of zinc lozenges was evaluated across studies. It also explains why one of the seven studies was an outlier. We would like to have seen a mention of the total number of people involved in the trials (575). The release also could have provided context about other meta-analyses of zinc supplements that have been performed and their conclusions. For instance this 2012 meta-analysis concluded that while zinc may shorten colds, “large high-quality trials are needed before definitive recommendations for clinical practice can be made.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 13, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For men who have prostate cancer that's considered "intermediate risk," radiation plus four months of hormone therapy appears to improve survival, a new study finds.

This combination of treatments, however, was not effective in men with either low-risk prostate cancer or advanced disease, the researchers said. Men with high-risk cancer need long-term hormone therapy.

The hormone therapy is known as androgen deprivation therapy. It's designed to reduce the levels of male hormones (androgens) in the body, since they can stimulate the growth of prostate cancer cells.

"For patients with early, localized cancer of the prostate who were treated with radiation therapy, [by] adding short-term androgen deprivation therapy, we improved their cure rates and increased their chance of living 10 years from 57 percent to 62 percent," said lead researcher Dr. Christopher U. Jones, from Radiological Associates of Sacramento, Calif.

But when the researchers looked closely at those findings, they found that patients with low-risk prostate cancer did not need hormone therapy because the chance they would survive with radiation alone was already almost 99 percent, Jones said.

And while short term hormonal therapy is "not very toxic, there are [still] some toxicities," Jones noted. "We don't want to treat any man unnecessarily with that type of treatment. We really want to make sure -- if we are going to recommend that treatment -- the person really needs it," he said.

On the other hand, hormone therapy plus radiation was most effective in patients with intermediate-risk prostate cancer. "We decreased the risk of dying from prostate cancer in those patients from 10 percent to 3 percent, at 10 years," Jones said.

For patients with high-risk prostate cancer, using hormone therapy for just a short while is not effective, he added. "We know from other studies that short-term androgen deprivation therapy isn't enough. You need to give long-term androgen deprivation therapy in addition to radiation to have the best results," Jones said.

The report was published in the July 14 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

For the study, Jones' team randomly assigned almost 2,000 men with prostate cancer to radiation therapy alone or in combination with four months of hormone therapy. The hormone therapy started two months before radiation.

Side effects of male hormone therapy can include erectile dysfunction (impotence), loss of sex drive, hot flashes, growth of breast tissue, loss of muscle and bone mass, weight gain, nausea, liver problems, fatigue, memory problems and mood swings.

In October 2010, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration asked manufacturers to add a warning that certain drugs used in hormone therapy (including the one used in the study) were linked to a small but increased risk of diabetes, heart attack, stroke and sudden death in men.

In this study, men treated with hormone therapy experienced a much higher percentage of liver damage; toxic effects of radiation treatment were similar in both groups.

Over an average of over nine years of follow-up, 62 percent of the men who had combination therapy were alive, compared with 57 percent of the men who received radiation therapy alone, the researchers found.

Overall, hormone therapy reduced the risk of dying from prostate cancer over 10 years from 8 percent to 4 percent, Jones said.

He noted that the radiation treatments in use today differ from those given in 1994 when the trial began.

"We can give 15 to 20 percent higher doses of radiation now than we could then, and we can do it more safely and more accurately," he said. So, that brings into question how much, if any, hormone therapy is needed, he added.

An ongoing trial among patients with intermediate risk prostate cancer aims to answer that question, Jones said. "We are going to find out if androgen deprivation therapy still applies to patients treated with modern techniques," he said.

"This study, in conjunction with what we know about hormonal therapy, really nails home the conclusion that hormonal therapy should not be used in men with low-risk disease because the risks outweigh any conceivable benefit," commented Dr. Anthony D'Amico, chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and author of an accompanying journal editorial.

D'Amico noted that new studies using up-to-date high-dose radiation also found that the addition of short-term hormone therapy improved outcomes at five years for men with intermediate risk prostate cancer, compared with radiation alone.

"If you are in the low-risk category, stay away from hormone therapy. It does no good. [It] can hurt," D'Amico said. "If you have anything beyond low-risk [prostate cancer], the hormonal therapy helps," he said. "It's just a matter of how long you need it for. It could be four months, six months or longer."

These findings are good news for some men, since the effects of short term of hormone therapy are reversible, D'Amico said. "It's not three years, where men are changed forever," he said.

For more information on prostate cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a stellar job presenting information about the outcomes of chance of dying and chance of dying of prostate cancer in 10 years differed for men treated with either radiation therapy alone or in conjunction with male hormone therapy depending on whether their prostate cancer was low, intermediate, or high risk at diagnosis.
The story did not specifically mention that the study it was reported on was a randomized trial.  And the information provided by the lead author indicating that the chance men with low risk prostate cancer had of surviving alone was almost 99% chance should have been that they an almost 99% chance of not dying of prostate cancer.  Because the study did not include an active surveillance control group, it cannot be concluded that even radiation alone was beneficial to men with low-risk prostate cancer.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Researchers have developed a score that predicts an individual's risk of dying within 5 years for people aged between 40 and 70 years old in the UK, according to new research published in The Lancet.

The score, which uses measures that can be obtained by simple questionnaires without any need for physical examination, such as self-rated health and usual walking speed, could be used by individuals to improve awareness of their health status, and by doctors to identify high-risk individuals for further treatment, say the authors.

Individuals can calculate their personalised 5-year mortality risk and what the study authors call an 'Ubble age' [1]?the age where the average mortality risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual?through an online questionnaire, using the dedicated interactive website [2]. The site was developed with Sense About Science [3], a UK charity that that equips people to make sense of scientific and medical claims in public discussion.

"The Ubble website allows anybody in the UK between forty and seventy years old to calculate their 'Ubble age' and their risk of dying within the next five years compared to the general population, using a simple set of a dozen or so questions," says study co-author Professor Erik Ingelsson from Uppsala University, Sweden. "This is the first study of its kind which is based on a very large study sample, and is not limited to specific populations, single types of risk, or requiring laboratory testing." [4]

To create the score, Professor Ingelsson and Dr Andrea Ganna, from the Karolinska Institutet in Sweden, analysed data collected between 2006 and 2010 from nearly half a million adults aged between 40 and 70 years from the UK Biobank [5]. They used a statistical survival model to assess the probability that 655 specific demographic, lifestyle, and health measurements could predict death from any cause and six specific causes, in men and women separately.

The results allow researchers to compare the predictive ability of a large number of health-related risk factors which were formerly studied separately and using different populations, although the predictive ability of risk factors does not necessarily imply they are causally related to the risk of dying.

For example, the research shows that self-reported information, such as usual walking pace and illness and injuries in the past 2 years, is generally a stronger predictor of death and survival than biological measurements, such as pulse rate and blood pressure. Surprisingly, self-reported walking pace is a stronger predictor of death risk in both men and women than smoking habits and other lifestyle measurements.

Self-rated overall health [6] emerged as the single most powerful predictor of death in men, and previous cancer diagnosis the strongest predictor in women (see figure 1 of the Article). When excluding individuals with serious diseases or disorders, smoking habits were the strongest predictors of mortality from any cause (figure 3).

Using these findings, the researchers then developed an easy-to-calculate risk score for an individual's risk of dying in the next 5 years, based on the most predictive self-reported information, including 13 questions for men and 11 for women. The performance of the score was validated in 35810 participants enrolled at two Scottish centres which were not used to develop the score, and was found to have around 80% accuracy in men and women (table 2). UK life tables and census information were used to calibrate the score for the overall UK population.

According to study co-author Dr Ganna, "The fact that the score can be measured online in a brief questionnaire, without any need for lab tests or physical examination, is an exciting development. We hope that our score might eventually enable doctors to quickly and easily identify their highest risk patients, although more research will be needed to determine whether it can be used in this way in a clinical setting. Of course, the score has a degree of uncertainty and shouldn't be seen as a deterministic prediction. For most people, a high risk of dying in the next five years can be reduced by increased physical activity, smoking cessation, and a healthy diet." [4]

Writing in a linked Comment, Simon Thompson and Peter Willeit from the University of Cambridge in the UK say, "One appealing aspect of the website is the representation of an individual's estimated 5 year mortality risk as what the authors call "Ubble age" (the age where the average risk in the population is most similar to the estimated risk of the individual); this concept is similar to that of heart age developed for communicating cardiovascular risk. Whether this will help individuals improve self-awareness of their health status, however, or only lead to so-called cyberchondria, is a moot point. Moreover, 5 year mortality is easier to predict than long-term morbidity, or quality of life and life expectancy, all of which are more important to individuals and to society."

This study was funded by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council.

[2] For preview login details for the Ubble website, please email daisy.barton@lancet.com.

[3] See http://www. for more information.

[4] Quotes direct from author and cannot be found in text of Article.

[5] UK Biobank http://www. recruited half a million people aged between 40 and 69 years in 2006-10 from across the country. Information on sociodemographics, physical measures, health and lifestyle factors, medical history, and blood measurements were taken. All participants agreed to have their health followed. The resource has been open to bona fide health researchers for 18 months. So far more than 1800 scientists have registered with UK Biobank to study a wide range of diseases.

"UK Biobank will only be limited by the imagination of the researchers using it," said Professor Rory Collins, UK Biobank Principal Investigator. "As an open access resource, scientists will be able to scrutinise each other's work, build upon their results or undertake their own novel studies to improve the health of future generations."

[6] Assessed using the question: In general how would you rate your overall health? Excellent/Good/Fair/Poor.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The data used came from a gargantuan epidemiological study involving nearly half a million UK respondents. The news release offers some details about that study, including the number of possible predictors (655) and the nature of the analysis. The text also contains a caveat reminding the reader that prediction is not the same as causation (a variant on the “correlation is not causation” theme), as well as a quote from one of the investigators that cautions against seeing one’s score as a “deterministic prediction.” These are important qualifiers, but they occur lower in the press release, and it is not clear how well those points will get picked up in subsequent stories.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Becky Herry has tried nearly every drug available for melanoma.

A few years ago, that would have been a very short list. Until recently, people with advanced melanoma often died within a year of diagnosis, even with chemotherapy.

For the first time, however, patients such as Herry have options.

The Food and Drug Administration approved two new melanoma drugs in 2011 — the first new therapy for the disease in more than a decade — and approved two from GlaxoSmithKline on Wednesday. All improve survival by a few months.

The FDA also has put a Merck melanoma drug, lambrolizumab, on a fast track to approval by designating it a "breakthrough" therapy.

Several other drug companies are also working on melanoma therapies.

Melanoma research will take center stage at the four-day annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, which begins Friday in Chicago. Doctors will present 288 melanoma studies, compared to only 62 a decade ago.

"The number of new melanoma therapies is sort of astonishing," says melanoma researcher Lynn Schuchter, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine. "The pace is unbelievable."

No one can claim to have cured melanoma, the most aggressive form of skin cancer, which is diagnosed in 77,000 Americans a year and kills more than 9,400.

But after decades of failure, the spate of new drugs is helping more patients than ever before, giving people like Herry more time and better quality of life, Schuchter says. Doctors now dare to hope that giving these new drugs in sequence, or in combination, will help people with melanoma live for years while feeling relatively good.

Unlike traditional chemo, which indiscriminately kills growing cells, the new generation of melanoma drugs work in a precise way, based on a better understanding of the specific genes and proteins that drive cancer growth, says Timothy Turnham, executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation.

"The reason we're seeing these breakthroughs is because we did the basic science research to help us understand how this cancer happens, how it escapes therapy and how it progresses," Turnham says.

Many of the new drugs aim to remove melanoma's "cloaking device," allowing it to be recognized and killed by the immune system, says Roy Herbst, chief of medical oncology at the Yale Cancer Center.

Other drugs — such as the two approved Wednesday, trametinib and dabrafenib — target growth signals within cancer cells.

Herry has tried two of the newer drugs from Bristol-Myers Squibb: ipilumumab, approved in 2011, and an experimental drug called nivolumab.

Although her tumors increased while taking ipilumumab, Herry says a CT scan earlier this year found they had shrunk by half after beginning nivolumab.

The most noticeable side effects from nivolumab have been moderate fatigue and vitiligo, a loss of pigment on some areas of her hands and arms, says Herry, 57, from Santa Cruz, Calif. She's been able to continue working as a registered nurse throughout these latest treatments.

Older melanoma therapies — including interferon, interleukin-2 and five chemo drugs — caused much more serious side effects, leaving her too sick to work, Herry says.

When the new immune therapies work, they often keep cancer at bay for a long time, says Schuchter, who has patients whose cancer has been controlled by ipilumumab for three years.

At the cancer meeting, featured presentations include a study by researcher Mario Sznol, of the Yale Cancer Center, who will discuss long-term results of nivolumab. Researcher Stephen Hodi, of Boston's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, will present the results of combining ipilumumab with an immune-stimulating drug. Doctors from New York's Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center will present research on uveal melanoma, which occurs in the eye, and affects about 1,200 Americans a year.

Other studies released in advance of the conference have shown positive results.

None of the new drugs works for everyone. And none are risk-free.

Ipilumumab can cause severe side effects, created when the immune system attacks the body itself, Schuchter says. Vemurafenib, approved in 2011, can cause non-lethal skin cancers.

"Doctors will say, 'There are side effects, but they are manageable,'" Turnham says. "Well, 'manageable' can mean something different to patients."

Turnham knew a 19-year-old woman with melanoma who "woke up bleeding every morning" because of rashes caused by one of the new drugs, which targets mutations in a gene called MEK. The woman died a year later.

Drugs such as ipilumumab can seem like breakthroughs to doctors because they help 15% of patients. Patients with a limited time to live may not be so positive, Turnham says.

"If you are a patient and someone says, 'There is an 85% chance of you spending $120,000 on a drug, and spending four months of your life being sick, with no benefit,' you're not going to be so excited."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: In a broad overview, the story gave an adequate sense of the state of the evidence.  Some newly approved drugs. Another on a fast track to approval.  Several other companies working on melanoma therapies.  288 melanoma studies to be discussed at upcoming ASCO meeting, compared with 62 a decade ago.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Patients with the most lethal form of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) – based on genetic profiles of their cancers – typically survive for only four to six months after diagnosis, even with aggressive chemotherapy. But new research indicates that such patients, paradoxically, may live longer if they receive a milder chemotherapy drug.

Treatment with the less intensive drug, decitabine, is not a cure. But surprisingly, AML patients whose leukemia cells carried mutations in a nefarious cancer gene called TP53 consistently achieved remission after treatment with decitabine. Their median survival was just over a year.

The study, by a team of scientists at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, is published Nov. 24 in The New England Journal of Medicine.

In AML, treatment involves intensive chemotherapy to try to kill the patient’s leukemia cells and put the cancer into remission. If successful, a follow-up bone-marrow transplant can offer a possible cure, but this course of treatment is recommended only for patients with a high risk of relapse because the procedure can cause severe complications, even death.

“What’s really unique here is that all the patients in the study with TP53 mutations had a response to decitabine and achieved an initial remission,” said the study’s senior author, Timothy J. Ley, MD, the Lewis T. and Rosalind B. Apple Professor of Medicine, noting that in AML, TP53 mutations have been correlated with an extremely poor prognosis. “With standard aggressive chemotherapy, we only see about 20 to 30 percent of these patients achieving remission, which is the critical first step to have a chance to cure patients with additional therapies.

“The findings need to be validated in a larger trial,” Ley added, “but they do suggest that TP53 mutations can reliably predict responses to decitabine, potentially prolonging survival in this ultra high-risk group of patients and providing a bridge to transplantation in some patients who might not otherwise be candidates.”

In an accompanying editorial, Elihu Estey, MD, an AML expert at the University of Washington Medical Center and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, noted that AML is not one disease but many, each driven by different genetic mutations. The results of the current trial, he said, point to the inevitable need to replace large cancer clinical trials evaluating homogeneous drug treatments with smaller trials that involve subgroups of patients, with treatments targeted to their specific mutations.

The current study involved 116 patients treated with decitabine at the Siteman Cancer Center at Washington University School of Medicine and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, and at the University of Chicago. The patients either had AML – a cancer of the bone marrow – or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), a group of blood cancers that often progresses to AML. This year, an estimated 20,000 people living in the U.S. will be diagnosed with AML, and at least 11,000 deaths will be attributed to the disease.

Decitabine often is given to older patients with AML or MDS because it is less toxic than standard chemotherapies. But fewer than half of patients who get the drug achieve an initial remission, so the researchers wanted to determine whether specific mutations in the patients’ cancer cells could predict their responses to treatment.

To find out, they sequenced all the genes in patients’ cancer cells or analyzed select cancer genes. They also conducted standard tests to look for broken, missing or rearranged chromosomes. Then, the researchers correlated these molecular markers with treatment response to identify subgroups of patients likely to benefit from decitabine.

Among the patients in the study, 46 percent achieved a remission with decitabine. But, remarkably, all 21 patients whose leukemia cells carried TP53 mutations went into remission.

Patients also were likely to respond to decitabine if they were deemed to have an “unfavorable risk” prognosis based on extensive chromosomal rearrangements in their cancer cells; many of these patients also had TP53 mutations. Indeed, 66 percent of patients with an unfavorable risk achieved remission, compared with 34 percent of patients who had more favorable prognoses.

“The challenge with using decitabine has been knowing which patients are most likely to respond,” said co-author Amanda Cashen, MD, an associate professor of medicine who led an earlier clinical trial of decitabine in older patients with AML. “The value of this study is the comprehensive mutational analysis that helps us figure out which patients are likely to benefit. This information opens the door to using decitabine in a more targeted fashion to treat not just older patients, but also younger patients who carry TP53 mutations.”

First author John Welch, MD, PhD, an assistant professor of medicine, added: “It’s important to note that patients with an extremely poor prognosis in this relatively small study had the same survival outcomes as patients facing a better prognosis, which is encouraging. We don’t yet understand why patients with TP53 mutations consistently respond to decitabine, and more work is needed to understand that phenomenon.”

Responses to decitabine are usually short-lived, however, with remissions typically lasting for about a year. Decitabine does not completely clear all the leukemia cells that carry TP53 mutations, and these cells invariably become resistant to the drug, leading to relapse.

“Remissions with decitabine typically don’t last long, and no one was cured with this drug,” Ley explained. “But patients who responded to decitabine live longer than what you would expect with aggressive chemotherapy, and that can mean something. Some people live a year or two and with a good quality of life, because the chemotherapy is not too toxic.”

Roughly 10 percent of AML patients carry TP53 mutations in their leukemia cells. Among patients in the study with such mutations, median survival was 12.7 months – which is not significantly different from the 15.4 months’ survival seen in patients without the mutations – and is longer than the typical four- to six-month survival observed in such patients treated with more aggressive therapies.

Decitabine was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a treatment for MDS, but oncologists often prescribe it off-label as a treatment for AML, particularly in older patients. AML typically strikes in a person’s mid-60s; the average age of people in the current study was 74.

“We’re now planning a larger trial to evaluate decitabine in AML patients of all ages who carry TP53 mutations,” Welch said. “It’s exciting to think we may have a therapy that has the potential to improve response rates in this group of high-risk patients.”

The research is supported by an AML-SPORE grant and the Genomics of AML Program Project grant, both from the National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant numbers P50 CA171963 and P01 CA101937.

Welch J, Petti A, Miller C, Fronick C, O’Laughlin M, Fulton R, Wilson R, Baty J, Duncavage E, Tandon B, Lee Y-S, Wartman L, Uy G, Ghobadi A, Tomasson M, Pusic I, Romee R, Fehniger T, Stockerl-Goldstein K, Vig R, Oh S, Abboud C, Cashen A, Schroeder M, Jacoby M, Heath S, Luber K, Janke M, Hantel A, Khan N, Sukanova M, Knoebel R, Stock W, Graubert T, Walter M, Westervelt P, Link D, DiPersio J and Ley T. TP53 and decitabine in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. The New England Journal of Medicine. Nov. 24, 2016.

Washington University School of Medicine‘s 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also are the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals. The School of Medicine is one of the leading medical research, teaching and patient-care institutions in the nation, currently ranked sixth in the nation by U.S. News & World Report. Through its affiliations with Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children’s hospitals, the School of Medicine is linked to BJC HealthCare.

Siteman Cancer Center, ranked among the top cancer treatment centers by U.S. News & World Report, also is one of only a few cancer centers in the U.S. to receive the highest rating of the National Cancer Institute (NCI). Comprising the cancer research, prevention and treatment programs of Barnes-Jewish Hospital and Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, Siteman is Missouri’s only NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center and the state’s only member of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release points out that the trial was fairly small but that the objective of identifying TP53 mutation holders and assessing their response to decitabine appears to be successful. It describes how patients were selected and how their genetic mutations were identified. The release also reinforces the limitations of the study in various ways. Among them: the trial was quite small with just 21 of the 116 patients treated with decitabine having the TP53 mutation, and the researchers do not know why this subgroup of patients — who typically have a poorer prognosis — responded better than the whole to the drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CHICAGO -- Acupuncture gets a thumbs-up for helping relieve pain from chronic headaches, backaches and arthritis in a review of more than two dozen studies -- the latest analysis of an often-studied therapy that has as many fans as critics.

Some believe its only powers are a psychological, placebo effect. But some doctors believe even if that's the explanation for acupuncture's effectiveness, there's no reason not to offer it if it makes people feel better.

The new analysis examined 29 studies involving almost 18,000 adults. The researchers concluded that the needle remedy worked better than usual pain treatment and slightly better than fake acupuncture. That kind of analysis is not the strongest type of research, but the authors took extra steps including examining raw data from the original studies.

The results "provide the most robust evidence to date that acupuncture is a reasonable referral option," wrote the authors, who include researchers with Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and several universities in England and Germany.

Their study isn't proof, but it adds to evidence that acupuncture may benefit a range of conditions.

The new analysis was published online Monday in Archives of Internal Medicine. The federal government's National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine paid for most of the study, along with a small grant from the Samueli Institute, a non-profit group that supports research on alternative healing.

Acupuncture's use has become more mainstream. The military has used it to help treat pain from war wounds, and California recently passed legislation that would include acupuncture among treatments recommended for coverage under provisions of the nation's new health care law. That law requires insurance plans to cover certain categories of benefits starting in 2014. Deciding specifics is being left up to the states.

Some private insurance plans already cover acupuncture; Medicare does not.

In traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture involves inserting long, very thin needles just beneath the skin's surface at specific points on the body to control pain or stress. Several weekly sessions are usually involved, typically costing about $60 to $100 per session. Fake acupuncture studied in research sometimes also uses needles, but on different areas of the body.

Scientists aren't sure what biological mechanism could explain how acupuncture might relieve pain, but the authors of the new study say the results suggest there's more involved than just a placebo effect.

Acupuncture skeptic Dr. Stephen Barrett said the study results are dubious. The retired psychiatrist runs Quackwatch, a Web site on medical scams, and says studies of acupuncture often involve strict research conditions that don't mirror how the procedure is used in the real world.

The new analysis combined results from studies of patients with common types of chronic pain -- recurring headaches, arthritis or back, neck and shoulder. The studies had randomly assigned patients to acupuncture and either fake acupuncture or standard pain treatment including medication or physical therapy.

The authors explained their statistical findings by using a pain scale of 0 to 100: The patients' average baseline pain measured 60; it dropped to 30 on average in those who got acupuncture, 35 in those who got fake acupuncture, and 43 in the usual treatment group.

While the difference in results for real versus fake acupuncture was small, it suggests acupuncture could have more than a psychological effect, said lead author Andrew Vickers, a cancer researcher at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. The center offers acupuncture and other alternative therapies for cancer patients with hard-to-treat pain.

The analysis was more rigorous than most research based on pooling previous studies' results, because the authors obtained original data from each study. That makes the conclusion more robust, said Dr. Andrew Avins, author of an Archives commentary and a physician and researcher with the University of California at San Francisco and Kaiser-Permanente.

Acupuncture is relatively safe and uncertainty over how it works shouldn't stop doctors from offering it as an option for patients struggling with pain, Avins said.

"Perhaps a more productive strategy at this point would be to provide whatever benefits we can for our patients, while we continue to explore more carefully all mechanisms of healing," he wrote.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Compared with the competing Reuters piece, the story gives a much better sense that this is just one of many studies that have looked at the usefulness of acupuncture in recent years. And it specifies aspects of the study that may make the conclusions more reliable than previous studies — particularly the inclusion of individual patient data.  It also includes a comment from a more mainstream “Western” physician who points out that the results observed in acupuncture studies may not represent the “real world” experience of average acupuncture patients (although this is a deficiency seen in studies of many types of treatments — including more mainstream ones).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Veterans Affairs database study of more than 83,000 patients found that men whose low testosterone was restored to normal through gels, patches, or injections had a lower risk of heart attack, stroke, or death from any cause, versus similar men who were not treated.

The study also found that men who were treated but did not attain normal levels did not see the same benefits as those whose levels did reach normal. The study was published online Aug. 6, 2015, in the European Heart Journal.

The findings may sway the ongoing debate over testosterone therapy's benefits and risks, especially for the heart. Studies over the past few years have yielded mixed results, although part of that might stem from differing patient populations and research methods.

For example, the new VA study excluded men with a history of heart attacks or strokes, although it did include those with existing heart disease. A much-cited VA database study that was published in JAMA in 2013 looked specifically at men with coronary artery disease; about 20 percent of the total study group of around 8,700 men had suffered a prior heart attack.

So far, the medical community lacks results from any definitive clinical trial that might provide clear guidance. Meanwhile, the Food and Drug Administration issued guidance earlier in 2015 advising clinicians about the over-use of testosterone therapy, and pointing to a possible increased risk of heart attack and stroke.

The new VA study is likely to draw attention because of its large size and relatively long follow-up period.

Dr. Rajat Barua, the paper's corresponding author, says the study is also noteworthy because of its finding that administering the right dose is critical: Treating "low T" but not restoring levels to normal doesn't appear to impart much benefit, at least in terms of cardiovascular risk. Testosterone isn't prescribed with the goal of improving heart health, but that is a consideration in many cases.

"It is the first study to demonstrate that significant benefit is observed only if the dose is adequate to normalize the total testosterone levels," Barua and his coauthors wrote. "Patients who failed to achieve the therapeutic range after testosterone replacement therapy did not see a reduction in [heart attack] or stroke and had significantly less benefit on mortality."

Barua is with the Kansas City (Mo.) VA Medical Center. He's also an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Kansas.

The study team looked at national data on more than 83,000 men with documented low testosterone, all age 50 or above, who received care in VA between 1999 and 2014.

The researchers divided the men into three clinical groups: those who were treated to the point where their total testosterone levels returned to normal (Group 1); those who were treated but without reaching normal (Group 2); and those who were untreated and remained at low levels (Group 3).

Importantly, all three groups were "propensity matched" so the comparisons would be between men with similar health profiles. The researchers took into account a wide array of factors that might affect cardiovascular and overall risk. They included, for example, age, body mass index, various chronic diseases, LDL cholesterol levels, and the use of aspirin, beta blockers, and statins.

The average follow-up across the groups ranged from 4.6 to 6.2 years.

The sharpest contrast emerged between Group 1 (those who were treated and attained normal levels) and Group 3 (those whose low testosterone went untreated). The treated men were 56 percent less likely to die during the follow-up period, 24 percent less likely to suffer a heart attack, and 36 percent less likely to have a stroke.

The differences between Group 1 and Group 2 (those who were treated but did not attain normal levels) were similar but less pronounced.

Little difference emerged between Groups 2 and 3, except for a slight benefit in survival for those who were treated.

Barua and colleagues say they don't know the exact reasons for testosterone's apparent benefits for the heart and overall survival. "The mechanisms for these effects remain speculative," they write. Possible explanations, they say, could involve body fat, insulin sensitivity, lipids, blood platelets, inflammation, or other biological pathways. More research is needed, they say, to clarify how testosterone affects the cardiovascular system.

While the new study results do seem to advocate for testosterone replacement therapy, Barua stresses the need for "appropriate screening, selection, dosing, and follow-up of patients to maximize the benefit of testosterone therapy."

The authors also caution that "off-label" use remains a concern. In other words, doctors should not write a prescription simply because an older man is complaining of symptoms such as low energy and low sex drive. According to the FDA, "Testosterone products are FDA-approved only for use in men who lack or have low testosterone levels in conjunction with an associated medical condition. Examples of these conditions include failure of the testicles to produce testosterone because of reasons such as genetic problems or chemotherapy. ... None of the FDA-approved testosterone products are approved for use in men with low testosterone levels who lack an associated medical condition."
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The reader will find a lot of methodological detail in this news release, enough to make it clear that this was not a clinical study but, rather, an observational one in which men with low levels of testosterone who had received VA care were divided into groups that reflected either no treatment for the condition or treatment that led to normal levels for some individuals and continued lower levels for others.  The narrative indicates that the three groups were “propensity matched” across a range of biological markers, a strategy that is not as good as random assignment to conditions in a true experimental design but that does make comparisons possible.  Still, this study can only speak to “association” between testosterone levels and health impacts, and while the wording used in the news release does mostly avoid the “causality” hole, the headline and other statements in the release suggest that the study “found a benefit” from testosterone that can be “maximized” through appropriate dosing and other strategies. As a result, readers may well infer that the testosterone “caused” the benefits and that supplementing testosterone levels is a good idea.
In the end, while it could have been more clearly stated that cohort studies such as this are not the last word, we think the overall discussion of evidence was sufficient for a Satisfactory rating. This was a fairly strong research design and would be rated pretty highly for an observational study — though not as good as a randomized controlled trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) -- If you've just had your first heart attack, doctors may one day be able to reverse the damage done with stem cell therapy.

An intravenous method of injecting stem cells into patients who had experienced heart attacks within the previous 10 days suggested that this method works to repair -- not just manage -- heart damage, a recent study found.

The study is a step forward in a field in which a lot of approaches have been tried in animals and preliminary human trials, but none has been approved for widespread clinical use for heart patients.

The new results are a milestone in stem cell research, and for patients, said Jeffrey Karp, a researcher at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, who runs a stem cell biology lab at Harvard University. He was not involved in the study.

Most current clinical approaches are focused on managing problems, not addressing the root of the damage, he said.

"Many patients who have a heart attack will go on to suffer heart failure," he said. "It's imperative to try and fix the root of the problem as quickly as possible."

The research, published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, were part of a phase I study that set out to show safety. The trial has moved on to phase II, which is taking place in 50 hospitals in the United States, said Dr. Joshua Hare, director of the Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute at the University of Miami's Miller School of Medicine and lead author of the study.

"We're looking on the time frame here of five years, in the best-case scenario, to have approved cardiac stem cell therapies," Hare said.

Coronary heart disease, which causes heart attacks and angina -- chest pain resulting from the heart not getting enough blood -- is the leading cause of death in the United States, with nearly 450,000 in 2005, according to the American Heart Association. About 1.1 million people have attacks occur in the United States each year, according to the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute.

The particular kind of cells used in this research are called mesenchymal stem cells, and come from adults, not embryos.

The researchers are using a mesenchymal stem cell therapy that is marketed by Osiris Therapeutics Inc. under the name Prochymal. The drug, which consists of stem cells from donor bone marrow, gets injected into the vein. The cells then travel through the bloodstream and take up residence in the heart.

Mesenchymal stem cells have some natural homing capability, and injury serves as a homing beacon for them, Karp said.

The stem cells reduce the amount of scar tissue and increase the pumping strength of the heart in heart attack patients, Hare said. To a limited extent, they also grow new heart muscle.

The phase I results from 53 patients are not definitive proof that the treatment is effective, but do suggest so, Hare said. In accordance with clinical trial regulations set by the Food and Drug Administration, phase I is meant to show safety, while phase II and phase III trials are done on a larger group of subjects and evaluate how well the drug works.

In this trial, patients' doses ranged from 35 million cells to 350 million cells. There was no change or increase in side effects in treatments getting higher doses of cells, but it seemed that the treatment was more effective -- at least in terms of reducing electrical problems -- in the high dose group, he said.

In separate trials, researchers are looking at how the technique works in patients who have had heart attacks many month or years in the past, Hare said.

The study shows the results of a six-month follow-up with patients in 2007, and researchers are presently working with data from the two-year follow-up.

More broadly, besides bone marrow transplantations, there have not been any major successes in the stem cell field in terms of helping large numbers of patients, Karp said.

"Mesenchymal stem cells are poised to really be the next major success in cell therapy that could be used to treat tens of thousands of patients," he said.

There are several advantages to using mesenchymal stem cells for heart therapy. First, they are adult stem cells, so there are no ethical issues that surround research on embryonic stem cells. Secondly, at least from a safety perspective, mesenchymal stem cells do not require matching -- any donor can give cells to any other donor, and no immunosuppresant drugs are necessary, he said.

Still, millions of cells are required in order for enough stem cells to reach the heart and have a therapeutic benefit, and it's costly to get the required numbers of cells for each patient, Karp said. An area of improvement would be making the stem cell treatment more efficient, he said.

"If we could increase the number of cells that could reach the heart, that would have significant advantages to this approach," Karp said.

This method of intravenous injection means that the procedure theoretically could be performed in a doctor's office or clinic, increasing the accesibility to patients, Karp said.

A more invasive stem cell delivery technique has been showing positive results in other clinical trials, involving injecting patients' own stem cells directly into heart muscle.

The largest national stem cell study for heart disease, sponsored by Baxter Inc., uses this surgical method, and recently announced success in a 12-month phase II trial for patients with severe angina. Researchers found that participants had less pain and an improved ability to walk.

Because stem cells are delivered through a catheter in this method, there is a risk of perforation of about 1 percent, Dr. Douglas Losordo, cardiologist at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, told CNN earlier this year. The drug, GCSF, which mobilizes stem cells, also carries a small risk of blood clotting.

For the Osiris trials, further research is ongoing determine whether patients would benefit more from more infusions of the stem cells, or if it's better for the stem cells to come from their own bodies instead of from a donor, Hare said.

While there's less chance of a person's body rejecting his or her own stem cells than from a donor, there is a time delay, he said. Taking bone marrow and amplifying the stem cells in it could take up to five weeks, whereas donor cells could be made readily available, he said. On the other hand, it is unclear whether a donor could potentially transmit a disease to the recipient in the process.

If you are interested in enrolling in a clinical trial, you can find one at clinicaltrials.gov. The Orisis trial is still recruiting participants.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story makes plain that the evidence from the published study can only prove safety, not efficacy. It does a good job educating readers about the three phases of FDA trials and what each is designed to establish.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Microcapsules loaded with stem cell-derived insulin-producing cells retrieved after they had been transplanted into a mouse.

Kendall Squared brings you dispatches from the world’s epicenter for biotechnology and drug discovery.

Scientists on Monday showed they had overcome some of the major hurdles standing in the way of a long-sought therapeutic fix for patients with type 1 diabetes, outlining an approach that the body’s immune system could tolerate and providing a possible pathway toward clinical trials in the next few years.

In people with type 1 diabetes, formerly known as juvenile-onset diabetes, the immune system dismantles the pancreatic cells that normally produce insulin. So researchers have long sought a way to put back healthy insulin-producing cells, known as beta cells, into patients.

“We’re trying to figure out a way to replace nature’s solution,” said Douglas Melton, co-director of the Harvard Stem Cell Institute.

For years, physicians have been using beta cells from dead donors. But because the immune system of the recipient recognizes the donor cells as foreign, patients who receive a transplant have to take immune-suppressing drugs for the rest of their lives.

Those drugs are not ideal, because they carry a risk of infection or cancer. Plus, donors are in short supply and can’t yield enough cells to treat the millions of people with type 1 diabetes around the world.

The researchers behind two studies published Monday demonstrated they had made progress on both fronts, encapsulating the cells in a protective bubble to shield them from the body’s immune response, and creating beta cells from stem cells, which are potentially limitless.

For the capsules, the scientists homed in on alginate — a seaweed extract — as the starting material. Alginate allows sugar and insulin to flow between the cells and the body, but blocks immune cells from reaching the beta cells.

The problem with existing alginates is that the body eventually catches on to the material as a foreign substance, suffocating the implant in a layer of scar tissue. So, Daniel Anderson, a bioengineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, went in search of a better kind of alginate.

In one of two related studies published Monday, Anderson and his colleagues described in the journal Nature Biotechnology how they had tested 774 variations of alginate in rodents and monkeys and identified a handful that elicited a greatly reduced foreign body response.

For the other paper, published in Nature Medicine, the group embedded tiny capsules made from that durable alginate with beta cells derived from human embryonic stem cells. They then transplanted them into mice with a disease akin to type 1 diabetes.

The beta cells performed “every bit as good as the body’s own cells,” said Melton, a co-author on the Nature Medicine paper.

The transplanted cells controlled glucose levels in the mice without immune-suppressing drugs, the researchers reported. And when the scientists removed the capsules after almost six months, the cells were still cranking out insulin and there was little sign of an immune response to the capsules.

“From very early on, we were getting great success,” said Arturo Vegas, a lead author of the papers who worked in Anderson’s lab before moving to Boston University, where he is now an assistant chemistry professor.

“Everything kind of fell into place,” Vegas continued. “You saw less foreign body response. The human beta cells survived exquisitely well.”

The studies show “you can take stem cells and make a limitless supply of [human beta cells] and put them in a device and cure an entirely different species of animal,” Anderson said.

Just because the system produced strong results in mice does not mean people will respond the same way. But experts say the findings provide hope for future treatments for people.

“This is really the first demonstration of the ability of these novel materials in combination with a stem-cell derived beta cell to reverse diabetes in an animal model,” said Julia Greenstein, vice president of discovery research at JDRF, an organization trying to end type 1 diabetes that provided some funding for the studies. “Our goal is to bring that kind of biological cure across the spectrum of type 1 diabetes.”

The potential of the approach has attracted interest from both small startups and large biopharmaceutical companies that are looking at stem cell-based therapies for diabetes.

One company, San Diego-based ViaCyte, launched the first cell replacement clinical trial in 2014. Melton also recently helped start Semma Therapeutics, based in Cambridge’s Kendall Square neighborhood. Semma has not begun any human clinical trials yet, but the goal is to develop a device that once implanted could control someone’s blood sugar for a year or more, saving them from insulin injections and needing to check their blood sugar every few hours.

“The individuals would not have to worry about that,” Semma CEO Robert Millman said.

Other companies pursuing stem cells treatments for diabetes include Novo Nordisk and BetaLogics, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson.

Most of these other companies are taking a different approach from the work done in the studies published Monday.

The MIT team has developed tiny capsules for the cells, but ViaCyte, for example, has created a larger device outfitted with the cells that gets inserted under the skin. And whereas the Massachusetts researchers examined beta cells exclusively for their study, the ViaCyte team is exploring using less mature cells that, once implanted, differentiate into both insulin-producing beta cells and those that secrete another hormone called glucagon that’s deficient in the disease.

“The main issue with type 1 diabetes is a loss of beta cells,” said ViaCyte CEO Paul Laikind, “but there’s also good data out there to suggest dysfunction in other regulatory cell types.”

The team behind the studies published Monday, meanwhile, is working on tests now in monkey models. Vegas said that if the primate studies are successful, the next step will be developing a therapy to be used in people.

“I think we’ve advanced the ball pretty far, almost as far you could get in an academic environment,” he said. “The talk is shifting toward doing something clinically.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a really nice job of quickly summarizing the state of the evidence and then going into more detail. It’s almost a blueprint for how these stories should be written. In just three sentences, it captures nearly all the relevant information about the evidence. It says, “In one of two related studies published Monday, Anderson and his colleagues described in the journal Nature Biotechnology how they had tested 774 variations of alginate in rodents and monkeys and identified a handful that elicited a greatly reduced foreign body response. For the other paper, published in Nature Medicine, the group embedded tiny capsules made from that durable alginate with beta cells derived from human embryonic stem cells. They then transplanted them into mice with a disease akin to type 1 diabetes.” Note: published in a respected journal, tested in animals (the story could have specified how many and acknowledged that these were animal studies higher up in the story), focused on a disease that’s not exactly diabetes but close. This should signal to readers that a cure for diabetes is still a long ways away.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Updated | Almost sixty years since the FDA approved the pill for birth control in women, a male version may finally be on the horizon. Researchers have developed a prototype male pill that appears to be safe in a month-long trial.

More attractive to many men than a long-acting injection or topical gel—both of which are in development—the prototype pill offers a “major step forward” in male contraception, Stephanie Page, a professor at the University of Washington in Seattle and senior investigator on the study, said in a statement.

Read more: Male birth control pill could be made from heart-stopping poison in ancient African arrows

The once-daily prototype pill suppressed certain hormones to the low levels you'd expect to see with effective longer-term contraceptives, results from an ENDO 2018, the Endocrine Society’s annual meeting in Chicago, abstract show.

The prototype pill—dimethandrolone undecanoate (DMAU)—is somewhat similar to the combined female pill, which contains estrogen and a steroid hormone. Rather than estrogen, DMAU uses a male hormone like testosterone.

Currently available forms of testosterone can exit the body too quickly for use in a once-daily pill. The “undecanoate” in DMAU, however, is a long-chain fatty acid that can slow the drug’s journey out of the body, Page said.

Read more: Side effects are not what's holding back the male contraceptive pill

Eighty-three men took various doses of DMAU or a placebo for a month. Researchers analyzed the men’s hormones and cholesterol with blood tests at the start and end of the study. They found testosterone and two hormones needed for the production of sperm were notably suppressed in men who took the highest dose of DMAU.

While some subjects on all doses experienced mild weight gain and decreases in so-called "good" HDL cholesterol, DMAU appeared safe. All participants passed safety tests including liver and kidney health checks.

“Despite having low levels of circulating testosterone, very few subjects reported symptoms consistent with testosterone deficiency or excess,” Page said. There were no significant changes in mood or sexual function, but a minority of participants did experience decreased libido during the study.

Page has high hopes for the results, calling them “unprecedented in the development of a prototype male pill.” Longer-term studies are the next step toward a once-daily male contraceptive pill, she said.

The study was funded by the National Institutes for Health.

This article has been updated to include more information on DMAU.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story accurately describes the study as being a month-long trial, with a control, involving 83 patients. It could have done more to explain why a lot more testing is needed, though.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WHAT: NIH-supported researchers are reporting additional details about a widely-publicized study that linked a systolic blood pressure target under 120 mm Hg (millimeters of mercury) with reduced cardiovascular disease and a lower risk of death. The new analysis singles out adults aged 75 and older and confirms that those with high blood pressure also benefit from the lower pressure target similar to the larger group studied in the earlier research: non-diabetic adults aged 50 and older. These additional results of the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT) appear in the current online issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA).

The study shows that for adults aged 75 years and older with high blood pressure, a systolic blood pressure goal of less than 120 mm Hg reduced rates of cardiovascular events, such as heart attack and heart failure, as well as stroke, by 33 percent. This lower blood pressure goal also reduced the risk of death among this group by 32 percent, compared to a target systolic pressure of 140 mm Hg. The benefits of a more aggressive blood pressure intervention occurred in both frail (individuals with several impairments or disorders) and non-frail older participants, the researchers note.

About three-fourths of the U.S. population aged 75 and older live with hypertension, a leading contributor to cardiovascular disease and death. Although the standard blood pressure treatment goal is 140 mm Hg, various medical panels have provided inconsistent guidance about what is the optimal blood pressure goal for the senior population. One group has recommended a target blood pressure of 160 mm Hg for persons aged 80 or older, while another recommended a target of 150 mm Hg for adults aged 60 or older. Other experts have supported keeping the standard treatment goal at 140 mm Hg.

To address this issue, the SPRINT study tapped more than 2,600 volunteers aged 75 and older, assigning half to a target blood pressure of less than 140 mm Hg and half to target of less than 120 mm Hg. While study participants with the lower blood pressure goal appeared to have better cardiovascular outcomes overall, the researchers caution all other hypertension patients to talk to their doctor to determine whether this lower goal is best for their individual care.

In addition to primary sponsorship by the NHLBI, SPRINT is co-sponsored by the NIH's National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and the National Institute on Aging.

WHO: Lawrence Fine, M.D., chief of the Clinical Applications and Prevention Branch at NHLBI and a co-author of the study, is available to comment on the findings and implications of this research.

CONTACT: For more information or to schedule an interview, please contact the NHLBI Office of Science Policy, Engagement, Education, and Communications at 301-496-5449 or nhlbi_news@nhlbi.nih.gov (link sends e-mail).

About the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI): NHLBI, a part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), plans, conducts, and supports research related to the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of heart, blood vessel, lung, and blood diseases; and sleep disorders. The Institute also administers national health education campaigns on women and heart disease, healthy weight for children, and other topics. NHLBI press releases and other materials are available online at http://www. .

About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release provides data on the number of participants, their general age and whether their targeted systolic blood pressure targets were 120 mm of mercury or 140 mm of mercury. It also states the clinical outcomes comparing the two targeted groups. While additional information would have been helpful for readers, the amount given is just barely sufficient for readers to see the benefits of the research.
One of the limitations of the study not mentioned in the release is that the study was stopped early; the subjects in the trial were followed for only 3 years. A majority of hypertensive patients will require lifetime medications, so the long-term benefits and harms of intensive therapy remain unknown.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Physicians should consider blood testing of female adolescents for iron deficiency within a few years of starting menses, according to two studies by Penn State College of Medicine researchers.

The researchers used data from more than 6,000 women 12 to 49 years old who took part in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) between 2003 and 2010. As part of the survey, female participants had blood testing for iron deficiency as well as hemoglobin testing to identify anemia.

Women are typically tested some time in their teens for anemia -- the severe form of iron deficiency -- using a quick and affordable hemoglobin test. However, iron deficiency can develop years before anemia and can be missed by hemoglobin testing alone.

"If you think about your car, you have to run your gas tank all the way down before the red light goes on, and that's similar to the way we're screening for iron deficiency," said Deepa L. Sekhar, physician and associate professor of pediatrics. "We're basically waiting until their red light goes on. You have to be really low on your iron storage before you're going to flag as anemic."

Iron deficiency without anemia has been associated with lower standardized math scores, attention deficit disorder and restless leg syndrome in children and adolescents. Among iron-deficient adolescent women there is a future risk of maternal iron deficiency and negative effects on infant health.

Blood tests for iron deficiency without anemia have been developed but they are more costly and difficult to obtain in the doctor's office compared to hemoglobin testing for anemia. Sekhar and colleagues hoped to determine risk factors for iron deficiency without anemia that could pinpoint which women could benefit most from this more costly testing.

In the first study, when the researchers analyzed the NHANES study data, 9 percent of females who were 12 to 21 years old had iron deficiency without anemia. The researchers then looked at potential iron deficiency risk factors in this group, including the age when they started menstruating, as well as their race and ethnicity, poverty status, food insecurity, tobacco or nicotine use, dietary information, body mass index (BMI) and physical activity.

All of these factors have been associated with iron deficiency anemia in women in prior studies. However, the only risk factor significantly associated with iron deficiency without anemia in young women in this study was having had a period for more than three years. The research was recently published in the journal PLOS ONE.

In a second study, the researchers next looked at whether a specially developed questionnaire could better predict iron status. Questions were included on depression, poor attention and daytime sleepiness, symptoms which all have been associated with iron deficiency or iron deficiency anemia, but were not captured in the prior NHANES analyses. This questionnaire was compared to the currently recommended four iron deficiency anemia-risk questions in the Bright Futures Adolescent Previsit Questionnaire, a survey recommended for physician use by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

Ninety-six female adolescents participated in this study, published in The Journal of Pediatrics. The Bright Futures questions alone did not predict iron deficiency or anemia. Yet, the researchers' risk assessment questionnaire was equally poor.

Taken together, the studies suggest that risk factors and assessments should not be used to determine which young women should receive testing for iron deficiency.

"The questions aren't predictive," Sekhar said. "I think we need to establish the optimal timing for an objective assessment of adolescent iron deficiency and anemia."

Sekhar believes the appropriate age may be 16 years old, when most females will have been menstruating for at least three years.

In addition to timing, further research will be needed to determine which blood test for iron deficiency without anemia is accurate, cost-efficient and practical for routine doctor's office use. This test should be given with hemoglobin testing to catch all young women on the spectrum of iron deficiency, Sekhar said.

Iron deficiency can be corrected with dietary changes and supplementation, Sekhar added.

Other researchers on the study in PLOS ONE were Laura E. Murray-Kolb, in the Department of Nutritional Sciences, Allen R. Kunselman in the Department of Public Health Sciences, Carol S. Weisman in the Departments of Public Health Sciences and Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Ian M. Paul in the Departments of Pediatrics and Public Health Sciences, all at Penn State.

This research received $62,500 of federal funding from The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health (grant number K12HD055882), which funded 100 percent of the project.

Murray-Kolb and Paul also worked on the study in The Journal of Pediatrics, along with Eric W. Schaefer, a biostatistician in the Department of Public Health Sciences. Non-government funding from Sackler Institute for Nutrition Science of the New York Academy of Sciences provided 100 percent of funding for this research project.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release describes the two studies and gives enough details about their methods and the questions they were trying to answer for readers to judge the quality of the evidence. However, contrary to the release headline, the two studies that were published do not contain specific recommendations for expanded or universal screening for iron deficiency. In the release itself, the study’s main author is quoted saying:
“I think we need to establish the optimal timing for an objective assessment of adolescent iron deficiency and anemia.” She does not say that she knows the optimal timing.
She further states that more research is needed.
“In addition to timing, further research will be needed to determine which blood test for iron deficiency without anemia is accurate, cost-efficient and practical for routine doctor’s office use.”
The release would have been stronger if it had included a sentence reminding readers that association is not causation. We don’t know that changing the iron levels in teens prevents any of the problems listed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
But in many cases it is just not known whether what is seen on a scan is the cause of the pain. The problem is that all too often, no one knows what is normal.

“A patient comes in because he’s in pain,” said Dr. Nelda Wray, a senior research scientist at the Methodist Institute for Technology in Houston. “We see something in a scan, and we assume causation. But we have no idea of the prevalence of the abnormality in routine populations.”

Now, as more and more people have scans for everything from headaches to foot aches, more are left in a medical lurch, or with unnecessary or sometimes even harmful treatments, including surgery.

“Every time we get a new technology that provides insights into structures we didn’t encounter before, we end up saying, ‘Oh, my God, look at all those abnormalities.’ They might be dangerous,” said Dr. David Felson, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at Boston University Medical School. “Some are, some aren’t, but it ends up leading to a lot of care that’s unnecessary.”

That was what almost happened with Mrs. Weinstein, an active, athletic 64-year-old who lives in New London, N.H. And it was her great fortune to finally visit a surgeon who told her so. He told her bluntly that her pain was caused by arthritis, not the torn cartilage.

No one had told her that before, Mrs. Weinstein said, and looking back on her quest to get a scan and get the cartilage fixed, she shook her head in dismay. There’s no surgical procedure short of a knee replacement that will help, and she’s not ready for a knee replacement.

“I feel that I have come full circle,” she said. “I will cope on my own with this knee.”

In fact, Mrs. Weinstein was also lucky because her problem was with her knee. It’s one of only two body parts — the other is the back — where there are good data on abnormalities that turn up in people who feel just fine, indicating that the abnormalities may not be so abnormal after all.

But even the data on knees comes from just one study, and researchers say the problem is far from fixed. It is difficult to conduct scans on people who feel fine — most do not want to spend time in an M.R.I. machine, and CT scans require that people be exposed to radiation. But that leaves patients and doctors in an untenable situation.

“It’s a concern, isn’t it?” said Dr. Jeffrey Jarvik, a professor of radiology and neurosurgery at the University of Washington. “We are trying to fix things that shouldn’t be fixed.”

As a rheumatologist, Dr. Felson saw patient after patient with knee pain, many of whom had already had scans. And he was becoming concerned about their findings.

Often, a scan would show that a person with arthritis had a torn meniscus, cartilage that stabilizes the knee. And often the result was surgery — orthopedic surgeons do more meniscus surgery than any other operation. But, Dr. Felson wondered, was the torn cartilage an injury causing pain or was the arthritis causing pain and the tear a consequence of arthritis?

That led Dr. Felson and his colleagues to do the first and so far the only large study of knees, asking what is normal. It involved M.R.I. scans on 991 people ages 50 to 90. Some had knee pain, others did not.

On Sept. 11, Dr. Felson and his colleagues published their results in The New England Journal of Medicine: meniscal tears were just as common in people with knee arthritis who did not complain of pain as they were in people with knee arthritis who did have pain. They tended to occur along with arthritis and were a part of the disease process itself. And so repairing the tears would not eliminate the pain.

“The rule is, as you get older, you will get a meniscal tear,” Dr. Felson said. “It’s a function of aging and disease. If you are a 60-year-old guy, the chance that you have a meniscal tear is 40 percent.”

It is a result that paralleled what spine researchers found over the past decade in what is perhaps the best evidence on what shows up on scans of healthy people. “If you’re going to look at a spine, you need to know what that spine might look like in a normal patient,” said Dr. Michael Modic, chairman of the Neurological Institute at the Cleveland Clinic.

After Dr. Modic and others scanned hundreds of asymptomatic people, they learned abnormalities were common.

“Somewhere between 20 and 25 percent of people who climb into a scanner will have a herniated disk,” Dr. Modic said. As many as 60 percent of healthy adults with no back pain, he said, have degenerative changes in their spines.

Those findings made Dr. Modic ask: Why do a scan in the first place? There are some who may benefit from surgery, but does it make sense to routinely do scans for nearly everyone with back pain? After all, one-third of herniated disks disappear on their own in six weeks, and two-thirds in six months.

And surgeons use symptoms and a physical examination to identify patients who would be helped by operations. What extra medical help does a scan provide? So Dr. Modic did another study, this time with 250 patients. All had M.R.I. scans when they first arrived complaining of back pain or shooting pains down their leg, which can be caused by a herniated disc pressing on a nerve in the spine. And all had scans again six weeks later. Sixty percent had herniated disks, the scans showed.

Dr. Modic gave the results to only half of the patients and their doctors — the others had no idea what the M.R.I.’s revealed. Dr. Modic knew, though.

In 13 percent of the patients, the second scan showed that the herniated disk had become bigger or a new herniated disk had appeared. In 15 percent, the herniated disk had disappeared. But there was no relationship between the scan findings at six weeks and patients’ symptoms. Some continued to complain of pain even though their herniated disk had disappeared; others said they felt better even though their herniation had grown bigger.

The question, though, was whether it helped the patients and their doctors to know what the M.R.I.’s had found. And the answer, Dr. Modic reported, is that it did not. The patients who knew recovered no faster than those who did not know. However, Dr. Modic said, there was one effect of being told — patients felt worse about themselves when they knew they had a bulging disk.

“If I tell you that you have a degenerated disk, basically I’m telling you you’re ugly,” Dr. Modic said.

Scans, he said, are presurgical tools, not screening tools. A scan can help a surgeon before he or she operates, but it does not help with a diagnosis.

“If a patient has back or leg pain, they should be treated conservatively for at least eight weeks,” Dr. Modic said, meaning that they take pain relievers and go about their normal lives. “Then you should do imaging only if you are going to do surgery.”

That message can be a hard sell, he acknowledged. “A lot of people are driven by wanting to have imaging,” Dr. Modic said. “They are miserable as hell, they can’t work, they can’t sit. We look at you and say, ‘We think you have a herniated disk. We say the natural history is that you will get better. You should go through six to eight weeks of conservative management.’ ”

At the Partners Healthcare System in Boston, spine experts have the same struggle to convince patients that an M.R.I. scan is not necessarily desirable, said Dr. Scott Gazelle, director of radiology there.

“The consensus is that you are a surgical candidate or not based on your history and physical findings, not on imaging findings,” he said.

Dr. Gazelle had a chance last year to test his own convictions. He had the classic symptoms of a herniated disk — shooting pains down his left leg, a numb foot and difficulty walking.

Dr. Gazelle went to see his primary-care doctor but, he said, “I didn’t get an M.R.I.” That decision, he added, “was the right thing to do.”

About three months later, he had recovered on his own.

In 1998, two medical scientists, writing in The Lancet, proposed what sounded like a radical idea. Instead of simply providing patients and their doctors with the results of an X-ray or an M.R.I. scan, he said, radiologists should put the findings in context. For example, they wrote, if a scan showed advanced disk deterioration, the report should say, “Roughly 40 percent of patients with this finding do not have back pain so the finding may be unrelated.”

It is an idea that only would work for back pain, because that is the one area where radiologists have enough data. But it made eminent sense to Dr. Jarvik. “It gives referring physicians some sort of context,” he said.

So, a few years ago, with some trepidation, his radiology group starting including epidemiological data in their reports. “We thought, ‘What’s going to be the reaction among referring physicians?’ ” Dr. Jarvik said. Their fear was that doctors would start choosing other places for M.R.I.’s and that Dr. Jarvik’s group would lose business.

Because of the way the university’s records are kept, it’s hard to know whether the new reporting system had that effect, Dr. Jarvik said. But he was heartened by the responses of some doctors, like Dr. Sohail Mirza, who recently moved to Dartmouth Medical School.

“We often see patients who have already had M.R.I. scans,” Dr. Mirza said. “They are fixated on the abnormality and come to a surgeon to try to get the abnormality fixed. They’ll come in with the report in hand.”

The new sort of report, Dr. Mirza said, was “very helpful information to have when talking to patients and very helpful for patients to help them understand that the abnormalities were not catastrophic findings.”

Others, like Dr. Modic, are hesitant about reporting epidemiology along with a patient’s scan findings.

“It’s an interesting idea,” he said. But, he added: “The problem isn’t what happens after they get their imaging. It’s that they get the imaging in the first place.”

That was what happened with Mrs. Weinstein.

When she started looking up her symptoms on the Internet, she decided she probably had a meniscus tear. “I was very forceful in asking for an M.R.I.,” she said.

And when the scan showed that her meniscus was torn, she went to a surgeon expecting an operation.

He X-rayed her knee and told her she had arthritis. Then, Mrs. Weinstein said, the surgeon looked at her and said, “Let me get this straight. Are you here for a knee replacement?”

She said no, of course not. She skis, she does aerobics, she was nowhere near ready for something so drastic.

Then the surgeon told her that there was no point in repairing her meniscus because that was not her problem. And if he repaired the cartilage, her arthritic bones would just grind it down again.

For now, Mrs. Weinstein says she is finished with her medical odyssey.

“I continue to live with this, whatever they call it, this arthritic knee,” she said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the current study. The study brings in relevant scientific evidence to support the contention that imaging studies sometimes do not provide information that changes patient outcomes. As noted in the story, the evidence is more compelling for low back pain than for knee pain. However, it inaccurately claims that this is the first study to look at imaging of the knee. There have been several studies, albeit with smaller sample sizes, that have shown a high prevalence of knee abnormalities in asymptomatic individuals.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The publication notes that approximately 9,000 people aged 50 and older were enrolled and randomized in an efficacy study designed to compare Flublok Quadrivalent to a traditional quadrivalent vaccine. People who were given Flublok Quadrivalent were over 40% less likely to develop culture-confirmed influenza. This data satisfies both pre-specified criteria for non-inferiority and superiority of Flublok over the traditional egg-based quadrivalent inactivated vaccine. Flublok Quadrivalent was approved by the FDA in October 2016 and will be available nationwide in prefilled syringes for the upcoming flu season.

"This study shows that Flublok® Quadrivalent, produced with modern recombinant technology can provide better protection against confirmed influenza-like illness among older adults than standard-dose quadrivalent influenza vaccine produced with traditional technology," said Lisa Dunkle MD, Chief Medical Officer of Protein Sciences. "We demonstrated statistically significantly better protection by Flublok based on considerably fewer people contracting the flu after vaccination with Flublok Quadrivalent. Today, we announce that these peer-reviewed results have been published in the highly respected New England Journal of Medicine. Furthermore, physicians are eligible for up to 1 hour AMA PRA category 1 CME credit for reading the article. Clearly, Flublok represents a major step forward in combating influenza on a global scale."

Flublok is the only flu vaccine made without the use of eggs and therefore is not subject to the mutations that are sometimes introduced into the vaccine during the process of egg adaptation that can cause the traditional vaccines to be ineffective (see Skowronski et al. (2014) PLOS ONE 9(3), e92153). Flublok contains three times more active ingredients than traditional vaccines and produced significantly higher immune responses to the A strains of influenza (especially H3N2) in the Flublok Quadrivalent study. Furthermore, Flublok Quadrivalent is the first and only high antigen-content quadrivalent flu vaccine that with its high efficacy makes it ideal for older adults and those with a compromised immune system. Flublok is highly purified and does not contain influenza virus, antibiotics, formaldehyde, preservatives, egg protein, latex, gluten or gelatin unlike other flu vaccines. Flublok Quadrivalent is FDA approved for adults 18 and older.

For more information about Flublok, please visit www.flublok.com.

About Protein Sciences 

Protein Sciences is a world leader in vaccine development and protein production. Our mission is our inspiration: to save lives and improve health through the creation of innovative vaccines and biopharmaceuticals.

About Flublok® 

Flublok, the world's first recombinant protein-based vaccine for the prevention of seasonal influenza disease, is approved for all adults over 18 years. FDA approved the quadrivalent formulation ("Flublok Quadrivalent") in October 2016 that will be commercially available for everyone over 18 years for the 2017/18 influenza season. Flublok is the only flu vaccine made in a 100% egg-free system using modern cell culture technology, making it unnecessary to use an infectious influenza virus, antibiotics or harsh chemicals (e.g., formaldehyde) in manufacturing. Flublok is highly purified and does not contain any preservatives (e.g., thimerosal - a form of mercury), egg proteins, gelatin or latex. In addition, Flublok contains three times more antigen than traditional flu vaccines (3x45mcg hemagglutinin protein versus 3x15mcg hemagglutinin protein). In a 2014/15 post-marketing study of 9,000 adults 50 years and older, people who received Flublok were over 40% less likely to develop cell culture confirmed influenza than people who received a traditional flu vaccine. Flublok is an exact copy of the influenza virus coat protein and is not subject to the egg-adapted mutations associated with low vaccine effectiveness (see Skowronski et al. (2014) PLOS ONE 9(3), e92153).

Healthcare professionals in the U.S. wishing to order Flublok should contact one of the following distributors:

Learn more at www.proteinsciences.com and www.flublok.com.

Flublok Safety Information 

Flublok is approved for people 18 and older to prevent influenza disease. The most common side effect from Flublok is pain at the site of injection. Headache, fatigue or muscle ache may occur. Tell the doctor if you have ever experienced Guillain-Barré syndrome (severe muscle weakness) or have had a severe allergic reaction to any component of Flublok vaccine. Vaccination with Flublok may not protect all individuals. Please see the complete Package Insert available at www.flublok.com or call 203-686-0800 for more information.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release includes a concise, but effective, overview of the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Taking extra vitamin D and calcium doesn’t seem to prevent bone-thinning in older men, according to Australian researchers.

However, exercise did boost bone mineral density, a proxy for bone strength, their report shows.

Despite the findings, people still need to get enough calcium and vitamin D to reduce the risk of osteoporosis, or bone thinning, said Dr. Mone Zaidi, an osteoporosis researcher at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, who was not involved in the study.

“It’s like the four legs of the stool: vitamin D and calcium, exercise, medications if a person is losing bone, and the fourth leg is telling people how to prevent fractures,” Zaidi said.

More than 40 million people in the US are affected by osteoporosis. It’s most common in older women, but about seven percent of white men and five percent of black men are affected, according to the American College of Physicians.

In the new study, published in the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, Robin M. Daly from the University of Melbourne, Australia and colleagues randomly assigned men aged 59 to 70 to an exercise program, drinking milk fortified with calcium and vitamin D, doing both, or doing nothing.

They measured the men’s bone density before and after the study, which took place over 18 months, but they didn’t look at fractures.

At the end of the study, men who exercised had higher bone density than those who had supplemented their diet with 1000 milligrams of calcium and 800 international units (IU) of vitamin D per day.

Adding the supplements to the exercise program provided no extra benefit, hinting that the men already had enough vitamin D and calcium in their diets to be able to boost their bone strength through exercise alone.

The recommended daily intake of vitamin D is 600 IU in adults up to age 70, and 800 IU for older people, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH). A 6-month supply of vitamin D supplements can be bought for less than $10, and many multivitamins contain the recommended daily dose of vitamin D.

As for calcium, the NIH advises 1,000 mg per day for men ages19-70, and then 1,200 mg per day for men older than 70.

To build bone density, weight-bearing exercise is needed, such as running or weight-lifting, according to the NIH.

In animal studies, a lack of vitamin D has been linked to several diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and some types of cancer. However, there isn’t enough data to say if vitamin D can help treat or prevent these diseases, Zaidi said.

To reduce the risk of bone weakening, the NIH recommends not smoking, drinking less alcohol and exercising more.

Zaidi said that both vitamin D and calcium are extremely important for human health, so people should follow the previous vitamin D and calcium recommendations.

“You’ve got to have it to build a wall,” he said. “Adding more might not strengthen the wall, but you have to take enough to keep the wall strong. Otherwise it might fall apart.”

SOURCE: bit.ly/i4tDqs The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, online January 5, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story was very clear on what the study showed and did not show, and what the take-home ramifications were.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new form of cataract surgery using a patient's stem cells has restored vision in babies for the first time, and someday the technique may hold promise for millions of older Americans who undergo traditional cataract eye surgery every year, say scientists who developed the new procedure.

Eye experts across the country who spoke with CBS News are alternately excited and cautious about the findings, published Wednesday in the journal Nature.

The procedure, developed by researchers at the University of California San Diego and China, is less invasive than traditional cataract treatment, said the scientists.

Cataracts are most common in older adults. As most people age, an opaque film slowly forms over the lens -- the part of the eye that helps with focusing on images at various distances. It clouds vision and can lead to blindness.

In cataract surgery, which has been around for several decades, eye surgeons make an incision in the front of the eye and remove the lens from its supporting capsule. Then they replace it with an artificial lens.

The new procedure described in Nature involves making a slim incision at the side of the lens capsule, removing the entire lens, yet preserving the empty capsule bag or "scaffold." A certain kind of stem cell, called endogenous stem/progenitor cells, when left intact, then begins to repopulate the damaged lens and essentially grow a new, healthy lens.

Study author Dr. Kang Zhang, the chief of ophthalmic genetics at UC San Diego's Shiley Eye Institute, told CBS News, "Unlike [the] current way of cataract surgery, which destroys over half of lens stem cells and requires implantation of a plastic intranet ocular lens, we devised a new surgery to make a very small opening at the side of a cataractous lens bag, remove [the] cataract inside, allow the opening to heal, and promote dormant lens stem cells to regrow an entirely new lens with vision."

The experimental procedure was done in 12 infants who were born with a congenital cataract condition.

By using a less invasive procedure, Zhang and his colleagues report that they were able to leave the lens epithelial stem cells, also called LECs, intact. These LECs regenerated the eye's lens in the children, eliminating the need for implants. The same technique was also successfully performed in animals.

In little ones with congenital cataracts, eye surgeons need to intervene early so that light can get to the brain and allow for normal, healthy growth, said Suraj Bhat, associate professor of ophthalmology and director of the Vision Molecular Biology Laboratory at the UCLA Stein Eye Institute. Bhat was not involved in the new research, but said it's "extremely exciting" because it offers an alternative to "an extraordinarily invasive" procedure.

"In early childhood cataracts are very bad. We need light to enter into the eyes at a young age to get proper brain function, otherwise, information does not get transferred to the developing brain," said Bhat.

Traditional surgery can cause opacity in the line of a child's vision and, because the eye is still growing, it is difficult to provide good vision with eye glasses, explained Julie T. Daniels, from University College London Institute of Ophthalmology, in an accompanying commentary in Nature.

Many children also later go on to suffer from glaucoma.

Daniels wrote that to correctly refract light onto the retina at the back of the eye, the cornea and lens must remain transparent throughout life. Current treatments for the cornea and lens involve donor transplants or artificial implants, but the procedures can be risky. She said the new procedure, which coaxes stem cells to regenerate normal tissue in the body, offers promise.

"The study's stem cell engineering has led to the regeneration of transparent lens tissue in children, showing that the concept offers a potential therapeutic approach," Daniels wrote.

She noted a second study in Nature that used transplant tissue grown in the laboratory from stem cells to treat damaged corneas, saying it also holds promise.

Zhang said their results need to be validated in a large number of patients "and with a longer follow-up period."

Will it work in older eyes?

One major question remains to be answered: Can it be applied to age-related cataracts, the leading cause of blindness?

According to the National Eye Institute, about 24.4 million Americans suffer from cataracts. Between 2000 and 2010, the number of cataract cases in the U.S. went up by 20 percent, and it's expected to continue to grow as the population ages.

"We are now planning a study to test this approach in this old patient population. In addition, we are testing if this approach can be used in treating other leading causes of blindness, such as macular degeneration and glaucoma," said Zhang.

He hopes the surgery will be available to the general population within four to five years.

"I would anticipate that it may be available after several independent studies with a large number of patients," he said.

Some other experts in the field saw great promise in the research.

"Everyone's working on this. Stem cells are like the Holy Grail of vision research," Dr. James Tsai, M.D., president of the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai, told CBS News. "To me, it's very exciting data. They may be on to something."

But he tempered the hope the study offers by noting that the lens regeneration work is also "very controversial" and could impact a multimillion-dollar industry.

"This is potentially a new surgery. If you think about the implications in the long run, lens implants may not be necessary," he said. "There are a lot of doctors who will want to see more data."

He also pointed out that the study involved infants, and that adults -- the most common cataract patients -- have a different regenerative capacity of lens epithelial stem cells.

In the meantime, Tsai said it's hopeful news for some babies with congenital cataracts like the children who participated in the study. "As a glaucoma specialist, the way we do congenital cataracts, there's a great risk these babies will develop glaucoma for a lifetime and maybe with this new surgery, they won't have that glaucoma risk."

Dr. Maria Valeria Canto-Soler, assistant professor of ophthalmology and director of the Retinal Degeneration Research Center at Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute, said she was impressed by the research.

"The main excitement for me is the ability to regenerate an organ or a tissue within an organ," said Canto-Soler, a retina specialist.

"From what I know, I'd say this is the first demonstration where you can use endogenous stem cells for replacing tissue within the eye. It's something we are all looking for. They have actually done it in humans."

She said, even without answers to the question of whether it will work in aging eyes, it creates hope for children with congenital issues. "If you can create it in children, that's a big thing. You are giving sight back to little kids and that change their lives."

Dr. Kathryn Hatch, an ophthalmologist at Massachusetts Eye and Ear in Boston, told CBS News the procedure "seems very exciting," but more research is needed.

"I'd need to see a larger study with more eyes, and we need to see some reproducibility, and see how long it would take for the lens -- if it's able to regenerate -- what are the visual results. Because that's what patients really care about. Their vision. If it takes months to get to an outcome, it's not superior to the lens technologies we have now. I'm not sure what the advantage is. Most patients don't even want to wait. They want to get back to work, their life," Hatch added.

She also had questions about how the procedure was done with such a tiny incision. "I don't understand how they're doing the surgery with such a tiny hole without tearing the capsule. If we make a three millimeter incision [in traditional cataract surgery], that's really small in an adult."

Cataract surgery is "traditionally done by hand with a bent needle. That's one of the most difficult steps to learn as a surgeon. One of most important steps to learn," she said and there could be major eye damage if a surgery was compromised by a tear.

She also noted that baby eye surgery is different from adults in that the infant cataract is much softer compared to an adult's harder cataract.

UCLA's Bhat noted another limitation in the study: "These are all genetic cataracts. This study wasn't long enough. They [cataracts] may come back," he said, but it's also possible the genetic defect may not reappear.

He's said it's unclear if the results will be mirrored in older cataract patients, the same concern expressed by others in the field.

"Cell division is slower in older people," Bhat said. "The biggest problem as we grow older, particularly beyond 50, is cell division which keeps on decreasing. Our ability to make new cells is significantly lost. The process that these people are depending upon is tremendously dependent on cell division."

Bhat said he also paused when he read the statement in the paper that claimed a 100 percent success rate three months after surgery.

"I don't know them. I can't second guess them. You've got to believe the written word."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story explains that the study included a small number of infant patients (12) with a condition that differs from routine adult cataracts. The story did a good job of letting us know the study had some key limitations, primarily its short duration. As one source said, “this study wasn’t long enough. They [cataracts] may come back.”
Ideally, the story would have specifically told us the length of time (six months), which helps readers better understand the need for more research with a larger pool of patients followed over a longer timeframe. It also should have been made clear if the study was randomized and included a control group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Eating a high-fiber diet as a teenager, including lots of fruits and vegetables, may be another tool to help women lower their risk for later breast cancer.

A new study looking at diet and health data from more than 44,000 women found that those who reported consuming the highest amount of fiber during high school, about 28 grams a day, had a significantly lower risk of breast cancer before menopause compared with those who said they ate less than 15 grams a day.

The researchers from Harvard's T.H. Chan School of Public Health, whose study appears in the journal Pediatrics, analyzed data from a large, ongoing, national study of nurses focused on factors that influence women's health.

"The results of this study emphasize the role of an early life high-fiber diet on prevention of breast cancer in later life. High consumption of foods rich in fiber such as fruits, vegetables and whole grains in early life may help to reduce breast cancer incidence," lead author Maryam Farvid, a visiting scientist at Harvard, told CBS News.

The findings showed that breast cancer risk was 12 to 19 percent lower among women who ate more dietary fiber in their youth, depending on how much more they ate. Eating more fiber during adolescence was linked to a 16 percent lower risk of breast cancer overall, and a 24 percent lower risk of breast cancer before menopause.

Farvid said the findings show that each additional 10 grams per day increase in fiber intake during adolescence reduced the risk of breast cancer by 14 percent.

"Having the recommended 25 to 30 grams of fiber daily would decrease the risk by 30 percent and potentially even greater with higher fiber intake," Farvid said. "Women are doing themselves a huge favor in terms of breast cancer prevention if they increase the amount of dietary fiber intake earlier in life rather than later."

Eating more fruits and vegetables was especially beneficial, the researchers said.

Healthy high-fiber food choices include apples, pears, raspberries, artichokes, green peas, broccoli, split peas, lentils, beans, whole wheat pasta, whole grain bread, brown rice, bran flakes, and oatmeal.

Why would these foods have such an impact?

In an accompanying editorial, Duke University Medical Center's Dr. Kimberly Blackwell said there's longstanding evidence that dietary fiber may cut down on circulating estrogen levels through changes in the gut microbiome.

She said that recently more evidence has come to light suggesting a relationship between dietary fiber and breast cancer risk, and that eating more fiber would be a simple way to reduce risk.

One weakness she pointed out in the study is that the women were asked to recall details about their adolescent diet when they were in their 30s and 40s. Nevertheless, Blackwell said, "It is reasonable for pediatricians to encourage a high-fiber diet and include decreasing breast cancer risk as one of the potential benefits."

Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital, in New York, told CBS News, "It lends support to the fact that we need to encourage people to start healthy habits earlier on."
• Lesser-known signs of breast cancer women should watch out for

Dr. Deanna Attai, assistant clinical professor of surgery at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California Los Angeles, said that while it's an observational study, not a clinical intervention, its larger point about diet and health is important.

"The sexy headline is eat this and you'll have a lower risk of breast cancer, but I'd shift the focus to, eat more fiber because it's better for you and you'll be a healthier person and you're less likely to be obese and have chronic inflammation and other things that will reduce your risk for heart disease and cancer along the way," said Attai.

She added, "The message is a good one as far as increasing fiber, but it also has to be put in perspective. This is just one mechanism by which we can reduce risk and it does warrant further study."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story offers a brief description of the study, and notes that it is an observational study rather than a clinical study. It also gets high marks for highlighting the fact that the study required women to “recall details about their adolescent diet when they were in their 30s and 40s.” (Though, worth noting, that sentence should say “…in their 30s, 40s and 50s.”)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Neil M. Bressler of Johns Hopkins University, the chairman of the group that conducted the trial, said a two-line improvement in vision would allow some people to read normal-size print or to drive again.

Lucentis is not approved as a treatment for macular edema. But it is approved for another eye disease, age-related macular degeneration.

So doctors can — and some already do — use the drug off-label for the diabetic condition. With this successful Phase 3 trial, insurers will now be more likely to pay for such off-label use.

Some doctors criticized the organizers of the trial for testing Lucentis rather than another Genentech drug, Avastin, which works in the same way as Lucentis.

Although it is a cancer drug, Avastin is often used off-label for eye diseases because it is far cheaper than Lucentis, costing only $20 to $100 a dose, compared with $2,000 for Lucentis.

Avastin is undercutting sales of Lucentis, which totaled $1.1 billion in the United States last year.

Organizers of the trial conceded that a major reason Lucentis was chosen was that Genentech, which is now owned by Roche, agreed to provide the drug free of charge and to contribute $9 million in additional financing — but only if Lucentis were used.

“Obviously you can’t underplay $9 million,” said Dr. Ferris of the eye institute, which is part of the part of the National Institutes of Health. But he said there were other factors as well, like a belief that Lucentis might have been the better drug.

Dr. Philip J. Rosenfeld, a professor of ophthalmology at the University of Miami, said the decision was “clearly a case of pay to play” since Genentech’s money dictated the choice of drugs.

Retinopathy results from damage to the blood vessels in the eye. In macular edema, fluid from those damaged vessels leaks into the macula, the part of the retina that is responsible for the straight-ahead vision important for driving, recognizing faces and reading.

Lucentis, also known as ranibizumab, works by drying up leaky blood vessels and preventing the growth of new ones.

John Bevan, who has diabetic macular edema, said that every two months or so he used to have an incident in which blood leaked into his eye, blurring his vision.

“It’s like a paintball hits a plate-glass window — there’s a big splat and it drips downward and takes three days to a week to dissipate,” said Mr. Bevan, the school superintendent in north central Indiana. He said treatment with Lucentis in the clinical trial virtually eliminated those incidents.

The trial involved 691 patients, some of whom had both eyes treated, resulting in 854 total eyes. There were four treatment groups: One group got Lucentis injections into the eye as often as every four weeks, plus laser therapy. Another got Lucentis, with laser therapy used only after six months and only if needed. The third group got laser therapy plus injections into the eye of triamcinolone, a steroid sold by Allergan under the name Trivaris. The fourth group got laser therapy plus a sham injection.

After the first year, only 3 to 4 percent of the eyes treated with Lucentis suffered a visual loss of two or more lines compared to 13 percent that got only laser therapy.

Researchers said the results seem to be holding up for the second year of the three-year trial.

About 1 percent of those getting Lucentis injections suffered an inflammation of the eye from an infection.

The steroid treatment did not improve eyesight more than laser therapy alone and caused side effects.

Results of the trial were published online on Tuesday by the journal Ophthalmology.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:  The story mentioned that the results reported on were from a phase III clinical trial; it included information about the number of affected eyes included in the study, and the impact on vision.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Women who take bone drugs for several years have a slightly increased chance of suffering an unusual type of thigh fracture, according to a large Canadian study.

The findings add to earlier concern over the medicines, called bisphosphonates, whose U.S. labels have been required since October to include a warning about the thighbone fracture risk.

However, researchers stress the drugs are effective at preventing fractures of the hip or spine, which are much more common in elderly people with the bone-thinning disease osteoporosis.

And the actual risk of having one of the unusual fractures was low, said Laura Y. Park-Wyllie, of St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto, who worked on the new study.

“Women with osteoporosis who are at high risk of fractures should not stop taking their treatment,” she told Reuters Health.

Some 10 million Americans currently suffer from bone thinning, according to the National Osteoporosis Foundation. The majority are postmenopausal women.

Park-Wyllie and colleagues tapped into data on more than 205,000 Ontario women at least 68 years old who had taken the bone drugs. Their findings appear in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

Overall, 716 women suffered the unusual type of thighbone fracture after starting the bone drugs, and nearly 10,000 had typical hip fractures.

The risk of a thighbone fracture differed depending on how long the women had been taking the medicine. After taking bone drugs for five years, about one in 1,000 women went on to suffer a thigh fracture over the next year.

That works out to nearly three times the risk of those who’d taken the drugs for roughly three months or less, after accounting for other risk factors.

On the other hand, longer treatment was tied to a 24-percent decrease in hip fractures, which along with wrist and spine fractures affect about half of all people with osteoporosis.

There are several alternative ways to treat osteoporosis, including hormone treatment for women. And one preliminary study, published along with the Canadian findings in JAMA, hints that the common heart medication nitroglycerin might also boost bone health.

So far, however, the cheap and effective bisphosphonate bone drugs remain the most popular treatment option. But some experts worry that negative media coverage might have led to more fractures and possibly deaths by dissuading patients from taking the drugs.

“The bad news is that overstating the levels of risk of side effects with these drugs — which the media have been doing for some time now — has led people to stop the drugs when they should be taking them,” said Dr. Ethel S. Siris, who heads the Toni Stabile Osteoporosis Center at Columbia University in New York.

Apart from atypical fractures, the most serious side effect of the bone drugs is bone death, or osteonecrosis, of the jaw. But that’s a very rare problem, experts say, which only affects about one in 100,000 people on bisphosphonates.

“If you’re taking the drugs and you’ve been on them for a while, but aren’t sure if you’re at high risk, you should ask your doctor about it,” Park-Wyllie advised.

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a federal expert panel, recommends screening all women over 65 for osteoporosis.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Reuters squeaks by on this one, by mentioning how many women were in the study – 205,000 – which is often a measure of quality. But they don’t explicitly say anything about the methods or quote independent sources about the quality of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Oct. 23, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Older women who take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs -- such as aspirin or ibuprofen -- appear to have a lower risk of death from colorectal cancer than women who don't use these medications, a large new study suggests.

Women who reported using these drugs, called NSAIDs, at the beginning of the study and three years later had a roughly 30 percent lower rate of death from colorectal cancer than women who did not take the drugs, or women who took them at only one of these two points in time, according to an American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) news release.

"Our results suggest that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use is associated with lower colorectal cancer mortality among postmenopausal women who use these medications more consistently and for longer periods of time," Anna Coghill, a doctoral student in epidemiology at the University of Washington and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, said in the news release.

In the study, researchers examined the use of aspirin and non-aspirin NSAIDs among more than 160,000 postmenopausal women in relation to deaths from colorectal cancer.

Study participants were enrolled in the Women's Health Initiative, which "represents a large and well-characterized cohort [group] of postmenopausal women, and the medication data collected in this cohort made it possible for us to investigate multiple types, durations and strengths of NSAID use," Coghill explained.

The researchers confirmed 2,119 cases of colorectal cancer and 492 deaths due to the disease.

"The results of our study help to further clarify the importance of different durations of NSAID use over time for the risk for dying from colorectal cancer," Coghill noted in the news release.

While the study found an association between NSAID use and a reduced risk of colorectal cancer, it did not prove a cause-and-effect.

The findings were slated for presentation on Sunday at the AACR International Conference on Frontiers in Cancer Prevention Research, in Boston.

Experts say that for studies presented at medical meetings, data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about colon and rectal cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: While the article does caution that the study does not “prove a cause-and-effect,” it should have expanded on that statement and explained the limitations of the study. The story does not mention if other variables were accounted for, or if the researchers found any other correlations in their study, which seems likely. However, it does point out that the study “data and conclusions should be viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Vitamin D, in combination with calcium, is good for your bones. You should consume modest amounts in your diet, if possible (and for most people that is quite possible), or in the form of supplements if you can't get enough via food and drink.

We know this. But somehow we've arrived at a point when some physicians are prescribing large doses of Vitamin D supplements for their patients in the hope of preventing cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, autoimmune disorders and other maladies, despite a lack of evidence that this works, according to a new commentary in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Other people are loading up on Vitamin D on their own.

"Clinical enthusiasm for supplemental vitamin D has outpaced available evidence on its effectiveness," JoAnn E. Manson and Shari S. Bassuk of the Division of Preventive Medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston wrote last week in the journal's online version.

This practice isn't totally harmless. You should be consuming 600 international units daily if you're between the ages of 1 and 70, and 800 IU each day if you're 71 or older, according to the Institute of Medicine, the health arm of the National Academcy of Sciences. (For a chart with a little more detail, see here.) These amounts are enough for 97.5 percent of U.S. and Canadian residents, according to the IOM. (Sunlight stimulates production of vitamin D for people in sunnier climes.)

Go above 4,000 IUs, unless there's a specific reason that you need that amount, and you risk kidney stones, calcification of blood vessels and possibly the very cardiovascular disease you were seeking to prevent, Manson said in an interview.

So how did we get here? "I think there's been a disconnect between the observational studies and the randomized clinical trials to date," Manson said. Over the past 15 years, those studies "have looked promising, and very often they've been reported by the media as suggesting that vitamin D has these benefits. I think there's a general perception that if some is good, more is better. I think it's important to understand that more is not necessarily better."

Manson is leading the most extensive clinical trial of vitamin D use ever, an examination of 25,875 people across the United States to determine whether vitamin D is helpful against cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, depression, infection, autoimmune disorders and other conditions. The results are expected in late 2017 or early 2018.

In the meantime, how much vitamin D should you be consuming? The recommended dietary allowance works out to three or four servings each day of "fortified" foods such as milk, yogurt, soy beverages, orange juice or cereal, plus fatty fish twice a week, according to Manson's commentary.

She also called on physicians not to overscreen patients for vitamin D deficiencies, a practice that can lead to overprescribing it.

"Large trials of other widely used supplements have sometimes found benefits," Manson wrote, "but in other cases--such as with high doses of beta carotene, vitamin E and selenium--have disproven some health claims for these supplements and identified health risks that may not have otherwise been detected."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story was prompted by a perspective piece by Dr. Manson, a leading expert in vitamin D and health outcomes. The main topic of the commentary is the lack of evidence supporting high-dose vitamin D supplementation. The story conveys that message first by stating that “physicians are prescribing large doses of Vitamin D…in the hope of preventing cancer…and other maladies, despite a lack of evidence that this works.” To back this up, the story relies on a quote that “there’s been a disconnect between the observational studies and the randomized clinical trials to date.” This is all correct, but admittedly a bit vague and potentially confusing for readers. How is an observational study different from a randomized trial, and which one provides stronger evidence?  Which studies have fallen short of showing positive health effects? Which health effects were those studies evaluating? Is this an area that may be affected by the bias against publishing negative results?
A bit more detail and explanation would have been welcome here. But since the overall message of the story is consistent with the evidence on this topic — i.e. the story clearly “grasps the quality of the evidence” — we’re inclined to rule this satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Dec. 9, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- The bone drug zoledronic acid (Zometa), considered a potentially promising weapon against breast cancer recurrence, has flopped in a new study involving more than 3,360 patients.

Zometa did not appear to prevent breast cancer from returning or to boost disease-free survival overall. British researchers presented the disappointing findings Thursday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in Texas.

"As a whole, the study is negative," study author Dr. Robert Coleman, a professor of medical oncology at the University of Sheffield in England, said during a Thursday news conference on the findings. "There is no overall difference in recurrence rates or survival rates [between patients who got the bone drug and those who did not], except in older patients, defined as more than five years after menopause."

That was a possible bright spot in the results.

"In that population, there is a benefit," Coleman said. The older women had a 27 percent improvement in recurrence and a 29 percent improvement in overall survival over the five-year follow-up, compared to those who didn't get the drug.

"There was tremendous hope that this [drug] approach would be a major leap forward," Coleman noted. "There have been other trials that suggest this is the case." In one previous study, the use of the drug was linked with a 32 percent improvement in survival and lowered recurrence in younger women with breast cancer.

Other research has found that healthy women on bone drugs were less prone to develop breast cancer, so experts were hoping the drugs had an anti-tumor effect.

Zometa, marketed by Novartis AG, is used to relieve pain when cancers have spread to the bone -- in part, by slowing bone erosion caused by the disease. It is given intravenously, while other bisphosphonates such as Actonel, Fosamax or Boniva can be taken orally.

In the trial, known as AZURE (Adjuvant Treatment with Zoledronic Acid in State II/III Breast Cancer), Coleman and his colleagues evaluated 3,360 breast cancer patients from 174 participating centers, all with stage II or III cancers but no evidence of metastases (cancer that has spread beyond the original site). About half received the bone drugs plus standard therapy; half just got standard therapy.

The focus was on disease-free survival. After five years, about 400 women in each group either died or had recurrences.

When Coleman's team looked at subgroups, however, they found the benefit among older women, a finding they say warrants more study.

"The younger patients are getting no benefit," Coleman said. "If anything, they are doing a little bit worse."

In addition, there were some troubling side effects among women taking Zometa, including 17 cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (a severe bone disease that can result in death of the jawbone).

Dr. Sharon Giordano, an associate professor of breast medical oncology at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, was not involved in the study but put it in perspective. Bisphosphonates have been used to treat osteoporosis as well as bone complications of breast cancer treatment, she said.

"The role of bisphosphonates in preventing cancer recurrence has been less clear," she said, noting that multiple studies have had conflicting findings.

As for the benefit found in postmenopausal women, she said, "I would consider this hypothesis-generating and not practice-changing."

Other studies underway may provide a clearer answer, she said.

Since the current study was presented at a meeting, its findings should be considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Said Coleman: "Zoledronic acid cannot be routinely recommended for prevention of cancer returning, but it remains a very good drug for patients where the cancer has already spread to the bone."

Coleman disclosed receiving speaker fees from Novartis; the researchers also received academic grant funding from the drug maker.

For more information on bisphosphonates, visit U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article accurately characterized the main conclusions of the study and the results of a secondary subgroup analysis. It also told readers that an earlier trial reached a different conclusion and that other studies are underway, thus helping make clear that these results are just part of a larger picture. The story emphasized—through the quote of an independent expert—that the subgroup analysis indicating older women with early stage breast cancer might get some benefit should lead to further research rather than changing standard practice now. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Colonoscopy may miss as many as one in every 13 colon cancers, suggests a new study.

Canadian researchers note that their finding should be a heads-up to clinicians performing the exam, as well as to patients preparing for it. Both groups could do things to improve the detection rate, they said.

“Several recent studies have raised questions on the effectiveness of colonoscopy as currently performed in everyday clinical practice on reducing risk of subsequent colon cancer,” lead researcher Dr. Harminder Singh, of the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, in Canada, told Reuters Health by e-mail. “Therefore, it is important to study the factors associated with the diagnosis of colon cancer occurring after colonoscopy.”

During a colonoscopy, a flexible camera is passed through the colon in search of abnormal growths known as polyps and other warning signs of early tumors. It is one of a few screening tests for colon cancer, the second-leading cancer killer in the U.S., according the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Another less expensive test is fecal occult blood testing, which involves taking stool specimens at home and mailing them to the doctor’s office or medical lab. The US Preventive Services Task Force, an independent panel of medical experts appointed by the federal government, recommends screening people aged 50 to 75 for the disease, but does not specify which test is best.

In their study, Singh and his colleagues identified nearly 5,000 individuals aged 50 to 80 who had been diagnosed with the cancer between 1992 and 2008, across the entire Canadian province of Manitoba.

The team found that about eight percent, or one in every 13 cancers, had been missed during colonoscopies conducted six months to three years prior to diagnosis.

Women were a third more likely to have had their cancer missed, report the researchers in The American Journal of Gastroenterology. And general practice physicians missed cancers 60 percent more often than gastroenterologists.

There are three likely reasons for these “misses,” noted Dr. David Lieberman of the Oregon Health and Science University, in Portland. Tumors may simply have gone unidentified on the exam, or were seen but not completely removed. While rare, he also noted that it is possible that an undetected cancer was actually not present at the exam, but rather grew very quickly afterwards.

No improvement in colonoscopy can do anything to avoid the latter. But the first two reasons are potentially avoidable, Lieberman told Reuters Health in an e-mail.

Given the wide variation in colonoscopy training, the researchers call for standardizing it, including credentialing and re-credentialing.

“There is an urgent need to focus on and improve the outcomes of colonoscopy,” Singh said.

However, Lieberman cautioned against the over-interpretation of the results. “These patients were referred for colonoscopy, most commonly due to symptoms,” Lieberman said. “This is very different from a population undergoing screening.”

Colonoscopy would probably miss a smaller percentage of cancers in such a large population, Lieberman said, because the rate would be lower.

Dr. Charles Kahi of the Indiana University School of Medicine, in Indianapolis, noted that the rate found in the new study was a bit higher than previously reported. But he added that the risk factors identified match those in the earlier studies.

“The key to maximizing protection against colorectal cancer after colonoscopy is performance by an operator with excellent examination” and growth-removal technique, “in a well-prepped colon,” Kahi told Reuters Health by e-mail.

And for this, patients should do their part. “To increase their chances of an early diagnosis, it is important that all individuals undergoing colonoscopy strictly follow the instructions for bowel preparation for colonoscopy,” added Singh, speaking of the large amounts of special drinks consumed before the test to clean out the bowel. “It may be a nuisance but it will help maximize the view during (colonoscopy).”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of evaluating the quality of the evidence. The writer includes sufficient detail about the study, including the ages of people screened, the total number, the years screened, and other important facts.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Elekta (EKTA-B.ST) today announced new data demonstrating stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a safe treatment option for early-stage lung cancer patients aged 80 or older. The results, which were based on data from more than 1,000 patients across five institutions that comprise the Elekta Lung Research Group, are available online and will be published in the July 15 print issue of International Journal of Radiation Oncology
• Biology
• Physics.

The study evaluated safety and efficacy outcomes of 1,083 patient reports collected in a multi-institutional database. Patients were treated with SBRT for early-stage lung cancer between 2004 and 2014 and followed for a median of 1.7 years. The cohort included 305 patients under 70 years of age, 448 patients ages 70 to 79 years, and 330 patients aged 80 years or more (which included 16 patients aged 90 years or more). The median age was 75 years (range 41to 94).

Study results show no significant differences among the three age groups with respect to 2-year local recurrence, regional recurrence, distant metastases or the incidence of grade 3 or higher toxicity. Cause-specific survival was similar among all three age groups (90.3 to 90.6 percent). Two-year overall survival was lower in older patients, which is likely related to other medical issues.

"Older patients are often not considered for radiation therapy due to concerns about their ability to tolerate treatment. The results of our study clearly support the use of SBRT for elderly patients, especially those who may not be able to tolerate longer courses of radiotherapy or more invasive treatment options," says Meredith Giuliani, MBBS, FRCPC, MEd, a radiation oncologist in the Cancer Clinical Research Unit at Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network in Toronto and lead study author. "Radiation oncologists need to work closely with our peers in other parts of the medical community to ensure that patients with diagnosed or suspected early-lung cancer are evaluated for potential treatment with SBRT regardless of age."

"This study is the largest series of its type to evaluate SBRT outcomes in patients aged 80 years and older," says Joel Goldwein, MD, Senior Vice President, Medical Affairs for Elekta. "In addition to providing important support for using SBRT to treat early-stage lung cancer in elderly patients, these findings highlight the value of multi-institutional collaborations and large data sets that can provide statistically meaningful answers to critical questions about treatment outcome and guide clinical decision making."

The Elekta Lung Research Group (ELRG) is an international collaboration of physicians and physicists that is evaluating clinical outcomes in early-stage non-small cell lung cancer patients. To date, they have accumulated data on close to 1,200 such patients and identified medical and technical factors that affect tumor control and toxicity. Their collective experience is among the largest multinational series of patients treated with image-guided SBRT to date.

The ELRG includes participants from William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Michigan; Princess Margaret Cancer Centre; Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Julius-Maximilians University of Würzburg in Würzburg, Germany; and The Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek hospital in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Disclosure: This research was partially supported by Elekta through a research grant with all institutions being members of the Elekta Lung Research Group. This work and these data, however, are the intellectual property of the individual group members and their sponsoring institutions. The authors declare no other conflicts of interest.

For further information, please contact:

This information was brought to you by Cision http://news.cision.com

The following files are available for download:
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a reasonable job explaining the size of the study and that it is on the verge of being published. But the release should have made it clear that similar results in patients undergoing SBRT at different ages does not translate into a claim that this therapy is equal or superior to other options available to elderly patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Medical researchers have recently returned to this plant product to investigate its effect on blood pressure and explore opportunities to put it to use in modern medicine and the home management of conditions.

Researchers have concluded that one glass of beetroot juice a day is enough to significantly reduce blood pressure in people with high blood pressure. They conducted a placebo-controlled trial with dozens of participants.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), high blood pressure is either the primary cause of or contributes to more than 1,000 deaths in the United States every day.

Because of the widespread impact of high blood pressure, researchers are likely to investigate in some depth any simple dietary interventions that could potentially benefit the wider population.

High blood pressure is a serious public health concern. It increases the risk of more dangerous health conditions, such as heart attack, stroke, and chronic heart failure. High blood pressure is also a major risk factor for kidney disease.

Beetroot contains high levels of dietary nitrate (NO3), which the body converts into biologically active nitrite (NO2) and nitric oxide (NO). In the human body, NO relaxes and dilates blood vessels.

Other leafy vegetables, such as lettuce and cabbage, also have high levels of the compound. They take it up from the soil through their roots.

A meta-analysis of 16 trials was published in The Journal of Nutrition in 2013.

The researchers found that "Inorganic nitrate and beetroot juice supplementation was associated with a significant reduction in systolic blood pressure."

One major trial was carried out at Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) in the United Kingdom and published in the journal Hypertension. The research was funded by the British Heart Foundation.

They found the following results:

For the trial, Prof. Amrita Ahluwalia of the vascular pharmacology department at QMUL and her colleagues recruited 64 people aged between 18 and 85 years.

Half of the participants were taking prescribed medication for high blood pressure but did not reach their target blood pressure, and the rest had been diagnosed with high blood pressure but were not yet taking medication for it.

The participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups. One group consumed a 250-milliliter (ml) glass of beetroot juice, and the other group had the same, except their beetroot juice was nitrate-free.

The nitrate-free beetroot juice was the basis of the placebo group.

All groups consumed the juice daily for 4 weeks. They were also monitored for 2 weeks before and after the study, bringing the total trial period to 8 weeks.

The trial was double-blind, which means neither the administering clinicians nor the patients knew whether the beetroot juice they were given was the placebo or the active supplement.

During the 4 weeks in which they were taking the juice, patients in the active supplement group, whose beetroot juice contained inorganic nitrate, experienced a reduction in blood pressure of 8/4 millimeters of mercury (mmHg).

The first figure is systolic pressure, generated when the heart is pumping, and the second figure is diastolic pressure, created when the heart is relaxing and filling with blood. The 8/4-mmHg reduction brought the blood pressure of many participants back into the normal range.

In the 2 weeks after they stopped drinking the juice, their blood pressure returned to the higher levels noted at the start of the study.

This is the first study that shows evidence of dietary nitrate supplementation's long-lasting benefit in a group of patients with high blood pressure.

The patients in the active supplement group also experienced a 20 percent or so improvement in blood vessel dilation capacity, and their artery stiffness reduced by around 10 percent.

Studies show that these changes are linked to a reduced risk of heart disease.

There were no changes in blood pressure, blood vessel function, or artery stiffness in the placebo group.

The authors note that the reduction achieved in the active supplement group is close to that achieved by medication. The average reduction in blood pressure caused by a single anti-hypertension drug is 9/5 mmHg.

To put the importance of these findings in context: The authors note that large-scale observational studies show that for every 2 mmHg increase in blood pressure, the risk of death from heart disease goes up 7 percent and the risk of stroke by 10 percent.

Commenting on the findings, Prof. Ahluwalia says:

She says that one reason the findings are exciting is that they open up the potential for people with high blood pressure to increase dietary nitrate in a way that can be easily worked into their daily lives while still providing a positive benefit.

"It is hugely beneficial for people to be able to take steps in controlling their blood pressure through non-clinical means, such as eating vegetables," Prof. Ahluwalia adds. "We know many people don't like taking drugs life-long when they feel okay, and, because of this, medication compliance is a big issue."

"The possibility of using a natural product, rather than another pill, to help lower blood pressure, is very appealing," adds Dr. Amoils.

Prof. Ahluwalia advises that people looking to increase their daily nitrate intake should avoid boiling vegetables, as the nitrate dissolves in water. Instead, "steaming, roasting, or drinking in a juice all has a positive effect," she notes.

As for the next step in confirming the relationship between beetroot juice and blood pressure, she says this was a small trial. The next stage would be a larger study that tries to replicate the findings over a longer period with a much larger group of people who have high blood pressure.

Here is a link to a wide range of natural beetroot products. Please note that this will open an external site.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story points to the double-blind, placebo-based nature of the trial meaning patients and researchers were unaware of which version of the juice they were taking. One can check to see how good the blinding is by asking patients to guess. (It’s not clear if that was done here.) In addition, the blood pressure in subjects in the experimental group rose again to previous high levels once they stopped drinking the beetroot juice. The story also states that the study was published in a peer-reviewed journal, and was admittedly small and of short duration. Together, this suggests an adequate explanation of the quality of the evidence provided by the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Dec. 13, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Acupuncture may be an effective way to treat older children struggling with a certain form of lazy eye, new research from China suggests, although experts say more studies are needed.

Lazy eye (amblyopia) is essentially a state of miscommunication between the brain and the eyes, resulting in the favoring of one eye over the other, according to the National Eye Institute.

The study authors noted that anywhere from less than 1 percent to 5 percent of people worldwide are affected with the condition. Of those, between one third and one half have a type of lazy eye known as anisometropia, which is caused by a difference in the degree of nearsightedness or farsightedness between the two eyes.

Standard treatment for children involves eyeglasses or contact lens designed to correct focus issues. However, while this approach is often successful in younger children (between the ages of 3 and 7), it is successful among only about a third of older children (between the ages of 7 and 12).

For the latter group, doctors will often place a patch over the "good" eye temporarily in addition to eyeglasses, and treatment success is typically achieved in two-thirds of cases.

Children, however, often have trouble adhering to patch therapy, the treatment can bring emotional issues for some and a reverse form of lazy eye can also take root, the researchers said.

Study author Dr. Dennis S.C. Lam, from the department of ophthalmology and visual sciences and Institute of Chinese Medicine at the Joint Shantou International Eye Center of Shantou University and Chinese University of Hong Kong, and his colleagues report their observations in the December issue of the Archives of Ophthalmology.

In the search for a better option than patch therapy, Lam and his associates set out to explore the potential benefits of acupuncture, noting that it has been used to treat dry eye and myopia.

Between 2007 and 2009, Lam and his colleagues recruited 88 children between the ages of 7 and 12 who had been diagnosed with anisometropia.

About half the children were treated five times a week with acupuncture, targeting five specific acupuncture needle insertion points (located at the top of the head and the eyebrow region, as well as the legs and hands). The other half were given two hours a day of patch therapy, combined with a minimum of one hour per day of near-vision exercises such as reading.

After about four months of treatment, the research team found that overall visual acuity improved markedly more among the acupuncture group relative to the patch group. In fact, they noted that while lazy eye was successfully treated in nearly 42 percent of the acupuncture patients, that figure dropped to less than 17 percent among the patch patients.

Neither treatment prompted significant side effects, the authors said.

The team nonetheless pointed out that their study's tracking period was relatively short, and that acupuncture is a complicated system that may lend itself to different success rates, depending on the skills of the particular acupuncturist.

And while theorizing that the apparent success of this alternative approach may have something to do with stimulating blood flow, retinal nerve growth and visual cortex activity, the authors acknowledged that the exact mechanism by which it works remains poorly understood.

Dr. Richard Bensinger, a Seattle-based ophthalmologist and spokesman for the American Academy of Ophthalmology, said that the finding is "certainly suggestive and worth following up."

"This is kind of cool," he said. "But I will say that I don't know of any study looking at acupuncture and vision. There are studies based on symptomatic things such as pain, and I think there's pretty good evidence that it does have benefit in that respect. But for vision therapy this is the first I've heard of it, and I don't know that anyone has ever tried this before. So this is like a teaser."

"Of course people in those parts of the country, like where I live, where there's fairly wide acceptance of alternative medicine might receive this type of treatment better than others," Bensinger cautioned. "And no question patients will gravitate towards treatments that are covered by their insurance even if it's not the best treatment. And as an alternative approach, this may not be covered."

"But if it works," he added, "people will certainly be excited -- although it certainly needs further testing and further studies to decide if it's really beneficial or not."

For his part, Dr. Stanley Chang, chairman of the ophthalmology department at Columbia University in New York City, did not seem to hold out much promise for acupuncture's potential as an alternative lazy eye therapy.

"Acupuncture I think definitely works for pain amelioration, but I'm not sure it works for some of these other things," he cautioned. "They've tried it for the treatment of myopia and glaucoma, without much success. And so although there haven't been any really good trials comparing acupuncture with conventional therapies, my guess is that it's probably not going to do much for the treatment of lazy eye."

"However, I think it's worth considering or trying," Chang added, "because nothing else seems to work very well for patients of that age, including patch therapy. But what will need is a very carefully controlled study that accounts for all the variables that might have an impact on the outcome of this approach."

For more on amblyopia, visit the National Eye Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provides a reasonably accurate account of the experiment with appropriate caveats about limitations. The story introduces notes of caution early on about the small size of the study and the need for additional research. It also acknowledges that the study was of relatively short duration and that the results may be dependent upon the specific skills of the acupuncturist and may not be reproducible with other practitioners. Unlike the WebMD coverage, though, this story never mentioned that the acupuncture group also had to do an hour per day of near-vision activities on top of the acupuncture and similar to what the patching group was told to do. In addition, the story probably should have mentioned that acupuncture, like many conventional medicines, is known to produce a significant placebo effect. Thus, although the acupuncture seemed to work about as good or better than the patch therapy, we can’t be sure if the children in the study were responding to a real effect of the acupuncture or some other aspect of the treatment such as the time spent with caregivers or the therapeutic ritual. Had the study included a group of children receiving an identical sham acupuncture therapy (that is, needles placed randomly instead of in strategic acupuncture locations), we’d have greater confidence that the effects reported are real.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experiment in Thailand involving more than 16,000 men and women has demonstrated for the first time a small but measurable protective effect of an AIDS vaccine.

The vaccine, a complicated mixture of six "prime" and "booster" shots, reduced a person's risk of becoming infected by about one-third compared with people getting placebo injections.

The results were barely significant on statistical grounds, perplexing for scientific reasons and unanticipated by most researchers. Nevertheless, the first positive result for an AIDS vaccine after two decades of experimentation is being called a milestone.

"Conceptually, we now know a vaccine is possible," said Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which paid for most of the six-year trial. "Whether the vaccine is going to look anything like this one I don't know. But at least we know it can be done."

The vaccine is not licensed or being produced in large amounts. It is unlikely -- but not impossible -- that any country would consider it effective enough to be used as a public health measure against HIV.

Instead, the chief usefulness of the "ALVAC-AIDSVAX" vaccine is likely to be what it can teach virologists about what is happening in the immune system when a person is even somewhat protected from HIV.

"We really need to go through the data to see if there are effects here that are potentially useful," said Col. Jerome Kim, a physician involved in the study, which was run by the U.S. Army, the National Institutes of Health and Thailand's Ministry of Public Health.

He predicted that information gained from the trial after the results are fully analyzed will have "important implications for the design of future HIV vaccines."

Other researchers were less sanguine about the study but did not want to be quoted by name as being skeptical when only a few details of the results have been released.

"I just think it's too early really," said one, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for that reason. "It is in a kind of gray zone, and I think we should really get the data and look at it and see what it all means."

That the vaccine is at least nominally a success comes as a surprise.

Early in the decade, more than 20 prominent researchers wrote an open letter to the journal Science urging the federal government to cancel the Thai trial because the vaccine was so unpromising. The study cost $105 million, most of it provided by the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is the strength of the story – by itself and in comparison with many other stories by many other news organizations. 
Over and over and throughout the story, the evidence was questioned. Excerpts:
 Other researchers were less sanguine about the study but did not want to be quoted by name as being skeptical when only a few details of the results have been released. 
"I just think it’s too early really," said one, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for that reason. "It is in a kind of gray zone, and I think we should really get the data and look at it and see what it all means."
And there was more.  You get the picture.  
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 29, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Most heart patients who take low-dose omega-3 fatty acid supplements don't appear to gain any additional protection against further cardiac trouble, new Dutch research cautions.

In fact, neither low doses of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), which are found in fish oil, nor of alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), derived from nuts and several vegetable oils, provided any benefit to the vast majority of heart patients, the study showed.

The scientists focused on patients who were already taking medications to control blood pressure, cholesterol and potential clotting. So, the researchers theorized that the poor performance of the supplements may simply reflect the overwhelming power of the medications.

Study author Daan Kromhout, from the division of human nutrition at Wageningen University in the Netherlands, is to present the findings Sunday at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Stockholm; the study will appear online in the New England Journal of Medicine simultaneously.

In the study, researchers focused on a group of more than 4,800 Dutch heart attack patients between the ages of 60 and 80, slightly more than three-quarters of whom were men.

All had experienced a heart attack at some point in the decade leading up to the study, and all were taking blood pressure medications, anti-clotting drugs and statins.

At the study's start, the patients were instructed to consume (over a period lasting a little over three years) one of four different types of margarines: one supplemented with omega-3 fatty acids; one supplemented with the plant-derived ALA; one supplemented with both omega-3 fatty acids and ALA; and one with no supplements.

The amount of supplementation added to the various margarines was deemed to be "low-dose." During the study, the patients consumed an average of 18.8 grams of margarine per day, which meant ingestion of an average of 226 milligrams of EPA combined with 150 milligrams of DHA omega-3 fatty acids and/or 1.9 grams of ALA.

By the study's end, almost 14 percent of the heart attack patients had experienced another "major cardiovascular event," with some cases ending in death.

None of the low-dose supplements seemed to stave off such events in most of the patients. One exception appeared to be among women ingesting ALA; researchers saw a 27 percent reduction in the risk for further cardiac complications, although that reduction did not quite reach statistical significance.

"The bottom-line finding of the Alpha Omega Trial is that [omega]-3 fatty acids did not reduce the primary endpoint major cardiovascular events," Kromhout said, noting that the ALA finding needs further confirmation.

Dr. Murray A. Mittleman, director of the cardiovascular epidemiology research unit at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center at Harvard Medical School in Boston, said he was "not that surprised by these results."

"Other studies have shown no benefit from omega-3, other than specifically protecting against cardiac death linked to arrhythmia among patients who have just survived a heart attack," Mittleman noted. It is during this acute post-attack period, he explained, when patients are most vulnerable to a subsequent event.

"But here, in some cases the patients they looked at are years following their first heart attack when they start taking these supplements," he stressed. "So, that's a big difference in what kind of patient they're examining. And they're also not just looking at preventable fatalities but all heart-related events that follow. And on top of that, the supplement doses they use here are very low, much lower than those used in prior studies."

"So it might be big differences in study design that account for this new finding," Mittleman cautioned. "In any case, I would say this is absolutely worth further investigation."

Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles, agreed.

"It is possible that improvements in other treatments for heart attack patients have made fish oil supplementation less important for reducing cardiovascular risk," he acknowledged. "But it's also possible that the different dosing used in this study relative to previous work made a difference in the outcome. The dosing here may have been just too low, whereas higher doses given immediately following an initial heart attack might have been protective."

"So I would say," Fonarow added, "that this is by no means the final word regarding omega-3s and cardiovascular health."

For more on omega-3 fatty acids, visit the National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:  The story did an adequate job reporting on how the study was done and on some of the factors that might explain or influence the findings. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The two syndromes differ, though, in their constellation of symptoms. For example, psoriatic arthritis manifests most often in the lower extremities and is associated with the autoimmune skin condition called psoriasis, in which raised red, scaly patches appear on the skin. Although psoriatic rashes most often precede the onset of the arthritic stage, the reverse can also be the case.

Three of the 10 top-selling drugs in the United States in dollar sales — adalimumab, etanercept and infliximab — are biologics prescribed for psoriatic arthritis as well as for the more common rheumatoid arthritis. These three drugs share a common property: They block the action of a pro-inflammatory substance called tumor necrosis factor. Secreted by various immune cells, TNF stimulates the immune response and accompanying inflammation.

However, despite the availability of TNF inhibitors, “only about half of psoriatic arthritis patients who are given TNF inhibitors get better,” said Genovese.

Although the ultimate cause of the disease remains unknown, there was a good clinical rationale for hoping it might be responsive to ixekizumab. For the last decade or so, Genovese said, another pro-inflammatory substance called IL-17 has been drawing the attention of immunologists focusing on psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Ixekizumab works by blocking IL-17. The drug, an injectable monoclonal antibody, is already commercially available for the treatment of psoriasis, for which it has been remarkably effective, said Genovese. And in an earlier Lilly-sponsored phase-3 trial, ixekizumab was shown to be effective for psoriatic arthritis patients who had not yet been treated with biologic drugs such as TNF inhibitors. (Another approved monoclonal-antibody that targets IL-17, secukinumab, was approved in 2016 for psoriatic arthritis.)

Over the 24-week duration of the latest trial, 109 participants received ixekizumab every two weeks; 94 received placebo injections every two weeks; and 111 alternated every two weeks between getting injections of ixekizumab and the placebo. While 19.5 percent of patients who received only the placebo injections were judged to have met the trial’s specified clinical endpoint — at least a 20 percent reduction in the number of tender and swollen joints — the response rate among those getting the real drug every four weeks was 53.3 percent. Those getting the drug every two weeks didn’t do any better and were slightly more prone to side effects, such as a mild reaction at the injection site.

Although any treatment that works by blocking the immune system’s ability to mount an inflammatory response should be carefully monitored for its potential to render the body vulnerable to infectious disease, there were few observed differences in this category between recipients of placebo versus active drug given every four weeks, Genovese said.

Lilly has filed for approval of the drug by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Genovese has served as a consultant to Lilly.

Other co-authors of the study are affiliated with multiple institutions in diverse locations, including the University of Queensland, in Australia; Guy’s & Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, in London; St. Luke’s International University, in Tokyo; Memorial University, in Newfoundland, Canada; Lapeyronie Hospital, in Montpelier, France; Charite University Medicine Berlin, in Germany; and Eli Lilly and Company, in Indianapolis.

Stanford’s Department of Medicine also supported the work.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We learn that this is a randomized, blinded, three-armed, multi-site study that lasted 24 weeks, which is a sufficient description of the quality of evidence. We wish the release had mentioned that it remains uncertain how patients on the drug would fare long-term, beyond the 6 months of the trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
CDC To Doctors: Anti-HIV Pill No Magic Bullet Against Virus

In November, researchers revealed a encouraging finding: taking a pill can greatly reduce the risk of getting HIV. Now health officials are warning doctors that preventing the disease will take more than just writing a prescription.

The pill, called Truvada, is already on the market for treating HIV infections. But the landmark study, involving 2,500 men who have sex with men, showed that taking Truvada faithfully can reduce the risk of infection by as much as 92 percent.

That touched off a lot of celebrating. It's the first time anybody's shown that taking a pill can prevent HIV – and it was the first new weapon against HIV unveiled in many years.

To make sure it works, though, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says doctors need to do a number of things:
• Prescribe Truvada only for men at high risk of getting infected – that is, only for men who have sex with men, those who have multiple sex partners, and those who live in areas where there's a lot of HIV circulating.
• Test patients before prescribing it to make sure they're not already infected. That'll help avoid creating viruses resistant to the drug when patients miss doses. For the same reason, patients should get an HIV test periodically while on the drug.
• Counsel patients on Truvada to use condoms faithfully, because the drug isn't a sure bet against the virus.
• Above all, tell patients they must take the drug every day – not just when they've had risky sex.

The study makes that last point very clear. Overall, men who took Truvada had a 44 percent lower risk of HIV infection. But those who said they took the drug at least 9 out of every 10 day had a 73 percent lower risk.

That doesn't tell the whole story. When researchers tested the blood of patients for traces of Truvada, they found many who claimed to have taken the pill regularly weren't telling the truth. Among those whose tests showed they really did take it every day, the risk of HIV infection was 92 percent lower than those not on the drug.

There's one other thing, the CDC says. Make sure patients understand that warding off HIV isn't cheap. Each pill currently costs around $36, which adds up to more than $13,000 a year. Some insurers might pay, but some might balk.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a great job of communicating the read-between-the-lines reality of the evidence for the use of this drug.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Melanoma survivors may want to enlist partners to help search their bodies for suspicious looking moles, according to new research.

The researchers previously found that skin cancer survivors and their partners could be trained to spot potentially cancerous moles by doing skin exams. The new report shows that during the two years, those same people had increasing confidence in their skills, with no increase in embarrassment or discomfort.

“There was concern that they might be embarrassed by examining areas of the body that aren’t normally seen close up,” said lead author Dr. June Robinson, of Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago.

Melanoma survivors were previously told to use mirrors to check inaccessible areas of their bodies, she told Reuters Health.

“For example, men can’t see the top of their bald heads or the back of their necks or ears,” Robinson said.

The new study focused on 395 pairs of melanoma survivors who had received training in skin exams in the original study. The participants attended “booster” training sessions and completed surveys every four months for the next two years.

Overall, the trained group found 51 early melanomas during the study, compared to 18 melanomas found by a comparison group of patients and partners who didn’t receive training.

Among people who received the skin exam training, the researchers found a steep increase in their confidence at performing skin exams between the start of the study and four months later.

“Their confidence level goes up and plateaus at eight to 12 months, and it doesn’t go down,” said Robinson.

The exams didn’t become more embarrassing or less comfortable, either.

The new results show people can ask friends or relatives to help examine their bodies for suspicious moles, said Robinson.

“That’s a simple enough statement, and people are not put off by that,” she said.

Bringing this program into the mainstream presents some challenges, however. Each person in the study was trained on how to find melanoma and attended booster sessions every four months.

“We are now trying to see if people can learn, perform and have continuing confidence without the physician reinforcement,” said Robinson.

For now, she said people can go to the American Academy of Dermatology's website to learn the steps - known as the ABCDEs - of finding melanoma (bit.ly/2h9zl0Y).
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The study is a straightforward survey of people’s feelings of confidence and embarrassment, with appropriate statistical analysis applied to the results. There is little for the writer to interrogate in the quality of the evidence, though perhaps it would have been useful to hear from an expert in patient psychology to understand how these kind of surveys relate to real-life health behaviors.
We also liked how the story included this caveat:
Bringing this program into the mainstream presents some challenges, however. Each person in the study was trained on how to find melanoma and attended booster sessions every four months.
“We are now trying to see if people can learn, perform and have continuing confidence without the physician reinforcement,” said Robinson.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a finding that challenges the conventional wisdom about the risks of some hormones used in menopause, a major government study has found that years after using estrogen-only therapy, certain women had a markedly reduced risk of breast cancer and heart attack.

The research, part of the landmark Women’s Health Initiative study, is likely to surprise women and their doctors, who for years have heard frightening news about the risks of hormone therapy. But most of those fears are related to the use of a combination of two hormones, estrogen and progestin, which are prescribed to relieve hot flashes and other symptoms of menopause, and have been shown to increase a woman’s risk of breast cancer.

The new findings, reported Tuesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association, come from 10,739 women in the Women’s Health Initiative study who had previously had a hysterectomy, the surgical removal of the uterus. Nationwide, about one-third of women in their 50s have had a hysterectomy.

The Women’s Health Initiative was begun in 1991 by the National Institutes of Health as a sweeping investigation of hormone use and other health issues of postmenopausal women.



While most women in the hormone study were taking combination hormone therapy, women without a uterus took estrogen alone or a placebo for about six years and were followed for nearly 11 years. The estrogen-only group was not given progestin, which is prescribed only to protect the uterus from the harmful effects of estrogen. Although all the women in the estrogen study stopped using the treatment in 2004, the investigators have continued to monitor their health, as is typical in large clinical trials.

The most surprising new finding relates to breast cancer. The women with hysterectomies who used estrogen alone had a 23 percent lower risk for breast cancer compared with those who had taken a placebo. This is in stark contrast to the higher risk of breast cancer shown in the estrogen-progestin part of the trial.

“The decreased risk of breast cancer in this group is something we totally didn’t expect when we started the W.H.I. hormone therapy trials,” said Andrea Z. LaCroix, the study’s lead author and a professor of epidemiology at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle. “This study differentiates estrogen alone from estrogen and progestin in a very big way. I hope it gets across to women, because we are not reversing ourselves.”

Indeed, the investigators emphasized that the results do not change recommendations concerning combination hormone therapy for the two-thirds of menopausal women who still have a uterus. The Women’s Health Initiative data have consistently shown that the combination of estrogen and progestin raises breast cancer risk, and that the treatment should be used only to relieve severe menopause symptoms, using the lowest dose for the shortest possible time.

But the data are reassuring for millions of middle-aged women without a uterus who take estrogen to relieve hot flashes and other menopause symptoms.

An accompanying editorial in the journal was skeptical about the results, arguing that the design of the initiative, which is skewed toward older women and stopped all forms of hormone treatment after several years of use, does not match the way doctors typically prescribe treatment to women in their 50s at the onset of menopause.

Dr. Graham Colditz, an author of the editorial and professor of surgery at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, said he thought data collected from observational studies that show a higher risk of breast cancer associated with estrogen use were more reliable than the data gathered from the Women’s Health Initiative clinical trial.

“The finding doesn’t reflect how hormones are used in the U.S. at the moment,” Dr. Colditz said.

The trial has, however, been held up for years as the gold standard for medical research, and its findings linking combination hormones to breast cancer and heart problems led to significant changes in the way doctors around the world treated menopause.

A major caveat in interpreting the new estrogen data is that the study used conjugated equine estrogens, which are estrogen compounds derived from the urine of pregnant mares and marketed by Wyeth Pharmaceuticals under the brand Premarin. The brand has fallen out of favor with many women who are choosing treatments that contain estradiol, which is chemically similar to a woman’s natural estrogen. It is not known whether the benefits of estrogen shown in the Women’s Health Initiative would be replicated using a different type of estrogen.

Nobody knows why estrogen treatment alone appeared to lower breast cancer risk in the study, but one explanation may be that in menopausal women with low levels of natural estrogen, the effects of estrogen drugs induce cell death in existing tumors. Nobody is suggesting that women start using estrogen to prevent breast cancer, but the finding opens a potentially new avenue of research in the prevention of the disease.

“We need to look closely at these findings to see if we can learn more about ways to prevent breast cancer in women,” said Dr. JoAnn Manson, a Women’s Health Initiative investigator and an author of the study who is chief of preventive medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston.

In the final analysis of the estrogen-only trial, use of the hormone was not associated with any significant risks or benefits pertaining to blood clots, stroke, hip fracture, colon cancer or overall death rates.

But there were surprising differences in the risks and benefits of estrogen use on heart risk when comparing the youngest and oldest women in the study. Women who were in their 50s when they first started using estrogen also had significantly fewer heart risks, including almost 50 percent fewer heart attacks, compared with those assigned to the placebo group.

The data indicate that for every 10,000 women in their 50s, those using estrogen would experience 12 fewer heart attacks, 13 fewer deaths and 18 fewer adverse events like blood clots or stroke in a given year, compared with those taking a placebo.

But the risks of estrogen use were pronounced in older women. For every 10,000 women in their 70s, using estrogen would cause 16 extra heart attacks, 19 extra deaths and 48 serious adverse events.

“The big message there is that the data look much more favorable for younger women and much riskier for older women,” said Dr. LaCroix.

Dr. Rowan Chlebowski, another author of the study and a medical oncologist at Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, said the findings underscored the fact that the risks and benefits of menopause hormones change depending on a woman’s health status, her age and the type of hormone used.

Dr. Chlebowski previously led research that showed cancer risks associated with combination hormone therapy, but he says the new data on estrogen alone show that in certain women, estrogen use to relieve menopausal symptoms is a “good choice.”

“When you look at the debate, people are saying hormones are good or not good — it’s been all or nothing. This calls attention to the fact that there are differences,” Dr. Chlebowski said. “I hope that separation will become clearer now.”

 



This article appeared in print on Wednesday, April 6, 2011 on page A1.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Good job by the Times at digging below the surface and explaining nuance to readers. The critics, who published an editorial in the same JAMA issue point out that the WHI finding of decreased breast cancer risk with estrogen runs counter to results of many other studies showing an increased risk.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In a report on what is believed to be the first small clinical trial of its kind, researchers at the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center say they have safely used immune cells grown from patients' own bone marrow to treat multiple myeloma, a cancer of white blood cells.

Results of the trial involving a particular type of tumor-targeting T cell, known as marrow-infiltrating lymphocytes (MILs), are described in the May 20 issue of Science Translational Medicine.

"What we learned in this small trial is that large numbers of activated MILs can selectively target and kill myeloma cells," says Johns Hopkins immunologist Ivan Borrello, M.D., who led the clinical trial.

MILs, he explains, are the foot soldiers of the immune system and attack foreign cells, such as bacteria or viruses. But in their normal state, they are inactive and too few in number to have a measurable effect on cancer.

Previous laboratory research by Borrello and his colleagues showed that activated MILs could selectively target and kill myeloma cells taken from patients and grown in laboratory culture flasks.

For the clinical trial, the Johns Hopkins team enrolled 25 patients with newly diagnosed or relapsed multiple myeloma, although three of the patients relapsed before they could receive the MILs therapy.

The scientists retrieved MILs from each patient's bone marrow, grew them in the laboratory to expand their numbers, activated them with microscopic beads coated with immune activating antibodies and intravenously injected each of the 22 patients with their own cells. Three days before the injections of expanded MILs, patients received high doses of chemotherapy and a stem cell transplant, standard treatments for multiple myeloma.

One year after receiving the MILs therapy, 13 of the 22 patients had at least a partial response to the therapy, meaning that their cancers had shrunk by at least 50 percent.

Seven patients experienced at least a 90 percent reduction in tumor cell volume and lived, on average, 25.1 months without cancer progression. The remaining 15 patients had an average of 11.8 progression-free months following MILs therapy. None of the participants had serious side effects from the MILs therapy. The overall survival was 31.5 months for those with less than 90 percent disease reduction, but this number has not yet been reached in those with better responses. The average follow-up time is currently more than six years.

Borrello notes that several U.S. cancer centers have conducted similar experimental treatments, known as adoptive T cell therapy, but says the Johns Hopkins team is believed to be the only one to use MILs. Other types of tumor-infiltrating cells can be used, but they are usually less plentiful in patients' tumors and may not grow as well outside the body, says Borrello.

In nonblood-based tumors, such as melanoma, only about one-half of patients have T cells in their tumors that can be harvested, and only about one-half of those harvested cells can be grown. "Typically, immune cells from solid tumors, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, can be harvested and grown in only about 25 percent of patients who could potentially be eligible for the therapy. But in our clinical trial, we were able to harvest and grow MILs from all 22 patients," says Kimberly Noonan, Ph.D., a research associate at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

Noonan says the small trial helped her and her colleagues learn more about which patients may benefit from MILs therapy. For example, they were able to determine how many of the MILs grown in the lab were specifically targeted to the patient's tumor and whether they continued to target the tumor after being infused.

Additionally, the scientists found that patients whose bone marrow before treatment contained a high number of certain immune cells, known as central memory cells, also had better response to MILs therapy. Patients who began treatment with signs of an overactive immune response did not respond as well.

Noonan says the research team has used these data to guide two other ongoing MILs clinical trials. Those studies, she says, are trying to extend anti-tumor response and tumor specificity by combining the MILs transplant with a Johns Hopkins-developed cancer vaccine called GVAX and the myeloma drug lenalidomide, which stimulates T cell responses.

The researchers say the trials also have shed light on new ways to grow the MILs. "In most of these trials, you see that the more cells you get, the better response you get in patients. Learning how to improve cell growth may therefore improve the therapy," says Noonan.

Kimmel Cancer Center scientists are also developing MILs to treat solid tumors such as lung, esophageal and gastric cancers, as well as the pediatric cancers neuroblastoma and Ewing's sarcoma.

Experts report there are more than 20,000 new cases of multiple myeloma and more than 10,000 deaths each year in United States. It is the second most common cancer originating in the blood.

Other Johns Hopkins scientists who contributed to the research include Carol Ann Huff, Janice Davis, M. Victor Lemas, Susan Fiorino, Jeffrey Bitzan, Anna Ferguson, Amy Emerling, Leo Luznik, William Matsui, Jonathan Powell, Ephraim Fuchs, Gary L. Rosner, C. Epstein, Lakshmi Rudraraju, Richard F. Ambinder, Richard J. Jones and Drew Pardoll.

Funding for the study was provided by the Commonwealth Fund (5P01 CA015396, P30 CA006973) and the Baca and Morisi Funds.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release makes a very good effort to objectively describe a technically complicated trial. It defines the trial at least twice as being “small” and calls it a “pilot,” suggesting that caution is appropriate when considering the results. It effectively explains the process involved in the treatments, including what was learned regarding the growth of cells in the lab after harvesting. It also points to the fact that while tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) can only be retrieved from a quarter of the patient candidates for this technique, MILs were obtained from all of the patients in this study, suggesting that they may be a better tool for this therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Taking one or two baby aspirins a day for at least five years was tied to a lower risk of colorectal cancer in a study from Denmark.

Earlier studies had suggested that aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen may help protect against colorectal cancer, but it wasn’t clear how much had to be taken, and for how long, to achieve those benefits.

Now, using data on more than 113,000 individuals, researchers have been trying to sort out the relationship between aspirin and NSAIDs, duration of treatment, and colorectal cancer rates.

In general, the risk of developing colorectal cancer varies with age, race, ethnicity and lifestyle. More than 90 percent of cases are diagnosed in people older than 50, according to the National Cancer Institute.

An online risk calculator from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (available here: 1.usa.gov/1DlscTL) indicates that in the U.S., for an average white or black woman in her late fifties, the 10-year risk of developing colorectal cancer is between 1 and 1.4 percent, and her lifetime risk is between 5 and 5.4 percent. For an average black or white male of the same age, the corresponding risks would be about 1.4 percent and 5.8 percent.

In the new study from Denmark, taking low-dose aspirin continuously for at least five years appeared to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer by 27%, and using nonaspirin NSAIDs for at least five years appeared to reduce it by 30%.

On the other hand, merely having taken aspirin did not alter the colorectal cancer risk, they reported in Annals of Internal Medicine.

“Unless low-dose aspirin is taken continuously, there is little protection against colorectal cancer,” Dr. Soren Friis from the Danish Cancer Society Research Center in Copenhagen told Reuters Health.

Nonaspirin NSAIDs were also protective against colorectal cancer with consistent long-term use, “and there was some indication that even non-continuous use of these agents may be (marginally) effective for the prevention of colorectal cancer,” Dr. Friis said.

Aspirin and NSAIDs carry their own risks, however. Long-term use can cause gastrointestinal bleeding, for example, so the potential reduction in colon cancer risk needs to be balanced against potential side effects, the authors warn.

The study had several limitations. For instance, the researchers only had data for users who obtained their aspirin or NSAIDs from doctors’ prescriptions. They didn’t include patients who made over-the-counter purchases of the medicines. Also, the researchers can’t rule out the possibility that other factors may have increased participants’ risk for colorectal cancer, such as obesity, dietary habits, alcohol use, and family history of colorectal cancer.

Dr. Friis emphasized that people should not start taking aspirin or NSAIDs on the basis of the new findings.

“Self-medication with aspirin or non-aspirin NSAIDs is strongly discouraged, due to the possibility of serious adverse events,” Dr. Friis said. “The public should not take any medication regularly without consulting with a physician.”

Dr. Gurpreet Singh Ranger from Upper River Valley Hospital, Waterville, New Brunswick and Dalhousie Medical School, in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, agreed with Dr. Friis.

“Low dose aspirin, already taken regularly by millions, reduces the risk of colorectal cancer,” he told Reuters Health by email. But “before starting to take aspirin long term, it is important to discuss the implications with your family doctor or specialist.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story cites “several limitations” of the study, including the fact that the researchers did not include patients who bought their aspirin or other NSAIDs without a doctor’s prescription, and that the authors were not able to adjust for some risk factors, such as obesity, diet, alcohol use and family history of colorectal cancer.
The study type (retrospective case control) could also have been mentioned along with the relative weakness of this type of study compared with a randomized controlled trial. In addition, the story in several places uses language suggesting a cause and effect relationship between aspirin and colon cancer — e.g. “taking low-dose aspirin continuously for at least five years appeared to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer” — and it quotes an independent source who says flatly that aspirin “reduces the risk of colorectal cancer.” Such a strong statement wasn’t justified by anything we saw in this study — and the paper didn’t point to any other definitive evidence that would warrant such a statement.
But despite these concerns, we think that the story overall did enough to merit a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The stunning results found that angioplasty did not save lives or prevent heart attacks in non-emergency heart patients.

An even bigger surprise: Angioplasty gave only slight and temporary relief from chest pain, the main reason it is done.

"By five years, there was really no significant difference" in symptoms, said Dr. William Boden of Buffalo General Hospital in New York. "Few would have expected such results."

He led the study and gave results Monday at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology. They also were published online by the New England Journal of Medicine and will be in the April 12 issue.

Researchers from Canada and the United States followed more than 2,200 patients who had symptoms of heart disease but were considered stable, reports CBS News medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook. Half of these low-risk patients received stents and medication. The other half were given only medication: drugs to lower cholesterol, control blood pressure and prevent clotting.

To the surprise of the researchers, both groups fared about the same: approximately 19 percent had a heart attack or died within seven years, adds LaPook.

Angioplasty remains the top treatment for people having a heart attack or hospitalized with worsening symptoms. But most angioplasties are done on a non-emergency basis, to relieve chest pain caused by clogged arteries crimping the heart's blood supply.

Those patients now should try drugs first, experts say. If that does not help, they can consider angioplasty or bypass surgery, which unlike angioplasty, does save lives, prevents heart attacks and gives lasting relief of chest pain.

In the study, only one-third of the people treated with drugs ultimately needed angioplasty or a bypass.

"You are not putting yourself at risk of death or heart attack if you defer," and considering the safety worries about heart stents used to keep arteries open after angioplasty, it may be wise to wait, said Dr. Steven Nissen, a Cleveland Clinic heart specialist and president of the College of Cardiology.

Why did angioplasty not help more?

It fixes only one blockage at a time whereas drugs affect all the arteries, experts said. Also, the clogs treated with angioplasty are not the really dangerous kind.

"Even though it goes against intuition, the blockages that are severe that cause chest pain are less likely to be the source of a heart attack than segments in the artery that are not severely blocked," said Dr. David Maron, a Vanderbilt University cardiologist who helped lead the new study.

About 1.2 million angioplasties are done in the United States each year. Through a blood vessel in the groin, doctors snake a tube to a blocked heart artery. A tiny balloon is inflated to flatten the clog and a mesh scaffold stent is usually placed.

The procedure already has lost some popularity because of emerging evidence that popular drug-coated stents can raise the risk of blood clots months later. The new study shifts the argument from which type of stent to use to whether to do the procedure at all.

About 40 percent of patients in the study had a prior heart attack more than three months previously.

"We deliberately chose to enroll a sicker, more symptomatic group" to give angioplasty a good chance to prove itself, Boden said.

All were treated with medicines that improve chest pain and heart and artery health such as aspirin, cholesterol-lowering statins, nitrates, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers. All also were counseled on healthy lifestyles — diet, exercise and smoking cessation.

Half of the participants also were assigned to get angioplasty.

After an average of 4½ years, the groups had similar rates of death and heart attack: 211 in the angioplasty group and 202 in the medication group.

Neither treatment proved better for any subgroups like smokers, diabetics, or older or sicker people.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the design of the current study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, March 23, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Vitamin D supplements may slow or prevent low-grade prostate cancer from progressing, a small new study suggests.

"Vitamin D decreases inflammation in tissues, and inflammation is a driver of cancer," explained Bruce Hollis, the study's lead researcher and a professor of pediatrics, biochemistry and molecular biology at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston.

For the study, researchers randomly assigned 37 men who elected to have their prostate removed to receive either 4,000 international units (IU) of vitamin D or an inactive placebo daily for 60 days before their operation.

When the prostate gland was examined after their surgery, researchers found that many who received vitamin D had improvements in their prostate tumors, while the tumors in the placebo group remained the same or got worse.

"In greater than 60 percent of those taking it, vitamin D actually made the cancer better," said Hollis.

Hollis reported that in some cases the tumor shrank and in others the cancer went away. However, the study was small, and results from a larger trial aren't expected for several years, he added.

Doctors often recommend a "watch and wait" period for men with low-grade, or less aggressive, prostate tumors. But many patients and their families aren't comfortable waiting and opt to have surgery before it's deemed medically necessary. These findings suggest that taking vitamin D might help reduce the need for such radical treatment.

But Dr. Anthony D'Amico, chief of radiation oncology at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, said that this study was too small to reach any definitive conclusion about the value of vitamin D in fighting prostate cancer.

"It's premature to make any conclusions," he said. The findings also need to be replicated in a much larger number of patients, D'Amico said.

D'Amico stressed that men should not start taking vitamin D supplements in hopes of slowing or curing prostate cancer.

Vitamin D, known as the "sunshine vitamin," is produced by the body when it's exposed to sun. It's also found in fortified dairy products and fatty fish.

The study results were scheduled for presentation Monday at the annual meeting of the American Chemical Society in Denver. Data and conclusions presented at meetings are usually considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed medical journal.

For more about prostate cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story clears our bar here. It offers a strong rebuttal to the implication that vitamin D is clearly slowing or reversing prostate cancer by quoting a physician not connected to the study. And it does point out this was a small study, not yet published in a journal or subjected to full peer review, that needs to be replicated in a larger sample. Of course, there are many issues that the story could have delved into to increase readers’ understanding of the study. Were the patients and researchers blinded to who got what? How were tumors measured before and after surgery? Was compliance with vitamin D intake monitored? And how can a 60-day study tell us anything meaningful about cancers that may take a decade to impact the health of patients? But for a short piece, we think the story provided the right bottom-line message.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new study is raising questions about the age-old belief that a calorie is a calorie.

The research finds that dieters who were trying to maintain their weight loss burned significantly more calories eating a low-carb diet than they did eating a low-fat diet.

But some experts say these findings are very preliminary.

The study, funded by the National Institutes of Health, was designed to see if changing the type of diet people consumed helped with weight maintenance because dieters often regain lost weight.

So scientists had 21 obese participants, ages 18 to 40, lose 10% to 15% of their initial body weight (about 30 pounds). After their weight had stabilized, each participant followed one of three different diets for four weeks. Participants were fed food that was prepared for them by diet experts. The dieters were admitted to the hospital four times for medical and metabolic testing.

The diets had the same number of calories, but the fat, protein and carbohydrate content varied. Those diets:
•A low-fat diet which was about 20% of calories from fat and emphasized whole-grain products and fruits and vegetables.
•A low-carb diet, similar to the Atkins diet, with only 10% of calories from carbohydrates. It emphasized fish, chicken, beef, eggs, cheese, some vegetables and fruits while eliminating foods such as breads, pasta, potatoes and starchy vegetables.
•A low-glycemic index diet, similar to a Mediterranean diet, made up of vegetables, fruit, beans, healthy fats (olive oil, nuts) and mostly healthy grains (old-fashioned oats, brown rice). These foods digest more slowly, helping to keep blood sugar and hormones stable after the meal.

Findings, published in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association: Participants burned about 300 calories more a day on a low-carb diet than they did on a low-fat diet. "That's the amount you'd burn off in an hour of moderate intensity physical activity without lifting a finger," says senior author David Ludwig, director of the New Balance Foundation Obesity Prevention Center at Boston Children's Hospital.

"Participants burned 150 calories more on the low-glycemic index diet than the low-fat diet. That's about an hour of light physical activity," he says.

The reason for the low-carb advantage is unclear, he says.

"We think the low-carb and low-glycemic index diets, by not causing the surge and crash in blood sugar, don't trigger the starvation response. When the body thinks it's starving, it turns down metabolism to conserve energy," he says.

The authors note a downside to the low-carb diet: It appears to raise some risk factors for heart disease.

Ludwig says that restricting carbohydrates over the long term may be hard for many people. If you're trying to lose weight, "you can get a jump start with a low-carb diet, but over the long term, a low-glycemic index diet may be better than severely restricting carbohydrates."

"The low-glycemic index diet seems to be the happy medium," says Cara Ebbeling, associate director of the Obesity Prevention Center. "It didn't slow metabolism as much as the low-fat diet, and it didn't seem to have some of the negative effects on cardiovascular disease risk."

On a low-glycemic index diet, you would avoid highly processed carbs such as white bread, white rice, many snack foods, prepared breakfast cereals, sugary desserts and sugary beverages, she says.

Experts had different responses to the findings.

George Bray, an obesity researcher at Pennington Biomedical Research Center in Baton Rouge who has also studied this topic and who wrote the accompanying editorial in JAMA, says that other studies "show that you can do well on any diet as long as you stick to it. Adherence is the major key for weight loss and maintenance. There is no magic in any diet."

Eric Westman, a Duke University researcher who has conducted several studies on the low-carb diet and is co-author of The New Atkins for a New You, says this study documents that the "lower the carbohydrates, the better the metabolic effects. People burn more calories if they eat fewer carbohydrates."

Marion Nestle, a nutrition professor at New York University, says longer studies conducted among people in their own environments, not with such controlled meals, have shown "little difference in weight loss and maintenance between one kind of diet and another." More research is needed to show that interesting results like these are applicable in real life, she says.

"In the meantime, if you want to lose weight, eat less."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Caveats are introduced high up in the story and, unlike the competing WSJ coverage, USA Today provides 3 independent perspectives on the findings. Two of these experts mention important limitations, including the fact that the study was short-term and conducted under highly controlled conditions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SILVER SPRING, Md., May 18, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration today approved Tecentriq (atezolizumab) to treat the most common type of bladder cancer, called urothelial carcinoma. This is the first product in its class (PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors) approved to treat this type of cancer.

"Tecentriq provides these patients with a new therapy targeting the PD-L1 pathway," said Richard Pazdur, M.D., director of the Office of Hematology and Oncology Products in the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. "Products that block PD-1/PD-L1 interactions are part of an evolving story about the relationship between the body's immune system and its interaction with cancer cells."

Tecentriq targets the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway (proteins found on the body's immune cells and some cancer cells). By blocking these interactions, Tecentriq may help the body's immune system fight cancer cells. Tecentriq is the first FDA-approved PD-L1 inhibitor and the latest in the broader class of PD-1/PD-L1 targeted biologics approved by the FDA in the last two years.

Tecentriq is approved for the treatment of patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma whose disease has worsened during or following platinum-containing chemotherapy, or within 12 months of receiving platinum-containing chemotherapy, either before (neoadjuvant) or after (adjuvant) surgical treatment. Urothelial carcinoma is the most common type of bladder cancer and occurs in the urinary tract system, involving the bladder and related organs. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) estimates 76,960 new cases of bladder cancer and 16,390 deaths from the disease in 2016.

The safety and efficacy of Tecentriq were studied in a single-arm clinical trial involving 310 patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma. This trial measured the percentage of patients who experienced complete or partial shrinkage of their tumors (objective response rate). The study also looked at the difference in effect based on "positive" versus "negative" expression of the PD-L1 protein on patients' tumor-infiltrating immune cells. In all patients, 14.8 percent of participants experienced at least a partial shrinkage of their tumors, an effect that lasted from more than 2.1 to more than 13.8 months at the time of the response analysis. In patients who were classified as "positive" for PD-L1 expression, 26 percent of participants experienced a tumor response (compared to 9.5 percent of participants who were classified as "negative" for PD-L1 expression).

While patients who received Tecentriq experienced a tumor response across the study, the greater effect in those who were classified as "positive" for PD-L1 expression suggests that the level of PD-L1 expression in tumor-infiltrating immune cells may help identify patients who are more likely to respond to treatment with Tecentriq. Therefore, today the FDA also approved the Ventana PD-L1 (SP142) assay to detect PD-L1 protein expression levels on patients' tumor-infiltrating immune cells and help physicians determine which patients may benefit most from treatment with Tecentriq.

The most common side effects of treatment with Tencentriq were fatigue, decreased appetite, nausea, urinary tract infection, fever (pyrexia) and constipation. Tencentriq also has the potential to cause infection and serious side effects that result from the immune system effect of Tencentriq (known as "immune-mediated side effects"). These severe immune-mediated side effects involve healthy organs, including the lung, colon and endocrine system.

The FDA granted the Tecentriq application breakthrough therapy designation, priority review status and accelerated approval for this indication. These are distinct programs intended to facilitate and expedite the development and review of certain new drugs in light of their potential to benefit patients with serious or life-threatening conditions.

Tecentriq is marketed by Genentech based in San Francisco, California. The Ventana PD-L1 (SP142) assay companion diagnostic for Tecentriq is marketed by Ventana Medical Systems, based in Tucson, Arizona.

For more information:

FDA: Office of Hematology and Oncology Products 

FDA: Approved Drugs: Questions and Answers 

FDA: Companion Diagnostics 

NCI: Bladder Cancer

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation's food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release outlines that this is the very first clinical trial of this compound for safety and efficacy, and under which regulatory paths the drug was assessed, including “breakthrough therapy designation, priority review status and accelerated approval.” We’re giving this release the benefit of the doubt and rating it Satisfactory for its bare bones description of the trial (and since we already addressed the lack of long-term survival data in the “Benefits” section.) As it stands, the results from the small trial were preliminary and short-term and did not reflect long-term survival. We would have liked to see a reference or link to the completed trial where one could look at the results to assess independently or learn more about the outcomes. We think the release should have provided more data on the patient demographics, the treatment regimen (dosing amount and schedule) as well as the range in tumor reduction.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - - Exhausted shift workers may be safer driving home at night when they’re exposed to bright light before they hit the road, a small study suggests.

To test the effect of light therapy on driving, researchers did a series of three experiments with 19 adults. In two scenarios, participants spent a night being sleep-deprived in a lab and then spent 45 minutes in dim or bright light before a driving test. For a third test, people got a good nights’ sleep at home and then went to the lab for 45 minutes of bright light exposure before a driving test.

After sleep deprivation in the lab, five people exposed to dim light therapy got in car accidents during the driving simulations. None of the people who slept at home crashed, and neither did any of the sleep-deprived people who got bright light therapy before getting behind the wheel, the study found.

“We experience severe sleepiness toward the end of the night shift, and this may overlap with our commute time,” said senior study author Dr. Ralph Mistlberger of Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, Canada.

“Sleep deprivation makes this worse of course, and together with the clock, this conspires to impair our ability to sustain attention to task (e.g., driving), and avoid distraction, and react quickly to external stimuli like traffic lights, brake lights in front of you, road signs, etc,” Mistlberger added by email.

Sleepiness is a leading risk factor for automobile accidents because it can make drivers less vigilant, slow reaction times and dull cognitive abilities, researchers note in Sleep Medicine.

Shift workers with chronic sleep deprivation also face an increased risk of accidents. Strategies like drinking coffee or soda, napping before a drive or blasting music or rolling down the windows in the car may help increase alertness behind the wheel, but none of these strategies is fool-proof.

For the current study, researchers wanted to see if bright light might help reduce driving impairments related to sleep deprivation.

They found participants had lower body temperatures after spending a sleep-deprived night in the lab, as well as longer reaction times and increased sleepiness.

Exposure to bright light didn’t appear to improve reaction times or sleepiness. But light was associated with better driving.

Beyond its small size, other limitations of the study include the reliance on lab conditions for sleep deprivation and light exposure, which may not match what shift workers would experience on the job, the authors note.

“There is evidence that the use of bright light at the office (or even at home directly prior to beginning the work shift) may be beneficial in preventing sleep deprivation-related motor vehicle collisions,” said Russell Griffin, a researcher at the University of Alabama at Birmingham who wasn’t involved in the study.

“That said, there is not enough evidence to date to fully suggest the use of bright light therapy to avoid collision,” Griffin added by email.

The proven way to avoid the effects of sleepiness on the road is to consistently get enough sleep, said Dr. Flaura Koplin Winston, a researcher at the University of Pennsylvania and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia who wasn’t involved in the study.

“Drowsy driving is perhaps the most under-recognized cause of serious crashes and sadly, the evidence is not there on how to counter it,” Winston said by email.

More research is needed on the potential of bright light therapy to make exhausted drivers safer, said Dr. Donald Redelmeier, a researcher at the University of Toronto who wasn’t involved in the study.

But there are still things drivers can do now to stay safer on the road.

“Safety strategies while driving can include minimizing distractions, stopping at stop signs, respecting speed limits, yielding right-of-way, buckling a seatbelt, signaling all turns and not driving after drinking alcohol,” Redelmeier said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The writer devotes an entire paragraph to the limits of the study, which include a small number of participants (19) and the generalizability problems that stem from experiments in lab settings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“Fibromyalgia is so common, and we have such a difficult time treating it effectively. It’s defined by what the patient tells you,” he added. “It’s hard for some patients’ families and their doctors to get their head around what it is and whether it’s real. So, that these results were so positive for something that’s very safe is an impressive accomplishment.”

Recent studies have suggested that tai chi, with its slow exercises, breathing and meditation, could benefit patients with other chronic conditions, including arthritis. But not all of these reports have been conclusive, and tai chi is hard to study because there are many styles and approaches.

The fibromyalgia study involved the yang style of tai chi, taught by a Boston tai chi master, Ramel Rones. Dr. Solomon and other experts cautioned that bigger studies with other masters and approaches were necessary.

Still, patients, who received twice-weekly tai chi classes and a DVD to practice with 20 minutes daily, showed weekly improvement on an established measurement, the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire, improving more than the stretching-and-education group in physicians’ assessments, sleep, walking and mental health. One-third stopped using medication, compared with one-sixth in the stretching group.

Dr. Chenchen Wang, a Tufts rheumatologist who led the study, said she attributed the results to the fact that “fibromyalgia is a very complex problem” and “tai chi has multiple components — physical, psychological, social and spiritual.”

The therapy impressed Mary Petersen, 59, a retired phone company employee from Lynn, Mass., who said that before participating in the 2008 study, “I couldn’t walk half a mile,” and it “hurt me so much just to put my hands over my head.” Sleeping was difficult, and she was overweight. “There was no joy to life,” she said. “I was an entire mess from head to foot.”

She had tried and rejected medication, physical therapy, swimming and other approaches. “I was used to being treated in a condescending manner because they couldn’t diagnose me: ‘She’s menopausal, she’s crazy.’ ”

Before the study, “I didn’t know tai chi from a sneeze,” said Ms. Petersen, who has diabetes and other conditions. “I was like, ‘Well, O.K., I’ll get to meet some people, it will get me out of the house.’ I didn’t believe any of it. I thought this is so minimal, it’s stupid.”

After a few weeks, she said she began to feel better, and after 12 weeks “the pain had diminished 90 percent.” She has continued tai chi, lost 50 pounds and can walk three to seven miles a day.

“You could not have convinced me that I would ever have done this or continued with this,” she said. “I wouldn’t say it’s a cure. I will say it’s an effective method of controlling pain.”

Dr. Shmerling said that though tai chi is inexpensive compared with other treatments, some patients would reject such an alternative therapy. And Dr. Gloria Yeh, a Beth Israel Deaconess internist and co-author of the editorial, said others “will say, ‘It’s too slow, I can’t do that.’ ”

But she said it offered a “gentler option” for patients deterred by other physical activities. “The mind-body connections set it apart from other exercises,” she said, adding that doctors are seeking “anything we can offer that will make patients say ‘I can really do this.’ ”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION:  The story makes it clear early that the study is small and that more research would be needed in order to recommend tai chi as a therapy.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At workshops and conferences across the country, students, counselors and psychologists in private practice throng lectures on mindfulness. The National Institutes of Health is financing more than 50 studies testing mindfulness techniques, up from 3 in 2000, to help relieve stress, soothe addictive cravings, improve attention, lift despair and reduce hot flashes.

Some proponents say Buddha’s arrival in psychotherapy signals a broader opening in the culture at large — a way to access deeper healing, a hidden path revealed.

Yet so far, the evidence that mindfulness meditation helps relieve psychiatric symptoms is thin, and in some cases, it may make people worse, some studies suggest. Many researchers now worry that the enthusiasm for Buddhist practice will run so far ahead of the science that this promising psychological tool could turn into another fad.

“I’m very open to the possibility that this approach could be effective, and it certainly should be studied,” said Scott Lilienfeld, a psychology professor at Emory. “What concerns me is the hype, the talk about changing the world, this allure of the guru that the field of psychotherapy has a tendency to cultivate.”

Buddhist meditation came to psychotherapy from mainstream academic medicine. In the 1970s, a graduate student in molecular biology, Jon Kabat-Zinn, intrigued by Buddhist ideas, adapted a version of its meditative practice that could be easily learned and studied. It was by design a secular version, extracted like a gemstone from the many-layered foundation of Buddhist teaching, which has sprouted a wide variety of sects and spiritual practices and attracted 350 million adherents worldwide.

In transcendental meditation and other types of meditation, practitioners seek to transcend or “lose” themselves. The goal of mindfulness meditation was different, to foster an awareness of every sensation as it unfolds in the moment.

Dr. Kabat-Zinn taught the practice to people suffering from chronic pain at the University of Massachusetts medical school. In the 1980s he published a series of studies demonstrating that two-hour courses, given once a week for eight weeks, reduced chronic pain more effectively than treatment as usual.

Word spread, discreetly at first. “I think that back then, other researchers had to be very careful when they talked about this, because they didn’t want to be seen as New Age weirdos,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn, now a professor emeritus of medicine at the University of Massachusetts, said in an interview. “So they didn’t call it mindfulness or meditation. “After a while, we put enough studies out there that people became more comfortable with it.”

One person who noticed early on was Marsha Linehan, a psychologist at the University of Washington who was trying to treat deeply troubled patients with histories of suicidal behavior. “Trying to treat these patients with some change-based behavior therapy just made them worse, not better,” Dr. Linehan said in an interview. “With the really hard stuff, you need something else, something that allows people to tolerate these very strong emotions.”

In the 1990s, Dr. Linehan published a series of studies finding that a therapy that incorporated Zen Buddhist mindfulness, “radical acceptance,” practiced by therapist and patient significantly cut the risk of hospitalization and suicide attempts in the high-risk patients.

Finally, in 2000, a group of researchers including Dr. Segal in Toronto, J. Mark G. Williams at the University of Wales and John D. Teasdale at the Medical Research Council in England published a study that found that eight weekly sessions of mindfulness halved the rate of relapse in people with three or more episodes of depression.

With Dr. Kabat-Zinn, they wrote a popular book, “The Mindful Way Through Depression.” Psychotherapists’ curiosity about mindfulness, once tentative, turned into “this feeding frenzy, of sorts, that we have going on now,” Dr. Kabat-Zinn said.

Mindfulness meditation is easy to describe. Sit in a comfortable position, eyes closed, preferably with the back upright and unsupported. Relax and take note of body sensations, sounds and moods. Notice them without judgment. Let the mind settle into the rhythm of breathing. If it wanders (and it will), gently redirect attention to the breath. Stay with it for at least 10 minutes.

After mastering control of attention, some therapists say, a person can turn, mentally, to face a threatening or troubling thought — about, say, a strained relationship with a parent — and learn simply to endure the anger or sadness and let it pass, without lapsing into rumination or trying to change the feeling, a move that often backfires.

One woman, a doctor who had been in therapy for years to manage bouts of disabling anxiety, recently began seeing Gaea Logan, a therapist in Austin, Tex., who incorporates mindfulness meditation into her practice. This patient had plenty to worry about, including a mentally ill child, a divorce and what she described as a “harsh internal voice,” Ms. Logan said.

After practicing mindfulness meditation, she continued to feel anxious at times but told Ms. Logan, “I can stop and observe my feelings and thoughts and have compassion for myself.”

Steven Hayes, a psychologist at the University of Nevada at Reno, has developed a talk therapy called Acceptance Commitment Therapy, or ACT, based on a similar, Buddha-like effort to move beyond language to change fundamental psychological processes.

“It’s a shift from having our mental health defined by the content of our thoughts,” Dr. Hayes said, “to having it defined by our relationship to that content — and changing that relationship by sitting with, noticing and becoming disentangled from our definition of ourselves.”

For all these hopeful signs, the science behind mindfulness is in its infancy. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, which researches health practices, last year published a comprehensive review of meditation studies, including T.M., Zen and mindfulness practice, for a wide variety of physical and mental problems. The study found that over all, the research was too sketchy to draw conclusions.

A recent review by Canadian researchers, focusing specifically on mindfulness meditation, concluded that it did “not have a reliable effect on depression and anxiety.”

Therapists who incorporate mindfulness practices do not agree when the meditation is most useful, either. Some say Buddhist meditation is most useful for patients with moderate emotional problems. Others, like Dr. Linehan, insist that patients in severe mental distress are the best candidates for mindfulness.

A case in point is mindfulness-based therapy to prevent a relapse into depression. The treatment significantly reduced the risk of relapse in people who have had three or more episodes of depression. But it may have had the opposite effect on people who had one or two previous episodes, two studies suggest.

The mindfulness treatment “may be contraindicated for this group of patients,” S. Helen Ma and Dr. Teasdale of the Medical Research Council concluded in a 2004 study of the therapy.

Since mindfulness meditation may have different effects on different mental struggles, the challenge for its proponents will be to specify where it is most effective — and soon, given how popular the practice is becoming.

The question, said Linda Barnes, an associate professor of family medicine and pediatrics at the Boston University School of Medicine, is not whether mindfulness meditation will become a sophisticated therapeutic technique or lapse into self-help cliché.

“The answer to that question is yes to both,” Dr. Barnes said.

The real issue, most researchers agree, is whether the science will keep pace and help people distinguish the mindful variety from the mindless.

A variety of meditative practices have been studied by Western researchers for their effects on mental and physical health.

An active exercise, sometimes called moving meditation, involving extremely slow, continuous movement and extreme concentration. The movements are to balance the vital energy of the body but have no religious significance.

Studies are mixed, some finding it can reduce blood pressure in patients, and others finding no effect. There is some evidence that it can help elderly people improve balance.

Meditators sit comfortably, eyes closed, and breathe naturally. They repeat and concentrate on the mantra, a word or sound chosen by the instructor to achieve state of deep, transcendent absorption. Practitioners “lose” themselves, untouched by day-to-day concerns. Studies suggest it can reduce blood pressure in some patients.

Practitioners find a comfortable position, close the eyes and focus first on breathing, passively observing it. If a stray thought or emotion enters the mind, they allow it to pass and return attention to the breath. The aim is to achieve focused awareness on what is happening moment to moment.

Studies find that it can help manage chronic pain. The findings are mixed on substance abuse. Two trials suggest that it can cut the rate of relapse in people who have had three or more bouts of depression.

Enhanced awareness through breathing techniques and specific postures. Schools vary widely, aiming to achieve total absorption in the present and a release from ordinary thoughts. Studies are mixed, but evidence shows it can reduce stress.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story synthesizes evidence from several studies of mindfulness in mental health treatment and for the management of menopausal symptoms and chronic pain.  The story appropriately pairs the claims of mindfulness experts/researchers with available evidence from clinical studies. The writer did a particularly nice job exploring the strength of the evidence for this type of treatment. The story notes that the positive role of mindfulness meditation in patients with depression and anxiety is borne out in some studies, but not all.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A daily supplement of pharmaceutical grade chondroitin is as good as celecoxib (Celebrex) at relieving arthritic knee pain and doesn’t have dangerous side effects, researchers say.

Dr. Jean-Yves Reginster of Liege State University in Belgium and colleagues recruited 604 people over age 50 with knee osteoarthritis from five European countries and randomly assigned them to take 800 mg of the extra-pure chondroitin sulfate (Chondrosulf), 200 mg of celecoxib (Celebrex) or a placebo every day for six months.

Those who took chondroitin sulfate or celecoxib had similar levels of pain relief at the end of the study, and in both groups the improvement was greater than for those taking just a placebo, according to the report in Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases.

Reginster told Reuters Health the findings are in line with earlier studies showing pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate could significantly decrease the progression of knee osteoarthritis over a period of three years.

He stressed that pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin is not the same as over-the-counter supplements, which are made differently and can’t get into the joint in high enough concentrations to combat the causes of cartilage degradation and pain.

European regulatory bodies recommend pharmaceutical-grade chondroitin sulfate as well as pharmaceutical-grade glucosamine sulfate as first-line treatments for osteoarthritis, Reginster said by email, because of the side effects associated with celecoxib and other non-steroidal inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) including stomach ulcers, bleeding, liver and kidney problems.

Dr. Michael Shepard of Hoag Orthopedic Institute in Orange, California, noted that the study had a relatively low number of participants and that most U.S. studies of this type would run two years rather than six months.

In addition, U.S.-based studies of chondroitin have had mixed results, said Shepard, who wasn’t involved in the study. Some have found the supplements to be as effective as ibuprofen (also an NSAID), and some have found that chondroitin sulfate is no more effective than placebo, he told Reuters Health.

“I tell my patients, ‘buyer beware,’” Shepard said in an email. “I tell them about the mixed results of chondroitin in the literature. I tell them to try chondroitin for one month as a trial and if they like it and feel better with it, then keep taking it.”

If chondroitin doesn’t work for them, he suggests taking an NSAID “periodically,” and to be aware of the side effects.

“If you are going to stay on an NSAID for a prolonged period then you need regular follow up with your doctor,” Shepard cautioned.

Dr. Rachel Wolfe of Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, agreed that chondroitin is “reasonable to try” for some people, especially those with contraindications to NSAIDs.

“However, it should not replace other therapy such as quad strengthening exercises, and weight loss, which we know will provide benefit. It should be used in conjunction with these measures,” said Wolfe, who wasn’t involved in the study.

“Chondroitin is not a miracle pill, but if it allows people to feel less pain and be more active, thereby losing weight and strengthening muscles, then I think there may benefit,” Wolfe told Reuters Health by email. “Studies like this highlight that medicine is still an art - we do not have perfect answers, and we have to individualize for each patient.”

The study was sponsored by IBSA Institut Biochimique SA, a pharmaceutical company based in Lugano, Switzerland, that makes the chondroitin sulfate supplements used in the test.

SOURCE: bit.ly/2rcPLh0 Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, online May 22, 2017.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Even though the article does not provide data about the study results, it does provide plenty of context for readers. Expert sources are quoted saying that the study was relatively small and short in duration, compared to previous similar studies. Further, sources note that findings with chondroitin and arthritic knee pain are a mixed bag, with some studies showing positive results, as this study did, and others showing no effect.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
COLUMBUS, Ohio - Results from an international, randomized study show that an implanted nerve stimulator significantly improves symptoms in those with central sleep apnea, without causing serious side effects.

Dr. William Abraham, co-lead author and director of the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine at The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, presented findings from the study at the recent European Society of

Cardiology Congress in Rome. The study is published today by The Lancet. Unlike the more common obstructive sleep apnea, in which the airway partially collapses and causes pauses in breathing, central sleep apnea (CSA) occurs when the brain fails to control breathing during sleep.

"CSA is a serious concern because it affects about a third of people with heart failure and it's known to make the condition worse," Abraham said. "Currently, we don't have good treatments available. Positive airway pressure devices have been used, but many patients don't tolerate them well and a recent study showed them to be harmful."

Abraham, along with lead author Dr. Maria Rosa Costanzo at Advocate Heart Institute in Naperville, IL, led the study at 31 hospitals in the United States, Germany and Poland. The research team tested the safety and effectiveness of a transvenous phrenic nerve stimulator made by Respicardia Inc. Much like a pacemaker, it sends a regular signal telling the diaphragm to breathe during sleep.

In the randomized study, 151 patients were implanted with the device. Ten were excluded due to non-study related medical issues or deaths, exiting the study or missing visits. During the first six months of evaluation, 68 devices were activated for treatment, while 73 were left inactive as the control group. Between six and 12 months of follow-up, all patients received the neurostimulation treatment.

At the six month evaluation, the device reduced CSA events per hour by half or more for 35 of the 68 members (51 percent) of the treatment group. Only eight (11 percent) of those in the control group achieved the same reduction. Other important sleep measures, such as the amount of time spent with a low blood oxygen level, were also significantly improved. About a third of patients in the treatment group reported therapy-related discomfort that was resolved with some reprogramming of the device.

"Not only did we see this reduction in events per hour, the patients also rated themselves better on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (meaning they were less sleepy during the day) and on a global assessment of their overall quality of life," Abraham said. "This tells us the effects of neurostimulation are clinically relevant and this could be a promising therapy for those with central sleep apnea."

In addition to Abraham, Ohio State's Dr. Rami Khayat and Dr. Ralph Augostini participated in this research, making Ohio State one of the high enrolling centers participating in the study worldwide.

The study was funded by Respicardia. Abraham is a consultant for the company.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We rate this as marginally satisfactory. Overall, the release contains enough information for readers to judge the quality of the evidence. It includes information about the randomized trial and number of patients in both the control and experimental groups, as well as the duration.
Most of the outcomes had objective measures — and that’s to the good —  but important patient-relevant outcomes like congestive heart failure, high blood pressure, cardiovascular event rates, etc., were not studied. The release could have mentioned that this was a limitation of the research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
New research shows that resistance training protects the brain in persons with multiple sclerosis, which may delay the development of the disease

In the past, multiple sclerosis patients were advised not to exercise for fear of exacerbating the illness. However, it is now known that physical training can relieve many of the symptoms, including the excessive fatigue and mobility impairments that are often seen. New research now shows that resistance training may protect the nervous system and thus slow the progression of the disease.

This is the main finding of a study conducted by a research partnership between Aarhus University, Aarhus University Hospital, the University of Southern Denmark and the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, that has just been published in Multiple Sclerosis Journal.

The study shows that resistance training has a number of positive effects on the brain, which go beyond what can be achieved through effective disease specific medication.

"Over the past six years, we have been pursuing the idea that physical training has effects on more than just the symptoms, and this study provides the first indications that physical exercise may protect the nervous system against the disease," says one of the researchers behind the study, Associate Professor Ulrik Dalgas from the Department of Public Health at Aarhus University.

"For the past 15 years, we have known that physical exercise does not harm people with multiple sclerosis, but instead often has a positive impact on, for example, their ability to walk, their levels of fatigue, their muscle strength and their aerobic capacity, which has otherwise often deteriorated. But the fact that physical training also seems to have a protective effect on the brain in people with multiple sclerosis is new and important knowledge," says Ulrik Dalgas.

In the study, the researchers followed 35 people with multiple sclerosis for six months. Half of the group engaged in resistance training twice a week, while the other half continued to live their lives normally without systematic training.

Prior to and following the six-month period, the test subjects had their brains MR-scanned, and the researchers could see that there was a tendency for the brain to shrink less in those patients who undertook resistance training.

"Among persons with multiple sclerosis, the brain shrinks markedly faster than normal. Drugs can counter this development, but we saw a tendency that training further minimises brain shrinkage in patients already receiving medication. In addition, we saw that several smaller brain areas actually started to grow in response to training," says Ulrik Dalgas.

The researchers behind the study are still unable to explain why training has a positive effect on the brain in people with multiple sclerosis. A bigger and more in-depth on-going study will help to clarify this, and may also lead to improved treatment options, says Ulrik Dalgas. However, he stresses that the aim is not to replace medication with physical training.

"Phasing out drugs in favour of training is not realistic. On the other hand, the study indicates that systematic physical training can be a far more important supplement during treatment than has so far been assumed. This aspect needs to be thoroughly explored," says Ulrik Dalgas.

It is not yet clear whether all people with multiple sclerosis can benefit from this type of exercise, as it has not been sufficiently tested in the more severely affected patients. Therefore, Ulrik Dalgas is not recommending that all multiple sclerosis patients throw themselves into intensive physical training regimes without first seeking professional advice.
• Multiple sclerosis is an incurable disease of the central nervous system.
• There are about twice as many women as men with multiple sclerosis.
• Eighty per cent of people with multiple sclerosis live with the disease for more than 35 years.
• The disease is found in both aggressive and more benign forms.
• The cause of the illness is unknown, but both genetic and environmental factors play a role.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release tells readers that 35 MS patients participated in the study, with half of the group receiving resistance training twice a week and the other half serving as controls with “no systematic training.” We don’t know what types of exercises were included in the training regimen, but the news release mentions this type of exercise has not been sufficiently tested in more severely affected MS patients. It also emphasizes to readers that resistance training should not replace medication and that more research is needed to discover why training has a “positive effect.”
In the original journal article, researchers point out that the patient population was “highly selected,” since all of them were being treated with the same drug — beta interferons. Patients then were randomized to either an immediate training or control group. Every training session — consisting of four lower and two upper body exercises — was separated by at least 48 hours from the previous exercise bout.
Other study limitations are the small sample size and relatively short study duration. As a result, this research is classified as a pilot/explorative study, something authors acknowledged in the published study.
We would have liked this information to be included in the news release, but since it did provide some other caveats to caution readers, we give it a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Sept. 8, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Statins, lauded for their ability to lower cholesterol and prevent heart attacks and strokes, may also reduce the risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis, Israeli researchers report.

"We found that statin users who purchased their medication persistently were less likely to develop rheumatoid arthritis over a long follow-up period," said lead researcher Gabriel Chodick, from Maccabi Healthcare Services in Tel Aviv.

For example, compared with patients who took statins less than 20 percent of the time, patients who took statins for 40 percent to 59 percent of the time had a 23 percent lower risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis, he said.

"Patients who were covered for more than 80 percent of the time, had a 40 percent lower risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis," Chodick said. "The effect was stronger in younger patients and in patients using more effective statins."

The report was published online Sept. 7 in PLoS Medicine.

For the study, Chodick's team collected data on 1.8 million patients who got their health care through the Maccabi Healthcare Services, an HMO in Israel.

The researchers looked for connections between statin use and the development of both rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, a degenerative joint disease that is unlikely to be affected by statins, the researchers noted.

Over nine years of follow-up, 2,578 people developed rheumatoid arthritis and 17,878 developed osteoarthritis.

When Chodick's group looked at statin use, they found that those not taking statins had a 51 percent higher risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis over about 80 percent of the follow-up period.

After looking for other possibilities, those who took statins regularly had a 41 percent lower risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis compared with people who were not taking statins regularly.

Among those taking statins, there was only a small, short-term reduction in risk of development of osteoarthritis.

"Although the study does not have immediate clinical implications, our findings may suggest that patients who were prescribed statins and take it persistently may benefit from the many effects of statins, which go far beyond cholesterol reduction, including the reduction of rheumatoid arthritis risk," Chodick said.

A previous study on the same group indicated that persistent use of statins was associated with substantially lower all-cause mortality, which could not be explained only by the prevention of cardiovascular disease, he said.

"We believe that a major part of the improved survival among statin users comes from the anti-inflammatory effects demonstrated by lower risk of rheumatoid arthritis. Unfortunately, our previous study indicated that, despite their benefits, many patients on statins discontinue their treatment," Chodick said.

This work received no outside or corporate finding, the researchers noted.

Dr. Robert Myerburg, a professor of medicine and physiology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, stressed that "this is a study looking for an association, and it doesn't prove that starting statins early in life will prevent or delay the onset of rheumatoid arthritis."

The only way to prove the connection is with a clinical trial, Myerburg said. "At this point, I would not use a statin for that [prevention of rheumatoid arthritis] indication," he said.

For more information on statins, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story points out that this study was observational and that a controlled experiment would be needed to prove cause-and-effect. The story also includes comments that people should not take statins in order to reduce their risk of rheumatoid arthritis based merely on the findings reported by these researchers. However, readers have to stay with the story almost until the end in order to see the cautionary statements about the preliminary nature of the study conclusions.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dermatologists will soon get some high-tech help deciding which suspicious-looking moles should be removed and checked for melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer.

The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday approved a first-of-its-kind device, called MelaFind, that makes detailed, digital images of skin growths and uses a computer to analyze them for signs of cancer, offering a sort of second opinion to doctors. The device is approved only for dermatologists and only for use on growths that don't have obvious signs of cancer but still have one or two worrisome traits.

The hope is to find more melanomas sooner. Nearly all patients diagnosed with early-stage melanoma can be treated and cured, but 85 percent of patients with late-stage melanoma die from it within five years.

More than 70,000 people in the U.S. will be diagnosed with melanoma this year, and 16 percent are diagnosed only after the disease has spread to other parts of the body, according to estimates from the National Institutes of Health.

To diagnose the disease, doctors decide which moles to remove and biopsy using an entirely visual set of guidelines involving size, shape and color. Most dermatologists easily spot late-stage lesions that have obvious signs of cancer, including irregular edges, uneven color and a width greater than 6 millimeters. But many others are tough calls.

"Every day patients come in with 20 moles on their back and the dilemma is, which ones are suspicious and need to be biopsied?" said Dr. David Pariser, former president of the American Academy of Dermatology. "The diagnosis of melanoma is the most serious one a dermatologist makes, and we have sleepless nights worrying about it," said Pariser, who consulted for the device's maker, Mela Sciences Inc. of Irvington, N.Y., on its presentation to FDA.

The device's handheld attachment, about the size of a blow dryer, emits light that penetrates below the surface of the skin, taking multicolored images that reflect the depth and shape of skin growths. A computer compares these to a database of 10,000 archived images and recommends whether a biopsy should be done.

In a company-sponsored study published last year involving around 1,300 patients, some with multiple growths, doctors reported that MelaFind correctly suggested biopsies on 125 of 127 melanomas that doctors had removed. MelaFind correctly identified about 10 percent of non-cancerous growths, which was better than doctors in the study who were correct less than 4 percent of the time, on average. The study was published in the Archives of Dermatology.

The company's study was not intended to show that screening with the device saves lives, only that it can help improve a doctor's ability to spot melanoma.

For now, experts say MelaFind will help dermatologists make better decisions on which moles to remove.

"There is no such thing as 100 percent certainty in medicine," said Dr. George Elias, a melanoma expert at Georgetown's Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center who had no ties to the company or the device.

"Ultimately it's the responsibility of the dermatologist to use his clinical judgment to make the best decision. This machine is there to help him, not replace him."

Elias voted with the majority of an FDA panel that narrowly endorsed the device last year.

Dermatologists say it's too early to tell whether MelaFind will lead to fewer unnecessary biopsies.

"A biopsy takes a few minutes in my hands, so if there's an issue with any lesion we will always biopsy, whether we have a MelaFind picture or not," said Dr. Leonard Goldberg, a dermatologist at the Texas Medical Center and vice president of the Skin Cancer Foundation, a disease awareness group that accepts donations from makers of sunscreen.

MelaFind underwent a contentious, years-long review by the Food and Drug Administration, which initially rejected the device and concluded it could "potentially cause more harm than good."

Regulators worried that the device could give physicians a false sense of certainty, leading to fewer biopsies. Another concern was that doctors could misinterpret the device's feedback, particularly error messages when a mole cannot be scanned. About 8 percent of growths scanned in the company study came back as "unevaluable."

At a meeting last fall, FDA scientists said Mela Sciences had not shown how its device would influence day-to-day decisions by doctors. The agency also worried about its use by general doctors not accustomed to identifying suspicious skin moles. Despite these concerns, the panel of advisers narrowly backed the overall safety and efficacy of the device in a 8-7 vote.

Regulators said this week that they ultimately approved the device after Mela Sciences agreed to limit its use to board-certified dermatologists who undergo a specialized training course.

"The device is only good for certain lesions, and that's why you have to be a dermatologist to be able to classify and categorize those lesions appropriately," said Christy Foreman, director of FDA's Office of Device Evaluation.

Foreman said an FDA-required follow-up study would help determine how much of a benefit MelaFind represents for patients.

"This device represents new technology. At the end of the day I don't know that this will be the best technology out there, but it is a step forward to allow continued innovation in this area," Foreman said.

Don't expect to see a MelaFind machine at your next doctor's appointment. The company plans to bring them next year to just 200 dermatologists on the East coast, all of whom must undergo company training before they can begin using the device.

Doctors will pay a one-time fee of $7,500 to lease and receive training on the device. Patients will pay $150 out of pocket for a MelaFind scan, which analysts say may limit use to more affluent patients who are willing to pay extra for the latest medical care. Mela Sciences does not plan to ask insurers to cover the device until several years from now, after it is more widely used.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We would have liked to have seen a little more about the latest study of the device, but there was enough information in the story to let readers know that this is the case where the evidence is still not quite settled. It says, for example, “MelaFind underwent a contentious, years-long review by the Food and Drug Administration, which initially rejected the device and concluded it could ‘potentially cause more harm than good.'” And later it says that “an FDA-required follow-up study would help determine how much of a benefit MelaFind represents for patients.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MILAN, ITALY, Sept. 12, 2017 - An antibody treatment reduces the rate of flare-ups by nearly 20 percent in patients with a subgroup of treatment-resistant chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), according to the results of two large international trials presented today at the European Respiratory Society International Congress in Milan, Italy, and simultaneously published in the New England Journal of Medicine.

"The goal of precision medicine is to give the right treatment to the right patient," said lead author Frank Sciurba, M.D., director of the Center for COPD and Emphysema and UPMC Pulmonary Function Exercise Physiology Laboratory, and visiting professor in the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. "These findings are the first example of a precision therapy that is uniquely effective in a subgroup of patients with treatment-resistant COPD."

"There is significant variation between patients in the cells and other proteins responsible for lung inflammation, so there are actually many different subtypes of COPD," said Sciurba.

One subgroup called eosinophilic predominant COPD is present in as many as 40 percent of patients and is characterized by elevated levels of a type of white blood cell known as eosinophils, he said.

The new study reports the results from two Phase III clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of mepolizumab, an antibody treatment that reduces the number of eosinophils in the blood, in moderate to severe treatment-resistant eosinophilic COPD by blocking the pro-inflammatory effects of interleukin-5.

Patients included in the trials were still having flare-ups despite a year of a standard treatment known as "triple inhaled therapy" that includes bronchodilators and glucocorticoids.

"These patients already have been given every treatment we have to offer them and are still having flare-ups that significantly interfere with their quality of life and can lead to deterioration in lung function and higher mortality," said Sciurba. "We hoped to be able to offer them an option."

Mepolizumab is already approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to reduce symptom flare-ups and improve quality of life in eosinophilic asthma.

The first trial, termed METREX, was conducted at 117 sites in 15 countries from 2014 to 2017. A total of 837 COPD patients were stratified by blood eosinophil counts and randomized to receive either 100 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, delivered under the skin every four weeks for one year.

The patients with high eosinophil counts who received mepolizumab had a statistically significant 18 percent lower rate of moderate/severe exacerbations (1.4 per year compared to 1.7 per year) than those in the placebo group. The exacerbation rate in the low eosinophil group treated with the biologic did not differ from placebo. The time to the first exacerbation also was higher with mepolizumab than placebo, but only in the high eosinophil group.

In a second, simultaneous trial, termed METREO, the team assessed the effect of a higher dose of mepolizumab in 675 patients with elevated eosinophil levels. Patients were randomized to receive 100 or 300 milligrams of mepolizumab or placebo, with the same delivery method and schedule as METREX.

Similar to METREX, the exacerbation rate was reduced by 20 percent in the high eosinophil group after 100 milligrams of mepolizumab. The METREO results narrowly missed statistical significance. The 300-milligram dose did not provide an advantage over the lower dose.

An analysis of data from both trials found that as baseline blood eosinophil counts increased, so did mepolizumab's reduction in the annual exacerbation rate. This finding indicates that patients with higher initial eosinophil counts benefited more from mepolizumab than those with lower eosinophil counts, Sciurba said. The safety profile of mepolizumab did not differ from placebo in either trial.

"In addition to providing a new treatment option for patients with treatment-resistant, moderate to severe COPD, the new results also are important because they identify a potential biomarker for the disease and demonstrate that eosinophilic inflammation plays a role in flare-ups in COPD," Sciurba said.

Pitt's Division of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine has a legacy of pioneering treatments for lung disease. UPMC also is home to a leading lung transplant program.

"The findings in these trials exemplify what we hope to achieve not only in COPD but across all lung diseases with regards to a precision approach to treatment," said division chief, Rama Mallampalli, M.D.

Funding for both trials was provided by GlaxoSmithKline, which plans to seek approval from the FDA for the use of mepolizumab in eosinophilic COPD.

Additional authors on the study are Ian Pavord, F.Med.Sci. D.M., University of Oxford, UK; Pascal Chanez, M.D., Ph.D., CIC Nord Aix-Marseille University, France; Gerard Criner, M.D., Temple University; Huib Kerstjens, M.D., Ph.D., University of Groningen, the Netherlands; Stephanie Korn, M.D., Ph.D., Mainz University Hospital, Germany; Njira Lugogo, M.D., Duke University; Jean-Benoit Martinot, M.D., CHU UCL Namur, Belgium; Hironori Sagara, M.D., Ph.D., Showa University, Japan; and Frank Albers, M.D., Ph.D., Eric Bradford, M.D., Stephanie Schweiker Harris, B.Sc., Bhabita Mayer, M.Sc., David Rubin, M.D., and Steven Yancey, M.Sc., all of GlaxoSmithKline.

Patients wishing to learn more about the research being performed at the Center for COPD and Emphysema can call 866-948-2673 or email ecrc@upmc.edu.

About the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine

As one of the nation's leading academic centers for biomedical research, the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine integrates advanced technology with basic science across a broad range of disciplines in a continuous quest to harness the power of new knowledge and improve the human condition. Driven mainly by the School of Medicine and its affiliates, Pitt has ranked among the top 10 recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health since 1998. In rankings recently released by the National Science Foundation, Pitt ranked fifth among all American universities in total federal science and engineering research and development support.

Likewise, the School of Medicine is equally committed to advancing the quality and strength of its medical and graduate education programs, for which it is recognized as an innovative leader, and to training highly skilled, compassionate clinicians and creative scientists well-equipped to engage in world-class research. The School of Medicine is the academic partner of UPMC, which has collaborated with the University to raise the standard of medical excellence in Pittsburgh and to position health care as a driving force behind the region's economy. For more information about the School of Medicine, see http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We’ll give the release a satisfactory in this category since it describes both studies as phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, parallel group trials.
While it deals with a subgroup of COPD patients, the focus on subgroups here is appropriate since the researchers are pre-specifying that a subgroup will be studied, separate from simply looking for subgroups within a larger study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
In the four-month study, the group randomly assigned to receive intranasal insulin twice a day either improved slightly or remained the same in tests of memory and assessments of their ability to handle day-to-day activities. The lower dose seemed more effective than the higher one. Those who received placebos got worse.

A third also had scans to assess their brains’ use of glucose. One hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease is reduced metabolism in the brain, which shows up on scans as less use of glucose, the fuel for brain cells. In this assessment, those getting insulin used more glucose in their brains; those taking placebos used less.

For years, the study’s principal investigator, Suzanne Craft, has studied insulin’s effects in Alzheimer’s. She is professor of psychiatry at the University of Washington in Seattle and director of the memory disorders clinic at the Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System.

Brain cells need insulin, Dr. Craft said. And conditions in which the body makes too little insulin or is resistant to its effects — diabetes, prediabetes, even untreated high-blood pressure — are associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s.

In addition, she said, beta amyloid, a toxic protein that accumulates in the brain of Alzheimer’s patients, seems to tie up insulin in the brain.

So, Dr. Craft reasoned, perhaps if more insulin could be put into the brains of people with the degenerative brain disease, their memories and ability to function might improve. The problem was to find a way to get more insulin to the brain but not to the body.

The solution was a special device made by Kurve Technology that delivers a spray of insulin deep into the nose. From there the hormone travels along the path of nerves into the brain.

The investigators first tried a single dose of insulin delivered via nasal spray to the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease. Their memories improved temporarily. Then they tried giving insulin daily for three weeks. Again, the hormone seemed to help. That led to the current study, lasting four months.

But Dr. Martha Daviglus of Northwestern University, who led a panel last year that assessed published papers on preventing and treating Alzheimer’s, urged caution. In her field, cardiovascular medicine, she has seen many exciting findings in small studies that fall apart in larger or longer ones.

Now Dr. Craft wants to test insulin again in a much more extensive study. .

In the meantime, she cautions Alzheimer’s patients not to rush out and try to take insulin. It is too soon to say if the treatment is even safe, she said. And patients would need a special device to get it deep into the nose. Kurve’s device is not yet on the market.

“The individual person will not be able to get this device,” Dr. Craft said. But, she added, if her study goes forward, many will be able to participate in it.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provided a reasonably detailed and accurate description of the study, with appropriate attention to limitations. It cautioned readers about the small size of the study and the preliminary nature of the data in several places, including high up in the piece. We liked that it referenced previous experience showing that early findings such as this “often fall apart” in larger, longer tests.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Premature labor is a serious and hard-to-predict problem. This test might help.

"Those molecules will circulate in the blood for some time, they can be measured, and you can see the contributions from essentially every tissue in the body," senior investigator Stephen Quake told BuzzFeed News. "When you are pregnant you can see the contribution from the placenta and the fetus," said Quake, a professor of bioengineering and applied physics at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California.

Both tests use cell-free RNA (cfRNA), which are snippets of genetic material released by cells when genes are active. They float around in the mother's bloodstream and can be picked up by blood tests.

However, a new blood test — which is still experimental and not yet available outside of a research lab — can pick up on gene activity in the body that suggests a pregnancy is at risk for preterm delivery, according to a study published Thursday in the journal Science . The researchers also found a similar type of blood test could determine gestational age, which is used to calculate the due date of the baby. Currently, gestational age is calculated in the first trimester using ultrasound, and it's not that accurate if used later in pregnancy.

Pregnancies are usually about 40 weeks, and a premature birth is when a baby arrives three or more weeks early. This happens in about 9% of all deliveries and it can be seriously risky for the infant ; they can have all kinds of complications, including lung problems, brain hemorrhages, and infections.

The scientists analyzed 20,000 genes to find the ones that were active during pregnancy and labor.

They identified seven cfRNAs that seemed to be associated with premature birth, and in a test of 38 women, they found that they could predict premature birth up to two months in advance.

All the women were at risk for premature labor because they had early contractions or a previous preterm delivery, and 13 did indeed go on to have a premature baby.

In a subgroup of women, the test accurately classified 4 of 5 preterm deliveries as being at-risk, and incorrectly suggested that 3 of 18 women who had a full-term pregnancy were at risk for early labor.

In a test of 31 healthy pregnant women, testing for nine cfRNAs seemed roughly as accurate as an ultrasound at measuring gestational age. An ultrasound has a 48% accuracy rate at predicting a due date that's within two weeks of a baby's actual birth, while the blood test was 45% accurate. The test, if it does turn out to work in clinical trials, would be cheaper than ultrasound, said Quake.

"It might be tens or hundreds of dollars, rather than thousands," he said.

There's a lot more work to be done before these tests becomes available, including clinical trials. The studies were small and included only black or white women, but not other ethnicities. But the findings are promising, particularly because premature delivery is such a serious problem.

"Preterm birth is the leading cause of neonatal death, it’s a huge problem," Quake said. If doctors know someone is at risk for premature labor earlier in pregnancy, they might start efforts to help delay labor, such as recommending bed rest.

Quake became interested in the problem in part because his first child was born almost a month premature. She's now a healthy 16-year-old. "You realize, holy cow, that was a pretty risky thing that we had no control over and no sense that it was coming," he said.

"We’d like to see a bunch of lives saved, that’s really the goal here," Quake said. "There’s a lot of work left to do before we get to that point, but we are pretty energized and excited at this point."

The study was funded by the March of Dimes and other nonprofit sources, although Quake and his colleagues have filed for a patent on the test.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: For a story targeting the general public, all of our skeptical itches are scratched in this criterion. We’re told in fairly plain English how the tests works to pick up genetic material, and that it’s already used by other blood tests. We also get a short synopsis of the study’s limitations, with the story describing how it was small (with 38 women) and didn’t include ethnicities other than white or black. Finally, some rare yet illustrative numbers on efficacy are provided: false-positive results (3 in 18 pregnancies were supposedly at risk but became full-term) and false-positive results (4 in 5 did become at-risk preterm pregnancies). These types of details stated in plain language really help readers make sense of an otherwise complex study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Food allergies are tricky business. They're on the rise in the United States and no one knows why.

Some children are allergic to many foods, and it's impossible to know based on preventive testing whether someone will have a mild or severe reaction. And so far there's no cure.

Researchers at Johns Hopkins University and Duke University are working on a treatment that may one day allow kids with allergies to safely eat the foods that cause them life-threatening reactions. It's still in the early stages, but Dr. Robert Wood of Johns Hopkins, who has been on the forefront of food allergy research, estimates the treatment could be brought to the public within six to eight years.

 

 In his new study, researchers explored a treatment for children with cow's milk allergies. The strategy is to desensitize the child by giving small amounts of the allergen (milk). Oral immunotherapy, swallowing small amounts of the allergen, has shown to be more effective than sublingual therapy, which involves putting even tinier quantities of milk under the person's tongue.

Wood and colleagues found promising results from this small experiment with 30 children ages 6 to 18. These kids were severely allergic to cow's milk. Wood presented the study, published in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, at the 2012 Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology this weekend.

The results suggested that children who went through a year of sublingual therapy followed by one to two years of oral immunotherapy were less likely to have significant allergic reactions when undergoing the oral immunotherapy. Still, it did not eliminate all symptoms.

This is particularly important, because about 20% of the kids that Wood and colleagues work with have significant reactions during the treatment that make the therapy unfeasible, Wood said.

Some participants have shown they can safely eat milk products up to a year after stopping the therapies, Wood said. But only one-third have longterm protection. Others need regular exposure to milk in order to maintain protection against allergic reactions.

"With milk that’s not too hard," Wood says, because one could "eat pizza a couple of times a week."

It's not known yet whether children respond better to this kind of treatment than adults, since there have been so few participants in this research. The big barrier to broadening the scope of the research is funding, Wood said.

This is the first time the sublingual therapy has been studied in terms of its benefit as a precursor to the oral immunotherapy, Wood said.

Other research has shown that immunotherapy techniques may similarly work for children with peanut allergies. But tree nuts may be harder to treat, Wood said, because tree-nut allergic individuals often have multiple kinds of nuts they can't eat.

Researchers are separately looking at a drug called omalizumab (Xolair), approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of severe asthma, to see if it could help people with food allergies, too.

Do not try the immunotherapy technique at home; these experiments are conducted under medical supervision.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There were appropriate caveats about the limitations of the research:
One thing that could have been improved: The story mentioned that the study was “published in the Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology” but didn’t link to it as we do here. Basing the story on the talk at the 2012 Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology and not linking to the journal article might mislead people if they take that to mean it hasn’t undergone the same rigorous peer review as a journal article. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. - Aug. 17, 2015 - Every year falls affect approximately one in three older adults living at home, with approximately one in 10 falls resulting in serious injury. Even if an injury does not occur, the fear of falling can lead to reduced activity and a loss of independence.

Research has shown that vitamin D plays a key role in maintaining muscle integrity and strength and some studies suggest vitamin D may reduce the risk of falls.

Homebound elderly, a generally vulnerable population due to poor dietary intake and nutrition-related health conditions as well as decreased exposure to sunlight, are at increased risk for low vitamin D levels, possibly leading to more falls.

Researchers at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center set out to evaluate the feasibility of delivering a vitamin D supplement through a Meals-on-Wheels (MOW) program to improve the clients' vitamin D levels and reduce falls.

The study is published in the early online edition (8/16/2015) of the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society.

"Falls in homebound older people often lead to disability and placement in a nursing home," said Denise Houston, Ph.D., R.D., associate professor of gerontology and geriatric medicine at Wake Forest Baptist and lead author of the study. "One or our aging center's goals is to help people maintain their independence and live safely at home for as long as possible."

Participants in the Meals-on-Wheels program in Forsyth County, North Carolina, were recruited to take part in a five-month, single-blind randomized trial.

Sixty-eight study participants received either a monthly vitamin D supplement of 100,000 international units or placebo delivered with their MOW meal. The study included the participants' history of falls and their fear of falling, blood tests at the beginning and at end of the trial to measure 25-hydroxyvitamin D (biomarker for vitamin D in blood), and a monthly diary recording falls during the trial period.

At the beginning of this pilot study, the research team found that more than half of the participants had insufficient concentrations of vitamin D in the blood (less than 20 ng/ml), while less than a quarter had concentrations in the optimal range (30 ng/ml or more).

The study showed that the monthly vitamin D supplement was effective in increasing the concentrations of vitamin D in the blood from insufficient to sufficient levels in all but one of the 34 people who received it, and to optimal levels in all but five people. In addition, people in the vitamin D group reported approximately half the falls of those in the control group.

"Although these initial findings are encouraging, we need to confirm the results in a larger trial," Houston said.

The Wake Forest Baptist team currently is conducting a clinical trial to try to determine how vitamin D affects risk factors for falls such as balance and muscle strength and power.

Funding for the study was provided by the Wake Forest Translational Science Institute and Center for Integrative Medicine and the Claude Pepper Older Americans Independence Center of Wake Forest Baptist.

Co-authors are Janet Tooze, Ph.D., Jamehl Demons, M.D., Brooke Davis, M.S., Rachel Shertzer-Skinner, M.A., Stephen Kritchevsky, Ph.D., and Jeff Williamson, M.D., of Wake Forest Baptist; and Linda Kearsley, B.S., Senior Services Inc., Winston-Salem.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release makes it clear that this was a randomized placebo-controlled trial and explained the purpose and delivery of the vitamin. It also closes with a restraining comment from one of the study researchers: “Although these initial findings are encouraging, we need to confirm the results in a larger trial,” Houston said. We’ll call that good enough for a Satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Data from a clinical trial has shown that how people respond to treatment for Bipolar Disorder may be influenced by their weight and the overall quality of their diet, including whether they are eating a diet high in foods thought to contribute to general inflammation. These are early results, but if replicated may mean that treatment of some mental health problems could benefit from the inclusion of dietary advice. This is presented at the ECNP Conference in Barcelona.

Bipolar Disorder (which used to be called 'manic depression') is characterised by episodes of mood swings, between being very up or very down with periods in between the two extremes. The fact that there are two opposite sets of symptoms means that finding an effective treatment is difficult. While current medications are useful, they are better at targeting mania symptoms (the 'up' phase), leaving a lack of effective treatment for people experiencing depressive episodes. Now a group of Australian, German and American scientists have shown those who have a high quality diet, a less inflammatory diet, and/or a low BMI (Body Mass Index) may respond better to an add-on nutraceutical treatment provided as part of a clinical trial.

"If we can confirm these results, then it's good news for people with Bipolar Disorder, as there is a great need for better treatments for the depressive phase of Bipolar Disorder" said lead researcher Melanie Ashton of Deakin University in Australia.

A total of 133 participants were randomly assigned to take a combination of nutraceuticals (compounds derived from foods such as vitamins or minerals that treat or prevent a disease or disorder) including the anti-inflammatory amino acid n-acetylcysteine (NAC), or NAC alone, or a placebo (a dummy pill) for 16 weeks. Participants received the study medication in addition to any stable treatments they were already receiving. Researchers measured BMI at the beginning of the study, and then measured depression and how a person is able to function in their day to day life. Researchers also rated whether a participant was improving and, if so, how much, over the next 20 weeks. Participants filled in a questionnaire about what they usually eat over the year and researchers calculated a diet quality score, where good diets included a healthy diet with lots of fruit and vegetables, whereas poorer-quality diets had more saturated fat, refined carbohydrates and alcohol. These types of diets were then categorised as either anti-inflammatory or pro-inflammatory based on foods that affect inflammation.

Melanie Ashton continued, "We found that people who had a better-quality diet, a diet with anti-inflammatory properties, or a lower BMI, showed better response to add-on nutraceutical treatment than did those who reported a low-quality diet, or a diet including foods that promote inflammation, or who were overweight.

What this means, if these results can be repeated in a larger trial, is that treatment for Bipolar Disorder would need to take into account what a person eats and their weight.

There are some points we need to note about this study. This is a randomised, controlled trial, but what we found were exploratory outcomes; in other words, it wasn't the main result that we were testing. Our result is statistically significant, but because the study wasn't specifically designed to test the effect of diet quality,

inflammatory diets and BMI on drug response in general, it is necessary to see the work replicated in a larger study before any firm conclusions can be formed".

"This is interesting work, which holds out the possibility that patients with Bipolar Disorder may benefit from a balanced diet. However, it is an early study, and we need more research before we can think whether this might affect clinical practice".

Professor Vieta was not involved in this work, it is an independent comment.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release describes the parameters of the research, and significantly, is to be commended for including some limitations of the study and for noting that the results need to be replicated in a larger study. An outside expert is quoted:
“This is interesting work, which holds out the possibility that patients with Bipolar Disorder may benefit from a balanced diet. However, it is an early study, and we need more research before we can think whether this might affect clinical practice”.
Other limitations of the research we observed is that it is unpublished (ie. unvetted by independent experts); very small (only 133 people completed the study);  the duration of follow-up is less than half a year;  and dietary information was gleaned from self-reporting (which can be quite unreliable).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Older adults who get plenty of vitamin E in their diets may have a somewhat lower risk of developing dementia than those who consume less of the nutrient, a study published Monday suggests.

Researchers found that among 5,400 Dutch adults age 55 and older, the one-third who reported the highest vitamin E intake from food were 25 percent less likely to develop dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease, over the next decade than the third with the lowest intakes.

The findings, reported in the Archives of Neurology, do not prove that vitamin E itself protects the aging brain. Studies so far have come to conflicting conclusions as to whether vitamin E or other antioxidants may influence older adults’ risk of dementia.

However, the new study followed participants for a longer period than most previous studies on antioxidants and dementia. And it supports findings from some previous research that dietary vitamin E, in particular, might be related to a lower risk of dementia.

Researchers have been interested in whether antioxidants like vitamins E and C and beta-carotene might help stave off dementia because, in theory, their actions might interfere with the process of brain-cell degeneration.

Antioxidants neutralize unstable forms of oxygen called reactive oxygen species that can damage cells throughout the body. Reactive oxygen species are produced naturally in the body, as byproducts of metabolism; because the brain is an area of high metabolic activity, it is thought to be particularly vulnerable to accumulating oxidative damage over a lifetime.

However, studies so far have come to mixed conclusions as to whether older adults with a high dietary intake of various antioxidants have a lower risk of dementia. And clinical trials looking at the effects of antioxidant supplements have found no evidence that they cut Alzheimer’s risk.

For the new study, researchers led by Dr. Monique Breteler, of Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, used data from 5,395 adults age 55 and older who were dementia-free at the start of the study. At that point, they were interviewed about their usual diet habits, which the researchers used to estimate their intake of vitamins C and E and beta-carotene.

Over the next decade, 465 study participants were diagnosed with dementia, including 365 with Alzheimer’s.

Among the one-third of men and women with the highest vitamin E intakes from food, 120 developed dementia. Of the third with the lowest intakes, 164 were diagnosed with dementia.

When Breteler’s team considered a number of other factors — including participants’ age, education, weight, and smoking and drinking habits — high vitamin E intake was linked to a one-quarter reduction in dementia risk.

The one-third of study participants with the highest vitamin E consumption typically got 18.5 milligrams (mg) per day, just over the recommended daily intake of 15 mg.

The researchers acknowledge that they cannot exclude the possibility that factors other than vitamin E explain the connection. Nor is it clear why vitamin E, but not vitamin C or beta-carotene, was linked to a lower dementia risk.

But the finding is in line with a previous study of U.S. adults that found that a higher intake of vitamin E, but not vitamin C or beta-carotene, was related to a lower risk of developing Alzheimer’s over two years.

According to Breteler’s team, studies should continue to look at the relationship between antioxidant intake and dementia — including whether antioxidant consumption at different points in life might have different effects on dementia risk.

Food sources of vitamin E include wheat germ, nuts such as almonds and hazelnuts, vegetable oils such as sunflower and safflower oils, and some green vegetables, such as spinach and broccoli.

In the current study, participants’ primary vitamin E sources included vegetable oils, margarine and butter.

It is unlikely that people could get too much vitamin E from food. However, high doses of vitamin E from supplements carry a risk of bleeding. Experts advise that adults consume no more than 1,000 mg of vitamin E per day.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story uses appropriate language and caveats when reporting on the results of this observational study.  It notes that the findings "do not prove that vitamin E itself protects the aging brain," and there is no talk about vitamin E "lowering the risk" of dementia. The story also provides the key details regarding how the researchers conducted the study, including the number of participants; how vitamin E intake was assessed; how long the participants were followed; what confounding factors were included in the analysis; and how much vitamin E participants were getting in the group that had the lowest risk. 
Had the story sought out a comment from an expert in nutritional epidemiology, they likely would have pointed out some problems with trying to assess dietary intake from a single baseline questionnaire as was used in this study. They also would have provided additional context about the MANY other studies (including other large cohorts) that have looked at associations between antioxidants and dementia/ cognitive decline. Nevertheless, readers can’t miss the take-home message, which is that these findings are not conclusive.    
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - New findings suggest that the antidepressant Lexapro might make hot flashes a little less of a nuisance to women — adding to the mixed bag of results regarding that drug’s effect on menopause symptoms.

The study, of 205 women, found that those randomly assigned to take Lexapro (escitalopram) for eight weeks reported less daily “interference” from their hot flashes.

Compared with women given inactive placebo pills, they said hot flashes were taking less of a toll on their work, daily activities, sleep and general mood. Women on the placebo also improved over time, however.

The findings come from the same clinical trial that, last year, showed Lexapro halved the number of hot flashes women had each day. (See Reuters story of January 18, 2011.)

A separate study a few months later showed no such benefit, however. In two trials of 36 women, researchers found that Lexapro did not cut the number or severity of hot flashes over eight weeks. (See Reuters Health story of May 26, 2011.)

And the lead researcher on that study said these latest findings are “nothing to write home about.”

“The differences between the treatment and placebo groups are very small,” said Robert Freedman, a professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University in Detroit.

In general, studies of hot-flash remedies over the years have “virtually always found a large placebo effect,” Freedman noted in an interview.

That could mean that study participants’ hot flashes are just getting better over time, which they sometimes do.

“But my feeling is that it’s the placebo effect,” Freedman said, referring to the phenomenon of study participants on placebos improving because they believe they are getting a real treatment.

Hot flashes, which mostly affect women transitioning to menopause and already in that phase of life, involve a sudden sensation of heat, sometimes accompanied by sweating or visible reddening of the skin.

Their exact cause is unknown, but hormonal regulation of body temperature is thought to be involved.

Bouts of hot flashes can happen many times a day and past research has found they can continue for anywhere from a few months to up to 10 years.

So far, Freedman noted, the only hot-flash treatment that has consistently worked in studies is hormone replacement therapy (HRT).

And right now, HRT is the only treatment approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for cooling hot flashes.

But women and doctors are wary of HRT these days — since a 2002 clinical trial linked the hormones to increased risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots.

So researchers have been looking for alternatives. And studies have suggested that a few antidepressants, used at low doses, can be helpful for some women — including paroxetine (Paxil), fluoxetine (Prozac) and venlafaxine (Effexor).

This latest study, reported in the journal Fertility & Sterility, focused on hot flash “interference” — the degree to which women feel hot flashes disrupt their lives.

That’s important because it gets at quality of life, according to the researchers, led by Janet S. Carpenter of Indiana University in Indianapolis.

The trial included 205 women who were having at least 28 bouts of hot flashes or “night sweats” a week. Carpenter’s team randomly assigned half to use Lexapro for eight weeks, while the other half were given placebo pills.

The women kept diaries to record their hot flash symptoms. And every four weeks, they filled out a questionnaire on hot-flash interference.

After four weeks, the study found, women on the antidepressant saw their score on the interference scale fall by half, on average. It remained there at week eight.

But women in the placebo group also improved, albeit more slowly and to a somewhat lesser degree.

In a separate analysis of the same study group, Carpenter’s team found that women on Lexapro also reported bigger improvements in sleep problems: half saw their insomnia symptoms drop by at least 50 percent, versus 35 percent of placebo users.

Those findings appear in a separate report in the journal Menopause.

Freedman said that the overall research on antidepressants and hot flashes is still inconsistent. “Overall, the picture is not optimistic.”

In his own study last year, Freedman used a different approach to measuring hot flashes: instead of asking women to record their symptoms in a diary, the researchers had them wear a “detector” to monitor objective measures of hot flashes.

It is possible for women’s hot flashes to remain unchanged objectively, but have their subjective experience of them change. “But that raises the question of why,” Freedman said.

And for now, he noted, it’s also not clear why antidepressants would have effects on hot flashes.

Lexapro, which costs about $125 a month, belongs to the group of antidepressants called selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They increase levels of the brain chemical serotonin, which may have a role in regulating body heat.

But no one knows if altering serotonin levels actually does affect women’s hot flashes. In fact, Freedman said, there’s some evidence that lowering serotonin levels does not worsen hot flashes — which would be expected if the “serotonin theory” is correct.

Antidepressants can also have side effects, like nausea, drowsiness, headache, constipation and dry mouth.

Right now, no antidepressant is specifically approved to treat hot flashes. But in the U.S., doctors are allowed to prescribe drugs “off-label” for conditions other than their approved uses.

Besides antidepressants, doctors sometimes prescribe certain blood pressure medications or the anti-seizure drug gabapentin, which some studies suggest may be helpful.

Hot flashes often need no drug treatment at all, though.

If they are not severe, experts say simple steps can be enough — like avoiding hot and spicy foods, turning down the thermostat, or trying relaxation techniques, such as yoga or meditation.

There are several herbal or “natural” products marketed for easing menopause symptoms, including black cohosh, soy, red clover and dong quai. But there is little evidence that they work, according to the North American Menopause Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article did a good job of putting the results of the study into perspective with quotes from scientists who were skeptical of the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AUGUSTA, Ga. (March 9, 2017) - The first year of free lung cancer screening in the Augusta, Georgia area found more than double the rate seen in a previous large, national study as well as a Massachusetts-based screening for this number one cancer killer.

The higher rates, coupled with the majority of cases being found in early, treatable stages, point toward the need for ongoing, accessible free screening in high-risk populations and underserved regions, say researchers at the Georgia Cancer Center at Augusta University. High risk includes those who have smoked a pack of cigarettes daily for two or three decades and, if they've quit smoking, did so less than 15 years ago.

The screening of 264 high-risk individuals within a 150-mile radius of Augusta found 3 percent had lung cancer and 75 percent of those were caught early, said Dr. Carsten Schroeder, thoracic oncology surgeon at the Georgia Cancer Center and Medical College of Georgia at AU. The researchers note that a percentage of the patients presenting at screening had early symptoms, like a persistent cough, so the rate of cancer detection in patients who showed no indication of disease was 2.2 percent, still double the rates of previous studies.

"Lung cancer is still the number one cancer killer in the United States and in our world," Schroeder said. "If we catch it in the early stages, ideally before symptoms surface, we can operate and patients can have an overall survival rate of 90 percent." Five-year survival rates are closer to 5 percent in more advanced disease.

The pioneering National Lung Screening Trial, which began in 2002 and included 33 largely urban centers, found 292 cases of lung cancer among the 26,722 high-risk individuals screened in the first year, for a rate of 1.1 percent. That study also provided the first broad evidence that low-dose computed tomography, or LDCT, was a more effective screening tool than the traditional chest X-ray. A decade later, the Massachusetts-based Lahey Hospital & Medical Center, on which the Augusta screening was modeled, found a .6 percent prevalence in the first 10 months of screening.

Like the previous experiences, the Augusta area screening that started in 2014, also reiterated the ability of LDCT to find lung cancer early, said Schroeder, corresponding author of the study in Southern Medical Journal.

Six of the eight cases found in the screening were considered potentially curable with surgery. Positive results were communicated directly to the participant's primary care provider; negative results were communicated to primary care docs and participants, along with a reminder for another screening in a year.

Participants, particularly from surrounding, more rural communities, have limited access to health care, Schroeder said. The area's median household income is 27 percent lower than the national average and the poverty level is 67 percent higher, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. The Augusta-area experience found generally younger patients, who started smoking earlier in life and had multiple risk factors. Augusta area participants were an average of 60 years old, about half male and female, more than 68 percent were white and nearly 20 percent were black.

"It doesn't matter how old you are, if you have smoked 30 years, you might want to consider a lung-cancer screening," Schroeder said, referencing the reality that some adults started smoking as children. Part of his drive to start a screening program in the Augusta area was that, when he relocated here three years ago from the Cleveland area, he found patients were often referred to him with later, less-treatable disease. In the Cleveland area where Schroeder previously practiced as a faculty member at Case Western Reserve University and where access to health care and/or health insurance was more widely available, early lung cancers might even be detected incidentally when patients had CT scans for a variety of other reasons.

Augusta researchers were able to offer free screening by utilizing natural downtime of the combined positive emission tomography, or PET, and computed tomography, or CT, scanner, said Dr. Norman B. Thomson III, chief of general/cardiothoracic radiology in the MCG Department of Radiology and Imaging and study co-author.

The combination technology is often used to visualize other tumor types throughout the body and many patients require an injection of sugar dye, which will be taken up by the tumor but must first circulate for about an hour before the scan is done. That means the machine is staffed at times when it is not able to be fully used for other diagnostic procedures, time that provides a natural window for lung screening using just the CT imaging capability in under five minutes from arrival to exit, Thomson said. More typically, a scan could cost between $100-$250.

In the last decade, CT technology has gotten increasingly adept at picking up early, small nodules, Thomson said. Low radiation doses work well in the lungs, which are mostly filled with air that provides a blank background for nodule surveillance. Thomson notes that means LDCT is also adept at finding things like scar tissue and small inflammatory nodules, that also are more common in the lungs of smokers. Nodules a third of an inch or smaller tend not to be cancer and more solid masses tend to be, Thomson said. They may follow up on smaller nodules in six months, then if the nodule is stable, go back to annual reviews.

And while some lung cancers are super aggressive, screening also may uncover some slow-growing versions that - like some prostate cancers - will not threaten life but need to be treated and/or closely followed once found.

"That's why the acid test for screening is not how many cancers you find or what stage the cancer is," Thomson said, rather what screening does to lung cancer death rates. Current evidence definitely supports screening, he said. Also, like lung cancer has been coincidently found in CT scans for other reasons, physicians like Thomson and Schroeder are now incidentally finding cardiovascular disease in their lung cancer screening.

To date about 700 individuals have been screened in the Augusta area and Schroeder is working to expand statewide, hoping to use the state public medical school's extensive campus network that has students learning from physicians at practices and hospitals across Georgia, as a natural base.

"We want to reach as many people as we can as early as we can," he said. Also, about half of patients screened continue to smoke so screening might also be a logical point for smoking intervention, Schroeder said.

The original National Lung Screening Trial, orchestrated by the National Cancer Institute and the American College of Radiology, was launched in 2002 and enrolled nearly 54,000 patients nationally. Five-year survival rates were about 70 percent for early cancers and about 5 percent for lung cancer found late.

Following the trial, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, a nonprofit organization of cancer centers that develop guidelines for cancer diagnosis and treatment, along with the United States Preventive Services Task Force, which makes recommendations for preventive medicine, recommended screening high-risk individuals on a slightly broader scale, which the Lahey and Augusta area screening used. The group recommends screening for those age 55-80 with a 30-pack year or greater history who have stopped smoking for 15 years or less and those age 50 or older with a 20-pack year smoking history and an additional risk factor other than secondhand smoke, such as family history of lung cancer or a personal cancer history. A pack year means smoking one pack a day for 30 years, or a variation like two packs daily for 15 years. After 15 years of not smoking, the lung cancer risk tends to diminish but never vanishes. Schroeder would prefer the screening still not stop there.

A total of 398 individuals signed up for the Augusta area screening, 350 qualified and 264 actually had LDCT. More than 80 patients were not screened in the first year, primarily because of socioeconomic and travel limitations that created a six-week backlog.

Ninety percent of lung cancer is related to cigarette smoking, the leading cause of preventable disease and death in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Symptoms of lung cancer include persistent, intense coughing, shortness of breath, pain in the chest, shoulder or back and changes in the color and/or volume of phlegm or mucus, hoarseness and coughing up blood.

A 2015 survey of smoking by adults by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found about 15 percent of adults in the country smoked, rates for Georgia and adjacent South Carolina were between 16-20 percent. Rates in Massachusetts, where the Lahey screening occurred, are 12.8 to 16.4 percent. Rates were highest in certain demographics. As examples, smoking rates were highest among those without a graduate education degree certificate and lowest among those with a graduate degree; higher among those living below the poverty level versus above it; and higher among some minorities such as American Indians and Alaska Natives, multiple- race individuals and blacks.

For more information about free lung cancer screening at the Georgia Cancer Center and MCG, call 706-721-4726 or email lung@augusta.edu.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a thorough job of laying out the screening procedure, and its rationale, for the Augusta study — and places it in the context of previous screening initiatives.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
OAK BROOK, Ill. - Additional breast cancers found with MRI are sometimes larger and potentially more aggressive than those found on mammography, according to a study published online in the journal Radiology. Researchers said that in some cases MRI findings of additional cancers not seen on mammography may necessitate a change in treatment.

Breast MRI is the most sensitive technique for the detection of breast cancer, with widespread application in the screening of high-risk patients and pre-surgical planning. In younger women and women with dense breasts, MRI is effective in the detection of what are known as multicentric cancers, meaning breast cancers involving two or more distinct primary tumors, usually in different quadrants of the breast. However, there has been some debate about the clinical significance of multicentric cancers found with MRI.

"Patients with clinically insignificant cancers undergoing potential overtreatment versus patients who may be undertreated is at the heart of the controversy surrounding breast MRI," said the study's lead author Chiara Iacconi, M.D., from the Breast Unit at USL1 Massa-Carrara in Carrara, Italy.

To learn more, Dr. Iacconi and colleagues reviewed records from 2,021 patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer who underwent biopsy after preoperative MRI. Of the 2,021 patients, 285, or 14 percent, had additional cancer detected on MRI that was hidden from view on mammography.

In 73 of those 285 patients, or 25.6 percent, MRI identified at least one additional cancer in a different quadrant of the breast than the index cancer, or the cancer detected by mammography and/or breast palpation.

These multicentric cancers were larger than the known index cancer in 17 of the 73 patients, or 23.3 percent. In addition, the MRI-detected multicentric cancers were greater than 1 centimeter in size in 25 percent of the 73 patients.

"We believe invasive cancer larger than 1 centimeter is clinically relevant disease," Dr. Iacconi said. "In general, it is accepted that radiation can likely treat invasive cancer less than 1 centimeter, but lesions larger than 1 centimeter, especially invasive carcinomas, may not be reliably treated with conservation."

The additional MRI-detected multicentric cancers were found mostly in patients with heterogeneously dense or extremely dense breasts. However, MRI also detected additional disease in 19 percent of patients with fatty or scattered fibroglandular tissue.

"The results show that multicentric cancer detected on breast MRI after mammography appears to represent a larger tumor burden in approximately a quarter of patients and can result in potential changes to cancer grade and treatment," Dr. Iacconi said.

"Multicentric Cancer Detected at Breast MR Imaging and Not at Mammography: Important or Not?" Collaborating with Dr. Iacconi on this paper were Lanie Galman, M.D., Juntig Zheng, M.S., Virgilio Sacchini, M.D., Elizabeth J. Sutton, M.D., David Dershaw, M.D., and Elizabeth A. Morris, M.D.

Radiology is edited by Herbert Y. Kressel, M.D., Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass., and owned and published by the Radiological Society of North America, Inc.

RSNA is an association of more than 54,000 radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists promoting excellence in patient care and health care delivery through education, research and technologic innovation. The Society is based in Oak Brook, Ill. (RSNA.org)
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release notes that this study is based on a review of patient records. It also points out that the study did not look at the results of treating the cancers found through MRI imaging, only that some of them were large enough to be considered clinically relevant based on general practice. The release would have been better if it specifically noted (as the journal article did) that many of the cancers found on MRI were not biopsied, thus making it more difficult to judge the potential threat they posed.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Feb. 15, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- People with high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome were better able to "catch" social cues after inhaling the hormone oxytocin, new research shows.

Oxytocin,which is produced in abundance when a mother is breast-feeding her baby, is known as the "bonding" hormone.

Although there are many kinks to be worked out, experts feel the strategy holds promise to treat one of the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder.

"When you start thinking of a hormone that can actually encourage pro-social behavior, you're talking about potentially significant changes in quality of life," said Clara Lajonchere, a vice president of clinical programs at the advocacy group Autism Speaks and a clinical assistant professor at the Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California.

"In the absence of intellectual deficits, the areas where they have the greatest struggle is around social communication and social connectedness," she continued. "These people can't interpret other people's perceptions, they can't read social cues, they don't make eye contact."

While there are drugs for the secondary symptoms of autism, such as irritability and aggression, doctors have nothing yet for the core symptoms in the areas of language, social interaction and intellectual deficits.

Prior studies have shown a strong effect of oxytocin on people with autism, as well as on people who are not on the autism disorders spectrum. One study found that autistic people seem to have a lower sensitivity to oxytocin than people without the disorder.

"There's no doubt that oxytocin has a big effect on social interactions in anyone. It's almost like a designer drug, a drug which has a selective effect on a behavior in the normal range," said Keith Young, vice chairman of research in psychiatry and behavioral science at the Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine in Temple and the neuroimaging and genetics core leader at the VA Center of Excellence for Research on Returning War Veterans at the Central Texas Veterans Health Care System.

The new study, led by Angela Sirigu at the Center for Cognitive Neuroscience in Lyon, France, was published in this week's issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. It involved 13 adults, most of them men, aged 17 to 39. All had high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome.

Participants performed different tasks -- either after inhaling oxytocin or without using the hormone.

When observed playing a virtual ball game, individuals who had inhaled oxytocin were able to interact better with their virtual partners compared to untreated participants.

Also, after inhaling oxytocin, participants showed more alertness to socially important visual cues in pictures of human faces.

There were, however, wide variations in individual responses, the team noted.

"It's not clear whether this would be effective at all in children or in young adults who had intellectual problems," warned Young.

The long-term effects of the hormone are also uncertain.

"I really want to encourage clinical trials in this area because of its potential significance, but we have to be very careful in terms of safety data," Lajonchere said. "Safety data is really critical."

Also, scientists would need to come up with a different method of delivery, Young said.

"The nasal [inhaled] drugs only work for a few minutes. Potentially it would be very difficult to be using this drug once an hour or something. It doesn't make a whole lot of sense," he pointed out. "But it does point the way to the possibility of raising oxytocin levels with other kinds of compounds to increase oxytocin levels more generally over a longer period of time. I don't know whether this is a realistic therapy as we have it now but, potentially, in the future it could really help these people whose primary autistic symptoms are having to do with reduction in social activity."

For more on autism, visit the U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We give the story kudos for noting several limitations in this research, including the wide variations in individual responses and a lack of evidence that the strategy "would be effective at all" in children or young adults. The author also notes a lack of long-term safety data, and she describes  challenges in translating the delivery method to a real-world application.
We would have liked to have seen a bit more characterization of the preliminary nature of this laboratory study and its very small sample.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, March 2, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- The new chemotherapy drug eribulin extends the lives of metastatic breast cancer patients who have received extensive treatment, according to a new study.

The researchers found that among patients whose cancer had spread, those who took the drug lived a median of 2.5 months longer than those who received a physician-chosen treatment -- 13.1 months versus 10.6 months.

The study included 508 women who were given eribulin and 254 women who received treatment of the physician's choice, which was defined as: any single-agent chemotherapy, hormonal or biological treatment approved for cancer treatment; radiotherapy; or symptomatic treatment alone.

The most common side effects in both groups were fatigue and depletion of white blood cells. Numbness and pain stemming from nerve damage were the most common adverse event connected to eribulin that led women to drop out of the study (24, or 5 percent).

The study, known as the EMBRACE trial, was funded by Eisai Inc., which markets eribulin. Dr. Javier Cortes, of the Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology in Barcelona, Spain, and colleagues published the findings in the March 3 online edition of The Lancet.

"This global phase 3 study establishes a potential new standard treatment for women with heavily pretreated metastatic breast cancer, for whom there was previously no chemotherapy treatment with proven survival benefit," the authors wrote.

In a related editorial, Drs. Nancy U. Lin and Harold J. Burstein, of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School in Boston, said: "EMBRACE provides much needed, high-level evidence for chemotherapy use in patients with heavily pretreated breast cancer. And that evidence suggests that the methods to treat advanced breast cancer are growing, the treatment challenge in refractory disease is a little bit less daunting, and the treatment results are a little bit better than they were before."

Commenting on the study, Dr. Stephanie Bernik, chief of surgical oncology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City, said, "The findings of this trial are exciting because they will propel eribulin into wider use. This drug shows much promise, and it should certainly be included in additional trials to fully establish its benefit."

"It would be interesting to see if the drug offers the same benefit in women that have not been treated with multiple drugs before exposure to eribulin," she added.

The Metastatic Breast Cancer Network has more about metastatic breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article does a good job of noting several times that the women in the trial, known as EMBRACE, all had metastatic breast cancer that had already been heavily treated with various chemotherapies.  And it did give the number of women in each arm of the trial and at least mentioned that this was a “global phase 3 study” – although that’s expecting readers to grasp what that really means.  We’ll call it barely satisfactory.
It’s always a judgment call for journalists on where to draw the line on details to include or leave out.  But some that maybe should have been included:
The article also fails to mention potential weaknesses of the trial design that were highlighted in the study.  The authors of the study pointed out that the treatment of physician’s choice group included several different chemotherapies precluding detailed comparisons with eribulin.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
It turns out that cholesterol isn’t the only thing you have to worry about to keep your heart healthy. In recent years, doctors have started to focus on inflammation — the same process that makes cuts red and painful — as an important contributor to a heart attack. It’s the reason doctors recommend low-dose aspirin to prevent recurrent heart attacks in people who have already had them, why they also prescribe statins, which lower both cholesterol and inflammation, and why they have started to measure inflammation levels in the blood.

But it’s never been clear exactly how much inflammation adds to heart disease risk. Since statins lower both, it’s hard to tell whether inflammation or cholesterol has the bigger impact on heart problems.

MORE: Why Inflammation in Your Mouth May Raise Your Risk of Cancer

But in a new paper published in the and presented at the European Society of Cardiology meeting, scientists say they now have proof that lowering inflammation alone, without affecting cholesterol, also reduces the risk of a heart attack.

In the study, 10,000 people who have already had a heart attack were randomly assigned to get injected with a placebo or different doses of a drug called canakinumab. Canakinumab, made by Novartis, is currently approved to treat rare immune-related conditions and works to reduce inflammation but does not affect cholesterol levels. After four years, the people who received the drug had a 15% lower chance of having a heart attack or stroke compared to people who didn’t get the drug. The medication also reduced the need for angioplasty or bypass surgery by 30%.

“Even I am pinching myself,” says Dr. Paul Ridker, who led the study and is director of the center for cardiovascular disease prevention at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and is a pioneer in exposing the role inflammation plays in heart disease. “This outcome is more than we hoped for. The bottom line is we now have clear evidence that lowering inflammation through this pathway lowers rates of heart attack and stroke with no change at all in cholesterol.”

About a quarter of people who have heart attacks will have another heart event even if they keep their cholesterol at recommended levels. For them, it may not be cholesterol so much as inflammation that is driving their heart disease. So the study further solidifies the fact that heart doctors should be measure inflammation as well as cholesterol in their heart patients. An inexpensive blood test that looks for a protein that rises in the blood with inflammation, called C-reactive protein (CRP), can tell doctors how much inflammation their patients have. Beginning in 2003, the American Heart Association started to provide guidelines on how doctors should use CRP testing; for patients like those in the current trial, the group did not see any additional benefit to CRP testing since those patients should already be treated with statins, which can lower both cholesterol and inflammation.

But with the new results, those guidelines may change. Ridker says the findings should clarify how doctors can optimize the way they treat their heart patients — about half of people who have had a heart attack tend to have high levels of inflammatory factors, while half have high cholesterol levels. The inexpensive CRP test could identify those with higher inflammation, who might be candidates for taking a drug like canakinumab.

The drug is not currently approved for any heart conditions, but Novartis will likely look at doing more studies to confirm its effectiveness in treating heart disease.

Perhaps more intriguing are additional results that Ridker reported, related to cancer. In a separate study published in the using data from the same study, he found that people taking canakinumab lowered their risk of dying from any cancer over four years by 50%, and their risk of fatal lung cancer by 75%.

While the connection between heart disease and cancer may not seem obvious, Ridker says that many people who have had heart problems, like those in the study, are former or current smokers, since smoking is a risk factor for heart attacks. And smoking increases inflammation. “People who smoke a pack of cigarettes a day are chronically inflaming their lungs,” he says. That’s why he decided to look at cancer deaths as well as heart events in his study population.

The cancer data is still preliminary, and needs to be confirmed with additional studies, but it’s encouraging, says Dr. Otis Bradley, chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society, who was not involved in the study. “We know that free oxygen radicals and inflammation can damage DNA and can cause cancer,” he says. “This all makes sense to me.” Studies have already shown, for example, that inflammation may be a factor in prostate cancer and colon cancer.

But whether anti-inflammatory agents, like canakinumab, or even over-the-counter drugs like aspirin, should be part of standard cancer treatment isn’t clear yet. There are a number of different inflammatory pathways, and canakinumab targets just one. Other pathways, along with new anti-inflammatory drugs, may emerge with more research.

When it comes to heart disease, however, it’s clear that inflammation-fighting medications like canakinumb may represent the next generation of treatment. “Ten years from now we will be doing more personalized medicine,” says Ridker. “Some people will get more cholesterol lowering. Some will get more inflammation-lowering drugs. Some will get other agents that we haven’t considered yet. It’s a wonderful new era in heart disease treatment.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Readers can infer this data was from a relatively large randomized controlled trial, so we’ll give this a barely passing Satisfactory. Some discussion of the study’s limitations was needed, however.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, June 15, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Reiterating a recommendation last made in 2008, an influential U.S. panel of health experts is advocating that regular colon cancer screening begin at age 50 and continue until at least age 75.

However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force stopped short of saying any one screening method was better than another.

"There are multiple screening options for colorectal cancer that reduce the risk of dying from the disease. We encourage people to choose the best option for them, in consultation with their clinician," former Task Force member Dr. Douglas Owens said Wednesday in a USPSTF news release.

The panel's reticence to choose one option over another may be at odds with the preference of many doctors, who often advise colonoscopy as the "gold standard" test.

Dr. Arun Swaminath is one of them.

"There is only one test -- colonoscopy -- that can both diagnose a polyp/cancer and remove or sample it at the same time," said Swaminath, who directs the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City.

"This is key, because a positive stool test plus stool DNA test (such as Cologuard), or a positive imaging test (such as CT colonoscopy) will still require a follow up colonoscopy to confirm and treat the problem," he explained.

For its part, the American Cancer Society recommends colonoscopy screening once every 10 years, beginning at age 50, or one of a number of other tests at more frequent intervals.

In drafting its updated colon cancer screening guidelines, the USPSTF reviewed data on several screening strategies. Besides colonoscopy, these included flexible sigmoidoscopy (an invasive procedure that penetrates less far than colonoscopy); CT colonography (a scan of the colon); traditional fecal occult blood tests (looking for blood in stool); and the recently approved Cologuard DNA-based stool test.

The panel said there were no comparison studies that suggested that any of the screening methods were any more effective than others. There are varying amounts of proof supporting the effectiveness of each, and each method has its advantages and limitations, the panelists said.

And what about colon cancer screening for the elderly?

In its statement, the panel said that "for some adults ages 76 to 85, the benefits of screening are smaller, and the potential for harm greater. However, some people in this age group may benefit, especially if they have never been screened before and are healthy enough to undergo treatment if cancer is found."

For this older group, the USPSTF recommends that decisions on screening be made during consultations between the patient and his or her doctor.

All of the recommendations are specific to symptom-free people 50 years of age or older with an average risk colorectal cancer, the panel stressed. People with disorders or medical histories that raise their odds for colon cancer may need more rigorous screening, the USPSTF said.

The updated recommendation was published online June 16 in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

"Evidence convincingly shows screening for colorectal cancer works, but not enough people are taking advantage of this highly effective service," said Owens, a general internist at the Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System and a professor at Stanford University.

The USPSTF notes that only one-third of eligible adults in the United States are screened for colon cancer, and more need to take advantage of this effective method of prevention.

Colorectal cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer death in the United States. This year about 134,000 people in the country will be diagnosed with the disease, and about 49,000 will die from it., the panel said

The USPSTF is an independent, volunteer panel of experts that makes recommendations about the effectiveness of specific preventive health services.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on colon cancer screening.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The USPSTF recommendation is the result of not only a structured review of available studies on colon cancer screening, but also new analyses of the data, in order to seek a deeper understanding of the pros and cons of various screening strategies. Though the story could have done a lot more to explain that, enough of the basics are included to warrant a Satisfactory here.
The story ideally would have explained what sets this recommendation apart from other reports that come from various groups of experts giving their opinions. Also, it should have noted that the USPSTF gave the recommendation for screening between ages 50 and 75 an “A” grade (the highest level of confidence), while screening of those over 75 (based on individual considerations) received only a “C” grade (moderate certainty).
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy may work slightly better than soy at reducing menopausal hot flashes, a new study says.

Women who took such hormones had fewer hot flashes, on average, than women who took soy - and both had fewer than those who took a placebo, or “dummy pill.”

“The bottom line for someone who is very disturbed by hot flashes, the best treatment is hormones, and the next tier would be soy,” said Dr. Gloria Bachmann, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Jersey.

However, a 2002 landmark study by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) found that such treatments can increase the risk of breast cancer, heart disease and stroke. That means that if women do take hormones, Bachmann told Reuters Health, it should be the lowest dose and for the shortest possible period of time.

And not every woman needs treatment, notes Bachmann, who was not involved in the study. Women with severe or frequent hot flashes or whose hot flashes keep them up at night, should consider treatment, she said.

Women typically suffer between 30 and 150 hot flashes a month, said Dr. Rafael Bolanos-Diaz, professor of health economics at San Marcos University in Lima, Peru, who co-authored the study.

Women who took hormones had an average of 24 fewer hot flashes per month, while those who took soy had 12 per month fewer. The study did not look at whether eating soy in food has the same effect on hot flashes as supplements, Bolanos-Diaz said.

The researchers looked at 19 studies on how a treatment, either hormones or soy, compared to a placebo. They compared the average number of hot flashes in 760 women who had treatment with 770 who did not.

The study was published in Menopause: The Journal of the North American Menopause Society.

Soy hasn’t been studied as much as hormone replacement to treat hot flashes, and doctors don’t know exactly how it works. It’s thought to have similar effects to estrogen on the brain, bones, and blood vessels, Bolanos-Diaz told Reuters Health by email.

Soy supplements also have side effects: Nausea, bloating, and constipation, according to the NIH. A month’s supply costs about $12, while a month of hormone tablets runs between $40 and $60.

“For some women, hormone therapy is the best option, for some soy is best, and for some, it’s just watchful waiting until the hot flashes subside,” Bachmann said.

SOURCE: bit.ly/hBua85 Menopause: The Journal of The North American Menopause Society, online March 3, 2011.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Adequate job.  The story explained that soy hasn’t been studied as much as HRT for hot flashes and that “doctors don’t know exactly how it works.”  It explained that this was a study of studies.
The story also includes a link to the study itself, which is always a nice touch.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Consuming walnuts and select other whole foods as part of a healthy diet may be associated with a reduced risk of physical function impairments throughout the aging process in women

Folsom, Calif., (June 22, 2016) - A new study published in the Journal of Nutrition suggests that consuming 1-2 servings of walnuts per week (1/4 cup per serving) was associated with reduced risk of developing impairments in physical function, which helps enable older women to maintain independence throughout the aging process. (1)

This paper emphasized that overall diet quality, rather than individual foods, may have a greater impact on reducing risk of physical function impairments. Specifically, diet quality traits most associated with reduced rates of incident physical impairment were higher intake of fruits and vegetables; lower intake of sugar-sweetened beverages, trans fat, and sodium; and moderate alcohol intake. Among food components, the strongest relations were found for increased intakes of oranges, orange juice, apples, pears, romaine or leaf lettuce, and walnuts.

"There's a lot of research that looks at specific health conditions in aging, such as diabetes and heart disease, but less attention to research on quality of life and ability to maintain independence with aging," said Dr. Francine Grodstein, ScD, professor of medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School. "The simple message from this study is that eating an overall healthy diet, including certain foods, such as walnuts and other whole foods, may help women with the ability to do key everyday tasks as they age, like carrying groceries or dressing themselves."

The researchers looked at data from 54,762 women in the Nurses' Health Study, which tracked women for over 30 years. Between 1992 and 2008, the women were asked questions about their physical function, including their ability to perform basic activities of daily living. This new paper prospectively examined the association between the dietary habits of the participants and subsequent impairment in physical function. Diet was assessed using the Alternative Healthy Eating Index (AHEI-2010), a measure of diet quality that incorporates foods and nutrients predictive of chronic disease risk based on scientific evidence.

"These results add to the large body of evidence that outline the many benefits of a healthy diet for women. Additional research is needed to better understand how diet and lifestyle choices can help maintain our health and well-being as we age," said Dr. Grodstein.

There are numerous possible active properties in walnuts that may be contributing factors in providing health benefits. Walnuts are unique among nuts in that they are primarily composed of polyunsaturated fat (13 grams per ounce), which includes alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), the plant-based omega-3 fatty acid. They are the only nut to contain a significant amount of ALA with 2.5 grams per one ounce serving.

Some study limitations should be considered. The sample only included women, so these results may not be generalizable to men. Additionally, participants were not assigned to eat walnuts or other foods, and were just asked about their dietary choices. It is also possible that subjects may have misreported their dietary intake since this information was collected by questionnaires. In addition, because this is an observational study, residual confounding cannot be ruled out (i.e. that other lifestyle habits which are more common in adults who eat walnuts could contribute to the study findings); and, thus, the results should be interpreted with caution.

This research was supported in part by the California Walnut Commission (CWC). The CWC has supported health-related research on walnuts for more than 25 years. While the CWC does provide funds and/or walnuts for various projects, the actual studies are conducted independently by researchers who design the experiments, interpret the results and write the manuscripts.

The California Walnut Commission, established in 1987, is funded by mandatory assessments of the growers. The Commission is an agency of the State of California that works in concurrence with the Secretary of the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA). The CWC is mainly involved in health research and export market development activities. For more industry information, health research and recipe ideas, visit http://www. .

The California Walnut Commission (CWC) prohibits discrimination in all programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance programs. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact the CWC offices at (916) 922-5888. To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). CWC is an equal opportunity employer and provider.

The California Walnut Commission offices are located at 101 Parkshore Dr., Ste. #250, Folsom, CA 95630

1. Hagan KA, Chiuve SE, Stampfer MJ, Katz JN, Grodstein F. Greater Adherence to the Alternative Healthy Eating Index Is Associated with Lower Incidence of Physical Function Impairment in the Nurses' Health Study [published online ahead of print May 11, 2016]. J Nutr. doi: 10.3945/jn.115.227900
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This news release cautions that the findings have limitations. Among them: the study included only women, so results may not apply to men; participants were not randomly assigned to eat walnuts or other foods but rather were just asked about their dietary choices; and subjects may have misreported their dietary intake since this information was collected by questionnaires every few years. Also, the news release mentions that because this was an observational study rather than a randomized trial, it’s possible that other lifestyle habits that are more common in adults who eat walnuts could contribute to the findings, even though researchers tried to control for such factors.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Does Putting On A Few Pounds Help You Cheat Death?

A body mass index under 25 is deemed normal and healthy, and a higher BMI that's "overweight" or "obese" is not. But that might be changing, at least when it comes to risk of death.

The body mass index, or BMI, associated with the lowest risk of death has increased since the 1970s, a study finds, from 23.7, in the "normal" weight category, to 27, which is deemed "overweight."

That means a person who is 5-foot-8 could weigh 180 pounds and be in that epidemiological sweet spot, according to the NIH's online BMI calculator. The results were published Tuesday in JAMA, the journal of the American Medical Association.

The researchers came to that conclusion by looking at data from three studies of people in Copenhagen, one from the 1970s, one from the 1990s and one from 2003-2013. More than 100,000 people were involved. Because Denmark has an excellent national health registry, they were able to pinpoint the cause of death for every single one of those people.

The risk of death for people who are obese, with a BMI of 30 or greater, also declined, to the point that it was on a par with some people of so-called "normal" weight.

So being fatter, at least a bit, may be healthier.

"I was surprised as a scientist to see how clear the result was," Borge Nordestgaard, a clinical professor and chief physician at Copenhagen University Hospital and senior author of the study, told Shots.

So he and his colleagues sliced and diced the data to see what could account for the shift. They looked at age, sex, smoking, cancer and heart disease. The most relevant was the decline in smoking since the 1970s. But when they looked at the mortality rates in nonsmokers who had never had cancer or heart disease, it also became associated with a higher BMI over time.

So what's going on?

"Now we get into the speculation part, right? I know you journalists always want that," Nordestgaard says. "One option certainly is over these three decades we have become much better at treating the cardiovascular risk factors that come with overweight and obesity."

That includes treating high cholesterol with statins; treating high blood pressure with diet, exercise and an array of medications; and making concerted efforts to help people to control blood sugar.

People in Denmark got heavier on average over the course of the study, as they have in the United States and most other countries. By 2013, 56 percent of the Danes had a BMI of 25 or higher. So you could think, OK, the new average is a heavier average.

Or you could wonder if being a bit heavier somehow helps confer health benefits that affect longevity.

Researchers have long known that people who are very thin tend to have a shorter life expectancy, often because they're dealing with cancer or other serious illnesses. The sweet spot on the BMI/longevity axis is typically somewhere near the middle. But there's not much data to back the notion that a bit more pudge is protective. "This is total speculation," Nordestgaard says.

The BMI has been vilified as a poor measure of an individual's health. Someone who is big, fit and well-muscled, like a pro football player, can peg an obese BMI. And all of the people in this study are white, so that's a limitation. But the BMI, which is a general measure of body fat, has proven useful for thinking about the health of large groups of people, as in this study.

Nordestgaard and his colleagues are going to dig into this more in an effort to figure out what's going on, but he cautions that these kinds of data dives can take many months.

But this does raise the prospect of whether it may soon be time to tweak the official definition of normal, healthy weight.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We’re giving this rating a barely-passing Satisfactory. The story points out some limitations, but doesn’t get into the larger issue of this being an observational study.
And some of the language, including the headline, suggests that there could be a cause-and-effect relationship– something this type of study isn’t designed to prove.
It didn’t mention the many factors — beyond age, sex, smoking, cancer and heart disease — that could confound the relationship between BMI and mortality in this type of study. There was an extensive discussion of those factors the last time this type of research made the rounds, and the same concerns apply here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Swedish teenagers who consumed more folic acid got better school grades, a small study published in the journal Pediatrics has found.

But don’t run out and stock up on the B vitamin with the rest of your school supplies just yet, one expert warns.

“There is very little deficiency of folic acid in North America,” Deborah O’Connor, a nutrition researcher who was not involved in the study, told Reuters Health. “If you’re already sufficient, there is not a lot of evidence that taking more supplements will help.”

She said the teens in the study might have been deficient in folic acid, with levels a few times lower than what’s typically seen in North American kids.

Because a lack of the nutrient during pregnancy can cause severe birth defects in babies, certain foods are fortified with folic acid, also called folate, in North America. Most of the population is thought to get adequate amounts for that reason.

During the study, Sweden did not fortify foods, nor did kids use a lot of supplements. Folic acid is naturally present in green, leafy vegetables and legumes.

The new study is among the first to examine whether folate is tied to school achievements, according to Dr. Torbjorn Nilsson of Orebro University Hospital and his colleagues.

The researchers looked at 386 15-year-olds who were finishing up ninth grade. When all their grades from ten core classes were added up, there was a clear difference between teens who got the most and the least folic acid in their diets.

Teens in the top third of folic acid intake — more than 253 micrograms per day for girls and 335 for boys — scored grades of 139 out of 200, on average. Those in the bottom third — less than 173 micrograms folic acid per day for girls and 227 for boys — had an average score of only 120.

The differences remained even after the researchers accounted for gender, smoking, the mothers’ education and which schools the kids went to.

O’Connor, of the University of Toronto and the Hospital for Sick Children in Ontario, Canada, called the findings “pretty significant.”

Still, she said, you can’t be sure if the kids who performed better had a better diet in general or if some other hidden factor could explain the results.

“It’s not a randomized controlled trial, so you always wonder, are there other things going on that you weren’t able to control for?” she said. “Like most studies, it probably raises more questions than it answers.”

In the U.S., kids aged 9 to 13 should get a total of 300 micrograms of folate a day from food and supplements according to the Institute of Medicine’s “Dietary Reference Intakes.” Kids 14 and older and adults are urged to get 400 micrograms a day and pregnant women should get 600 micrograms.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story mentioned the fact that the study was small and that the population differed in an important way from teens in the US who consume food that is supplemented with folic acid.  It also pointed out that the study was not a randomized controlled trial so there may have been other differences between the groups of teens found to have high and low amounts of folic acid.

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can carry serious health risks, but a new study adds to evidence that menopausal women who use the hormones may have lower odds of developing colon cancer.

The study, which followed nearly 57,000 California teachers, found that women who were using HRT at the outset were 36 percent less likely to develop colon cancer over the next decade than those who had never used HRT.

Of the 34,433 HRT users, 193 were diagnosed with colon cancer during the study period; that compared with 151 cases among the 13,778 women who had never used hormone replacement.

HRT — with either estrogen alone or a combination of estrogen and progestin — was linked to a lower colon cancer risk even when the researchers accounted for the women’s age, weight, exercise levels and race.

Older age and African-American race are risk factors for colon cancer, and there is evidence linking obesity and a sedentary lifestyle to the disease as well.

The findings, reported in the American Journal of Epidemiology, support the theory that estrogen offers some protection against colon cancer.

Some past studies have linked not only HRT, but also use of birth control pills, to a lower colon cancer risk. And lab experiments have shown that estrogen may inhibit tumor development in the colon by affecting cell growth, or by lowering levels of a cancer-linked hormone called IGF-1.

However, no one is recommending that women take HRT to ward off colon cancer. Millions of women stopped using the hormones after a large U.S. government study in 2002 found that postmenopausal women given HRT had higher risks of heart attack, stroke, breast cancer and blood clots than women given an inactive placebo.

As a result, experts now advise that while HRT is effective at relieving menopausal symptoms — like hot flashes and vaginal dryness — women should take it at the lowest dose and for the shortest time possible.

These latest findings do not alter that advice. But they point to a need for further study into the different effects of HRT on specific organs, write the researchers, led by Dr. Katherine DeLellis Henderson of the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, California.

The findings are based on 56,864 menopausal women who took part in the California Teachers Study, a health study begun in 1995. Most of the women were past menopause at the outset, and 61 percent were currently using HRT.

Over the next decade, 442 women were diagnosed with colon cancer.

While women who were current HRT users at the start of the study showed a lower risk of the disease, the same was not true of those who were former users.

Henderson’s team also found that the beneficial effect of HRT was stronger among women who had had a first-degree relative diagnosed with colon cancer. Among these women, HRT use was linked to a 55 percent lower risk of the disease versus non-use.

The implications of that finding, if any, are not yet clear.

Family history of colon cancer is an established risk factor for the disease, but only one study, according to Henderson’s team, has looked at whether family history affects the link between HRT and colon cancer risk — and it found no evidence that it did.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Good job explaining the evidence, explaining that the findings"support the theory that estrogen offers some protection against colon cancer" but then stating clearly, "However, no one is recommending that women take HRT to ward off colon cancer."  The story also discussed one physiological theory that has been forwarded to explain what COULD be happening to lower colon cancer risk.  But no sensational claims or projections were made. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Nov. 2, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- Despite the stereotype that Americans are eating more unhealthful foods that leave them vulnerable to assorted diseases, a new study suggests the opposite may be true.

Harvard researchers report that they found evidence that better diets since 1999 have saved more than one million people from dying prematurely. They also believe improved diets have significantly cut diabetes and heart disease, and even slightly trimmed cancer cases.

The findings paint a surprising picture of American health. But study author Dong Wang, a graduate student with the departments of nutrition and epidemiology at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health in Boston, cautioned that it's not time to declare victory in the battle against unhealthy eating.

"The overall American diet is still poor," he said. "Huge room exists for further improvement."

The researchers wanted to understand how changes in the American diet in the 21st century affected health over time. To get insight into the answer, they analyzed the results of seven health and nutrition surveys including almost 34,000 adults aged 20 and older between 1999 and 2012.

The researchers ranked diets on a healthy eating scale from 0 (poor diet) to 110 (perfect diet). From 1999 to 2012, the overall rating increased, from 40 to 48.

On the positive side, over time, Americans ate more fruit, whole grains, nuts and legumes and polyunsaturated fatty acids, Wang said. They also ate less trans fats, sugar-sweetened beverages and juice, and red and processed meat. But the intake of salt actually went up.

The researchers extrapolated their findings and estimated that the improvement in diets prevented over one million premature deaths and lowered heart disease cases by almost 9 percent, type 2 diabetes cases by nearly 13 percent and cancer cases by just over 1 percent.

According to Wang, the study findings suggest that healthier diets lower the risk of death in a variety of ways. Among other things, improved diets appear to lower the risk of chronic diseases and boost the survival of people who have those conditions. Even a year or two of a better diet appears to have the power to affect survival rates, he said.

The study authors didn't analyze whether their estimates match up to actual death rates in the United States. But other research has pinpointed a decline in death rates in this century, Wang said.

Dr. Sonia Anand, a professor of medicine and epidemiology at McMaster University in Hamilton, Canada, praised the study, saying it's "reasonable" to link changes in diet to death rates in this way. But, she said, nutrition research like this has limitations because it relies on people's memories of what they ate. As a result, she said, it's crucial to look at a variety of studies and see if trends hold up.

According to study author Wang, trans fats have been almost eliminated from the food supply, so what is needed next is more taxation on sugary drinks and more regulations requiring salt to be reduced in food.

He also said the government can do more to improve diets for the poor, who haven't seen the same level of improvements as other groups. One option, he said, is to increase the number of farmers markets that accept food stamps.

The study is published in the November issue of Health Affairs.

For more about healthy eating, visit the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Overall, the article did a fair job of describing the sources of the data, but it could have done more to bring credibility had it specifically mentioned some of the seven studies that made up the “index,” particularly NHANES which in some circles is a household name. In addition, we wish the story had made more specific mention of the fact that these were observational studies that are subject to important limitations. But since we’ve already mentioned that above, we won’t ding the story for that problem here. And the story does at least nod to the controversy surrounding the utility/validity of dietary recall data in these types of studies through comments from the quoted expert.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
For the past several decades, Alcoholics Anonymous and the 12 steps have dominated addiction treatment in America — boasting millions of adherents and turning into the standard option within most addiction treatment programs in the US.

A new study has found, however, that AA, the original 12-step program, and others like it don’t have to be the only answer for people seeking out mutual help groups to deal with alcohol addiction.

The study, in short, looked at how people’s self-reported outcomes with AA and 12-step programs compare with the three biggest alternative mutual help groups — Women for Sobriety, SMART Recovery, and LifeRing. It concluded that these other groups perform about as well as 12-step programs.

“This study suggests that these alternatives really are viable options for people who are looking for recovery support and don’t like AA for whatever reason,” Sarah Zemore, lead author of the study, told me.

The research is by no means the last word on this question — Zemore characterized the study as the beginning of a deeper evaluation into AA alternatives.

But this is important. There has been a good amount of research into AA and the 12 steps over the years, broadly finding that about a third of people maintain recovery from alcohol addiction due to 12-step treatment, another third get something out of the treatment but not enough for full recovery, and another third get nothing at all.

Researchers have long suspected, though, that the benefits found in 12-step treatment programs are not exclusive to the 12 steps. As Zemore told me, “The benefits of 12-step groups are not driven by the 12 steps’ specific philosophy or adherence to the 12 steps. It’s really more about general mechanisms like abstinence motivation and social support for abstinence. Presumably, you could get those by participating in alternatives to AA.”

In other words, these alternatives could help the one-third to two-thirds of people who don’t get anything or much out of AA. That would help deal with a big public health issue: Based on federal data, more than 20 million people in the US have a substance use disorder, and within that group, more than 15 million have an alcohol use disorder. Excessive drinking alone is linked to 88,000 deaths each year. So finding the right solutions for this problem is literally a matter of life or death.

The study, conducted by the Alcohol Research Group at the Public Health Institute in California and published last month in the Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, surveyed more than 600 people with alcohol use disorder (AUD), who were divided by which mutual help group they primarily participated in. Researchers followed up at six months then 12 months, measuring involvement in the groups and various substance use outcomes, including abstinence from drinking and alcohol-related problems.

After controlling for several factors, the researchers concluded that “[Women for Sobriety], LifeRing, and SMART are as effective as 12-step groups for those with AUDs.”

“Essentially, that’s the story,” Zemore said. “We were really interested in whether the effects of involvement on recovery outcomes depended on which group [participants] were in. And we found that they did not.”

There were some differences in the data. People who reported SMART as their primary group seemed to have worse substance use outcomes, and there were lower odds of total abstinence among LifeRing members.

That might have something to do with differences in recovery goals. For example, AA really emphasizes total abstinence from drinking as the solution to alcohol addiction. Groups like SMART and LifeRing, meanwhile, can be friendlier to the idea of members moderating their drinking but not quitting altogether. That could affect substance use outcomes — and especially abstinence outcomes.

The study’s survey data suggests this is in fact what was going on: When researchers controlled for people’s recovery goals — meaning, whether they wanted to commit to lifetime total abstinence or not — the differences between the 12-step groups, SMART, and LifeRing went away.

“That suggests that people with less commitment to lifetime total abstinence are more likely to participate in SMART and LifeRing than they are to participate in 12-step groups,” Zemore said. “That’s why you’re seeing these associations between SMART and LifeRing affiliation at baseline and worse recovery outcomes when you control for involvement.” She added, “But I want to emphasize that these go away when you control for recovery goals.”

Again, the study is not the final word. John Kelly, an addiction researcher at Harvard Medical School who was not involved in the study, told me that the study is “good news, in general,” but pointed out that it’s limited by its methodology: It’s based on an online survey, not the kind of randomized trial that’s typically the gold standard in research. That may have led to some potentially biased results — perhaps participants in specific groups were less likely to report bad outcomes, for instance.

And since it’s only one study, it’s possible that the results were biased in some other way. So it’s up to future research to verify the findings.

One tricky thing with this line of research is you can’t really force people to participate in certain groups — so studies that randomly assign participants to AA, SMART, LifeRing, or Women for Sobriety may not be easy to do. But there are ways that researchers could get around these problems, such as only using participants who are willing to try different groups and actively following up with them to make sure they are actually participating.

Another big research question: figuring out why, exactly, these groups might work to help people stay alcohol- or drug-free. There’s good research into how AA works, but it’d be good to figure out if SMART, LifeRing, and Women for Sobriety work in a similar way. That, Zemore said, will be one of her goals in future studies.

Why we need alternatives

In discussions about addiction treatment, AA and the 12 steps tend to prompt polarizing reactions — some people swear by the programs, others absolutely hate them.

There’s a good explanation for that: While the research shows that 12-step treatment can be as effective as professional treatment modalities like cognitive behavioral therapy, the research also shows that the 12 steps don’t work for everyone.

As one example, a prominent complaint about 12-step programs is the spiritual aspect. This is a big part of the 12 steps, with the final step even invoking “a spiritual awakening.” For people who aren’t religious or spiritual, this can be a big turn-off; that’s one reason SMART and LifeRing exist to begin with — they’re meant to be secular alternatives to the 12 steps.

The good news is that the research suggests the spiritual aspect doesn’t fully explain why the 12 steps are effective for some people. Instead, it seems other traits are just as, if not more, important — such as the social support that AA meetings provide and the lessons that participants can pick up at meetings.

That’s long led researchers to suspect that alternative mutual help groups could work. If so, that would let some people go to AA meetings if they prefer the 12 steps, while others could find SMART, LifeRing, Women for Sobriety, or something else that works for them. Basically, everyone could find a workable solution.

Providing these alternatives would essentially move addiction treatment closer to other kinds of medical problems. As Keith Humphreys, a drug policy expert at Stanford University, previously told me, “We don’t have anything that works for everybody. There’s very few places in medicine where you do.” So there need to be as many alternatives as possible.

The US is far from that at the moment. Most treatment facilities in America are, according to the survey data and research, at least partly based on the 12 steps — making it the only option for many people. While alternatives like SMART or LifeRing do exist, they’re not nearly as available as AA — and they certainly aren’t built into professional treatment programs in the same way as the 12 steps.

As Albert, a pseudonym for an AA member in Georgia, previously told me, “There’s just not a lot of widely advertised options available.” AA and 12-step treatment are “the most well-known and most recommended option, so that’s kind of where you tend to go.”

Zemore’s study begins to peel away at this problem. By showing that there really might be other effective options out there, the research provides hope that there may be a better — or at least more complete — solution out there for alcohol addiction.

For more on the research into AA and the 12 steps, read Vox’s explainer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This is a strong point of the story. It notes multiple times that the study is not the last word on this subject and calls attention to specific limitations of this type of study via an independent expert source who tells readers:
It’s based on an online survey, not the kind of randomized trial that’s typically the gold standard in research. That may have led to some potentially biased results — perhaps participants in specific groups were less likely to report bad outcomes, for instance.
And since it’s only one study, it’s possible that the results were biased in some other way. So it’s up to future research to verify the findings.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, July 24, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- The active ingredient in pot that gets you high can calm agitation in people with advanced Alzheimer's disease, a small new study suggests.

Canadian researchers found that a form of synthetic THC significantly decreased agitation in a small group of Alzheimer's patients, working even better than the drugs now used.

"This is the first clinical trial to show that a cannabinoid can decrease agitation," said lead researcher Krista Lanctot, a senior scientist at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center in Toronto.

However, many study patients suffered from sedation due to the drug, noted Keith Fargo, director of scientific programs and outreach at the Alzheimer's Association.

"We would love to see this study done in a larger group of people, to see if it continues to be effective in a larger group, and how worried we need to be about this sedation side effect," Fargo said.

Agitation is a frequent symptom of advanced Alzheimer's, Lanctot explained. Doctors struggle to control it through off-label use of drugs like antipsychotics and anticonvulsants.

Agitated patients yell, scream, pace and wander, she said. They also can become physically aggressive, striking out at people and hurting themselves or others.

"You're going to find one in five outpatients with it. But when you get to the long-term care facilities, about 50 percent of inpatients will have agitation," Lanctot said. "It's actually a big treatment challenge. The drugs we have now do not work very well and they're associated with an increase in mortality."

The off-label drugs used to treat Alzheimer's are indeed a bit dodgy. For example, only one person out of five to 14 treated with antipsychotics actually experiences a decrease in agitation, Lanctot said. And for every nine to 25 people helped, one will die.

But Lanctot and her colleagues suspected that cannabinoids might help control agitation, given that natural cannabinoids in the brain decrease as Alzheimer's enters its advanced stages.

"We know cannabis has several effects that might be good for people with agitation," Lanctot said. "It has a calming effect. It helps with weight loss because it helps with appetite. It's also used for pain."

The synthetic THC drug, nabilone, is approved in Canada for treating nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy. It comes in capsule form.

"It's a milder form of TCH" compared to whole-leaf marijuana, Lanctot said. "We hoped it wouldn't have the side effects associated with cannabis, but would have the calming effects."

During the clinical trial, 39 patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease received nabilone for six weeks to treat their clinically significant agitation, followed by six weeks with an inactive placebo.

"We had a significant decrease in agitation. The decrease we saw was larger than is seen with the currently used medications," Lanctot said.

Patients underwent significant overall improvement in their other behavioral symptoms, and had small benefits in their brain function and nutrition during the study. Their caregivers also reported reduced levels of stress, according to Lanctot.

These benefits came with a downside, though. About 45 percent of patients experienced sedation with nabilone, compared with 16 percent for placebo, the findings showed.

Lanctot and Fargo do not recommend that relatives or friends of those with agitated Alzheimer's provide them medical marijuana to ease their suffering.

"This trial tested a synthetic analog of THC. It's not THC, and it's certainly not whole-plant marijuana," Fargo said. "There's virtually no data on whole-plant marijuana, whether or not it's effective or safe in people with Alzheimer's disease."

A form of synthetic THC is available in the United States, called dronabinol and sold under the trade name Marinol, Lanctot said. It's used as an appetite stimulant for people with AIDS and an anti-nausea remedy for chemotherapy patients.

Marinol is now being tested for its usefulness in treating Alzheimer's symptoms, Lanctot said. People interested in trying it should reach out to one of the big clinical trials; Johns Hopkins is one of the centers testing Marinol.

"We wouldn't want to change clinical practice based on one study," Lanctot added.

The study was to be presented Tuesday at the Alzheimer's Association meeting in Chicago. Research presented at medical meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

The Alzheimer's Society has more about cannabis and Alzheimer's disease.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story was clear about the preliminary nature of this trial, and how many patients were enrolled. A source urges the need for a larger trial.  We are also glad that HealthDay repeatedly used this sentence, which it often does when reporting from medical meetings:
The study was (to be) presented Tuesday at the Alzheimer’s Association meeting in Chicago … research presented at medical meetings is considered preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Step inside the lounge at Evolved Science and you’ll find a cocktail menu unlike any you’ve ever seen.

The ritzy Manhattan medical office — which says it serves high-powered clients and celebrities — shakes and stirs up tailored IV infusions using a slurry of vitamins and amino acids. There’s a Jet Lag Eraser, for use after hopping off a long international flight, a Detoxification saline smoothie for “improving alertness and mental acuity,” and a Late Night Rescue cocktail to undo the effects of too many actual cocktails the night before.

The company claims liquid vitamins, minerals, and amino acids delivered straight to the bloodstream can protect users from getting a cold, boost athletic performance, “annihilate toxins,” and stave off headaches. “We put together the ideal combination for them to obtain the results they want: clearer skin, clearer mind, better hair, better nails,” said Dr. Erika Schwartz, who runs the clinic.

And though the IV lends a medical air to the procedure, the infusions suffer from the same problem as many supplements taken orally — there isn’t any robust evidence to back up their health claims.

“Supplements don’t fix anything and they don’t prevent anything. It’s simple,” said Dr. Pete Miller, a clinician and nutrition researcher at Johns Hopkins.

Vitamin IV infusions aren’t anything new. Celebrities from Simon Cowell and Rihanna to the Real Housewives have proclaimed their love for vitamin drips. They’re part of a huge — and wildly popular — supplement industry which goes largely unregulated. Supplement makers aren’t allowed to claim that their products can cure or treat a particular condition, but they are allowed to make sweeping claims that the products promote health.

The infusion treatments can be traced back to an intravenous supplement known as the Myers’ cocktail, a slurry of magnesium, calcium, B vitamins, and other products developed decades ago by a Baltimore physician. There is a published review on the use of Myers’ cocktail — but it’s just a collection of anecdotal evidence. The author, Dr. Alan Gaby, has long promoted the use of intravenous vitamins for a wide range of clinical conditions.

The research on injectable vitamins of any kind is thin and the results unimpressive. One study looked at injectable vitamins to treat asthma, but there was no placebo group to compare outcomes against. Two studies have examined intravenous vitamin use in fibromyalgia patients. One didn’t turn up any significant improvement in patients who received the infusions. The other — which was also missing a placebo group — involved just seven patients and showed only short-term improvement in symptoms.

Schwartz, though, said the supplements are completely safe.

“We’re doing it in a sterile environment, it’s administered by a nurse, and everything is sterile,” she said. “The only difference is it’s kind of a beautiful environment.”

Customers at Evolved Science shell out anywhere from $325 to $875 for an infusion. For first-time clients, Schwartz recommends weekly injections for the first month or so, and then a routine infusion once a month. Patients kick back in cream-colored chairs together while they’re hooked up to IVs in the “infusion lounge.”

“It doesn’t look like a doctor’s office. It’s very relaxed, not like a spa. But like a private club. It’s a SoHo house kind of thing,” said Schwartz, a former trauma surgeon.

But as for whether they’ll help a client prepare for an important presentation?

“There is not not substantial evidence that vitamin supplements have a large impact on cognitive function,” said Dr. Francine Grodstein, a public health researcher at Harvard who has studied the subject. A longitudinal study would be needed to back those claims with evidence, she added.

Still, the trend seems to be going strong. The I.V. Doc — an in-home vitamin infusion service — offers on-demand nutrient drips in places including Boston, Los Angeles, Chicago, and the Hamptons. In Las Vegas, hangover buses deliver pick-me-up infusions on the go.

And despite a lack of sound evidence, experts expect consumers to keep coming back for infusions.

“What drives the market is not the science,” said Miller. “In spite of that lack of evidence, there’s still a market for it.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gave readers multiple chances to read studies on intravenous nutritional supplements. The quality of evidence of course was low, but that was the point of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va., Aug. 25, 2016 – A study published today in the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine offers the most in-depth assessment yet of the safety and effectiveness of a high-tech alternative to brain surgery to treat the uncontrollable shaking caused by the most common movement disorder. And the news is very good.

The paper outlines the results of an international clinical trial, led by Jeff Elias, MD, of the University of Virginia Health System, that evaluated the scalpel-free approach called focused ultrasound for the treatment of essential tremor (ET), a condition that afflicts an estimated 10 million Americans. Not only did the researchers determine that the procedure was safe and effective, they found that it offered a lasting benefit, reducing shaking for trial participants throughout the 12-month study period.

“This study represents a major advance for neurosurgery, treatment of brain disease and specifically the treatment of ET,” Elias said. “For the first time in a randomized controlled trial, we have shown that ultrasound can be precisely delivered through the intact human skull to treat a difficult neurological disease.”

Pioneering Tremor TrialThe multi-site clinical trial included 76 participants with moderate to severe essential tremor, a condition that often robs people of their ability to write, feed themselves and carry out their normal daily activities. The trial participants all had tried existing medications, without success. The mean age was 71, and most had suffered with their tremor for many years.

Seventy-five percent of participants received the experimental treatment using focused ultrasound guided by magnetic resonance imaging. The remaining 25 percent underwent a sham procedure, to act as the control group. (They would later be given the opportunity to undergo the real procedure.)

Participants who received the treatment showed dramatic improvement, with the beneficial effects continuing throughout the study period. The researchers employed a 32-point scale to assess tremor severity, and they found that mean tremor scores improved by 47 percent at three months and 40 percent at 12 months. Participants reported major improvements in their quality of life. People who couldn’t feed themselves soup or cereal could again do so.

Participants who received the sham procedure, on the other hand, showed no significant improvements.

“The degree of tremor control was very good overall in the study, but the most important aspects were the significant gains in disabilities and quality of life – that’s what patients really care about,” Elias said.

The most commonly reported side effects were gait disturbances and numbness in the hand or face; in most instances, these side effects were temporary but some were permanent.

FDA Approved Based on the clinical trial led by Elias, the federal Food and Drug Administration has approved the focused ultrasound device, manufactured by InSightec Inc., for the treatment of essential tremor. The device focuses sound waves inside the brain to create heat, much like a magnifying glass focuses light. That heat can then be used to interrupt the troublesome brain connections responsible for the tremor. Elias can actually watch as patients’ tremor decreases, and the real-time imaging allows him to zone in on exactly the right spot before making any permanent changes to the brain.

The FDA approval means UVA can make the procedure available to eligible patients. UVA, however, is still working out the necessary logistics; it’s not yet clear when Elias will begin treating patients. Because the approach is so new, insurance plans will not yet cover the procedure, though that may change in the coming months. The cost at UVA has not yet been determined.

People interested in the procedure can learn more at uvahealth.com/focusedultrasound. The site includes a list of frequently asked questions and will be updated as UVA prepares to make the treatment available.

The procedure is not for everyone with essential tremor. It can’t be used in patients who cannot undergo MRI imaging, including those with implanted metallic devices such as a pacemaker. It is also not available for pregnant women, people with heart conditions or very high blood pressure, patients with kidney disease or clotting disorders, patients on blood thinners, patients with a history of strokes or brain tumors and people with substance abuse issues. There are other exclusions as well. Doctors at UVA will evaluate potential patients to determine their eligibility and then recommend the best course of treatment.

Groundbreaking ResearchUVA is a world leader in focused ultrasound research. Elias and his colleagues are testing the capability of focused ultrasound to treat Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, brain tumors and benign breast tumors.

The essential tremor research has been supported by InSightec, the Focused Ultrasound Foundation and the BIRD (US-Israel Binational Industry Research and Development) Foundation.

FOR REPORTERS: Elias will be available for interviews today, and he’ll be doing a Facebook Live broadcast at 3:15 Eastern. To arrange an interview, contact Alex Prevost at 434.906.7255 or amp3gb@virginia.edu. High-resolution images and video are available as well.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release mentions that this clinical trial was a randomized, multi-center, sham-controlled study with a small but reasonable number of patients, given the procedure involved.  It provides specifics on the patient population and the scope of their disease, as well as an explanation of how improvements were determined. The release would have been improved with a description of how improvement (or lack thereof) was measured.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
*****************************************Note: Video commentary from researchers and b-roll are available at http://bcove.me/tty4xtcl. A media teleconference with researchers and patients will also be held on Wednesday, Nov. 30, from 11 a.m. EST to 12:30 p.m. EST. To participate, U.S.-based media can call 855-698-2663; international media should dial 011-646-754-2524. The access code is 48330192. Phone lines open at 10:50 a.m., and all media should place speakers on mute unless posing a question. Reporters wishing to ask a question should e-mail their name and outlet to david.march@nyumc.org during the briefing, so they may be placed in a queue; the moderator will call on individual media to ask a question in the order names and outlets were received.******************************************

Newswise — When combined with psychological counseling, a single dose of a mind-altering compound contained in psychedelic mushrooms significantly lessens mental anguish in distressed cancer patients for months at a time, according to results of a clinical trial led by researchers at NYU Langone Medical Center.

Published in the Journal of Psychopharmacology online Dec.1, the study showed that one-time treatment with the hallucinogenic drug psilocybin — whose use required federal waivers because it is a banned substance — quickly brought relief from distress that then lasted for more than six months in 80 percent of the 29 study subjects monitored, based on clinical evaluation scores for anxiety and depression.

The NYU Langone-led study was published side by side with a similar study from Johns Hopkins. Study results were also endorsed in 11 accompanying editorials from leading experts in psychiatry, addiction, and palliative care.

“Our results represent the strongest evidence to date of a clinical benefit from psilocybin therapy, with the potential to transform care for patients with cancer-related psychological distress,” says study lead investigator Stephen Ross, MD, director of substance abuse services in the Department of Psychiatry at NYU Langone.

“If larger clinical trials prove successful, then we could ultimately have available a safe, effective, and inexpensive medication — dispensed under strict control — to alleviate the distress that increases suicide rates among cancer patients,” says Ross, also an associate professor of psychiatry at NYU School of Medicine.

Study co-investigator Jeffrey Guss, MD, a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at NYU Langone, notes that psilocybin has been studied for decades and has an established safety profile. Study participants, he says, experienced no serious negative effects, such as hospitalization or more serious mental health conditions.

Although the neurological benefits of psilocybin are not completely understood, it has been proven to activate parts of the brain also impacted by the signaling chemical serotonin, which is known to control mood and anxiety. Serotonin imbalances have also been linked to depression.

For the study, half of the participants were randomly assigned to receive a 0.3 milligrams per kilogram dose of psilocybin while the rest received a vitamin placebo (250 milligrams of niacin) known to produce a “rush” that mimics a hallucinogenic drug experience.

Approximately half way through the study’s monitoring period (after seven weeks), all participants switched treatments. Those who initially received psilocybin took a single dose of placebo, and those who first took niacin, then received psilocybin. Neither patients nor researchers knew who had first received psilocybin or placebo. Guss says, “The randomization, placebo control, and double-blind procedures maximized the validity of the study results.”

One of the key findings was that improvements in clinical evaluation scores for anxiety and depression lasted for the remainder of the study’s extended monitoring period — specifically, eight months for those who took psilocybin first.

All patients in the study — mostly women age 22 to 75 who are or were patients at the Perlmutter Cancer Center of NYU Langone — had either advanced breast, gastrointestinal, or blood cancers and had been diagnosed as suffering from serious psychological distress related to their disease. All patients, who volunteered to be part of the study, were provided with tailored counseling from a psychiatrist, psychologist, nurse or social worker, and were monitored for side effects and improvements in their mental state.

Co-investigator Anthony Bossis, PhD, a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at NYU Langone, says patients also reported post-psilocybin improvements in their quality of life: going out more, greater energy, getting along better with family members, and doing well at work. Several also reported variations of spirituality, unusual peacefulness, and increased feelings of altruism.

“Our study showed that psilocybin facilitated experiences that drove reductions in psychological distress,” says Bossis. “And if it’s true for cancer care, then it could apply to other stressful medical conditions.”

Bossis cautions that patients should not consume psilocybin on their own or without supervision by a physician and a trained counselor. He also says “Psilocybin therapy may not work for everyone, and some groups, such as people with schizophrenia, as well as adolescents, should not be treated with it.”

Both the NYU Langone and Johns Hopkins studies were principally funded by the Heffter Research Institute, a non-profit, scientific institution with the principal mission of helping to design, review and fund studies on the use of psilocybin for a wide range of ailments (Ross previously served as a board member). Additional funding for the NYU Langone study was provided by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, part of the National Institutes of Health (UL1 TR000038). The drug used in the study was manufactured by Organix Inc. in Woburn, Mass.

Besides Ross, Guss, and Bossis, other NYU researchers involved in this study are Gabrielle Agin-Liebes, BS; Tara Malone, MA; Alexander Belser, MPhil; Krystallia Kalliontzi, MSc; Barry Cohen, PhD; Sarah Mennenga, PhD; James Babb, PhD; Zhe Su, MS, MA; Patricia Corby, DDS; and Brian Schmidt, MD, PhD.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does an adequate job of describing the study: the number of patients, their clinical background, the study design. That earns it a satisfactory rating here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
PHILADELPHIA - Sleep deprivation -- typically administered in controlled, inpatient settings -- rapidly reduces symptoms of depression in roughly half of depression patients, according the first meta-analysis on the subject in nearly 30 years, from researchers at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. Partial sleep deprivation (sleep for three to four hours followed by forced wakefulness for 20-21 hours) was equally as effective as total sleep deprivation (being deprived of sleep for 36 hours), and medication did not appear to significantly influence these results. The results are published today in the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry.

Although total sleep deprivation or partial sleep deprivation can produce clinical improvement in depression symptoms within 24 hours, antidepressants are the most common treatment for depression. Such drugs typically take weeks or longer to experience results, yet 16.7 percent of 242 million U.S. adults filled one or more prescriptions for psychiatric drugs in 2013. The findings of this meta-analysis hope to provide relief for the estimated 16.1 million adults who experienced a major depressive episode in 2014.

Previous studies have shown rapid antidepressant effects from sleep deprivation for roughly 40-60 percent of individuals, yet this response rate has not been analyzed to obtain a more precise percentage since 1990 despite more than 75 studies since then on the subject.

"More than 30 years since the discovery of the antidepressant effects of sleep deprivation, we still do not have an effective grasp on precisely how effective the treatment is and how to achieve the best clinical results," said study senior author Philip Gehrman, PhD, an associate professor of Psychiatry and member of the Penn Sleep Center, who also treats patients at the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center. "Our analysis precisely reports how effective sleep deprivation is and in which populations it should be administered."

Reviewing more than 2,000 studies, the team pulled data from a final group of 66 studies executed over a 36 year period to determine how response may be affected by the type and timing of sleep deprivation performed (total vs early or late partial sleep deprivation), the clinical sample (having depressive or manic episodes, or a combination of both), medication status, and age and gender of the sample. They also explored how response to sleep deprivation may differ across studies according to how "response" is defined in each study.

"These studies in our analysis show that sleep deprivation is effective for many populations," said lead author Elaine Boland, PhD, a clinical associate and research psychologist at the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center. "Regardless of how the response was quantified, how the sleep deprivation was delivered, or the type of depression the subject was experiencing, we found a nearly equivalent response rate."

The authors note that further research is needed to identify precisely how sleep deprivation causes rapid and significant reductions in depression severity. Also, future studies are needed to include a more comprehensive assessment of potential predictors of treatment outcome to identify those patients most likely to benefit from sleep deprivation.

This research was funded by National Institutes of Health grants (R01 HL102119, P30 NS045839, R01MH107571, R01MH098260, P41 EB015893, R01 MH080729), National Aeronautics and Space Administration grants (NNX15AK76A, NBPF02701, NNX08AY09G, NBPF03401, NBPF02501, NNX14AM81G, NX16AI53G), National Heart, Lung, and Brain Institute (U01 HL125388), National Institute on Drug Abuse (1 R21 DA040902-01A1), the Office of Naval Research (N00014-11-1-0361), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NNX14AN49G), National Space Biomedical Research Institute through NASA (NCC 9-58), and grant support from Merck and Philips Healthcare/Respironics.

In addition to Gehrman and Boland, additional authors include Rachel V. Smith from the Cpl. Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, and Hengyi Rao, David F. Dinges, Namni Goel, John A. Detre, Mathias Basner, Yvette I. Sheline, and Michael E. Thase, all from Penn.

Penn Medicine is one of the world's leading academic medical centers, dedicated to the related missions of medical education, biomedical research, and excellence in patient care. Penn Medicine consists of the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania(founded in 1765 as the nation's first medical school) and the University of Pennsylvania Health System, which together form a $5.3 billion enterprise.

The Perelman School of Medicine has been ranked among the top five medical schools in the United States for the past 18 years, according to U.S. News & World Report's survey of research-oriented medical schools. The School is consistently among the nation's top recipients of funding from the National Institutes of Health, with $373 million awarded in the 2015 fiscal year.

The University of Pennsylvania Health System's patient care facilities include: The Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and Penn Presbyterian Medical Center -- which are recognized as one of the nation's top "Honor Roll" hospitals by U.S. News & World Report -- Chester County Hospital; Lancaster General Health; Penn Wissahickon Hospice; and Pennsylvania Hospital -- the nation's first hospital, founded in 1751. Additional affiliated inpatient care facilities and services throughout the Philadelphia region include Chestnut Hill Hospital and Good Shepherd Penn Partners, a partnership between Good Shepherd Rehabilitation Network and Penn Medicine.

Penn Medicine is committed to improving lives and health through a variety of community-based programs and activities. In fiscal year 2015, Penn Medicine provided $253.3 million to benefit our community.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release provides sufficient details on how this large study of studies was conducted:
“Reviewing more than 2,000 studies, the team pulled data from a final group of 66 studies executed over a 36 year period to determine how response may be affected by the type and timing of sleep deprivation performed (total vs early or late partial sleep deprivation), the clinical sample (having depressive or manic episodes, or a combination of both), medication status, and age and gender of the sample. They also explored how response to sleep deprivation may differ across studies according to how “response” is defined in each study.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers, including senior author Penny M. Kris-Etherton, PhD, distinguished professor of nutrition at Pennsylvania State University, publish their findings in the Journal of the American Heart Association.

It is well known that avocados are high in fat, but the majority of an avocado's fat is monounsaturated, which is deemed a "good" type of fat. It is known that monounsaturated fats can help lower levels of bad cholesterol, reducing the risk of heart attack and stroke.

For their study, Kris-Etherton and colleagues set out to assess how avocado consumption - by replacing saturated fatty acids, or "bad" fats - affected risk factors associated with cardiovascular diseases.

The team recruited 45 healthy participants aged 21-70 years who were either obese or overweight.

Every participant was required to follow each of three cholesterol-lowering diets for 5 weeks. The diets consisted of a lower-fat diet without avocado, a moderate-fat diet without avocado or a moderate-fat diet with one Hass avocado a day.

Prior to starting each diet, subjects ate what the researchers deem an "average American diet," which was made up of 34% of calories from fat, 16% from protein, while around half of calories were from carbohydrates.

From both of the moderate-fat diets, participants gained 34% of calories from fat, of which 17% were from monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs). The lower-fat diet provided participants with 24% of calories from fat, of which 11% was from MUFAs.

Moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day lowered 'bad' cholesterol by 13.5 mg/dL

The researchers found that participants' levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) - referred to as the "bad" cholesterol - were an average of 8.3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) lower after following the lower-fat diet without an avocado and 7.4 mg/dL lower after following the moderate-fat diet without an avocado, compared with their baseline average.

However, after participants followed the moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day, their LDL levels were found to be an average of 13.5 mg/dL lower than their baseline average.

What is more, the team found that a number of additional blood measurements - such as total cholesterol, small dense LDL, triglycerides and non-HDL (high-density lipoprotein) - were better after participants followed the moderate-fat diet with one avocado a day, compared with the other two diets.

Although these findings demonstrate that an avocado a day alongside a moderate-fat diet has the potential to reduce bad cholesterol, the team notes that their research was a controlled feeding study. "That is not the real-world," says Kris-Etherton, "so it is a proof-of-concept investigation."

Still, the team believes their findings indicate that people should consider replacing saturated fatty acids in their diet with healthier fats from avocados and other sources. Kris-Etherton adds:

"We need to focus on getting people to eat a heart-healthy diet that includes avocados and other nutrient-rich food sources of better fats. In the United States avocados are not a mainstream food yet, and they can be expensive, especially at certain times of the year. Also, most people do not really know how to incorporate them in their diet except for making guacamole. But guacamole is typically eaten with corn chips, which are high in calories and sodium. Avocados, however, can also be eaten with salads, vegetables, sandwiches, lean protein foods (like chicken or fish) or even whole."

It should be noted that this research was supported by the Hass Avocado Board, but the researchers say the organization played no other role in the study.

In January 2014, Medical News Today reported on a study suggesting that consuming half an avocado with lunch each day may satisfy hunger in overweight individuals and help with weight management.

Our Knowledge Center article on the health benefits of avocado reveals some of the other ways the food may be good for us, as well as the potential risks of avocado consumption.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job telling the reader about the methods of the study and the three diets. The number of participants  and a bit about their demographics are also provided.  The results of the study are provided in absolute terms and importantly are placed in context with a quote from the American Heart Association press release:  “Although these findings demonstrate that an avocado a day alongside a moderate-fat diet has the potential to reduce bad cholesterol, the team notes that their research was a controlled feeding study. That is not the real-world,” says Kris-Etherton, “so it is a proof-of-concept investigation.”
Given the presence of these caveats, we’ll rate this satisfactory, although we’d love to have seen some discussion of the fact that the primary outcome — LDL cholesterol — is an intermediate marker of heart disease risk. See our primer on this topic. Thus, the findings are not as strong as those of some other studies that assessed the number of heart attacks and strokes that occurred after dietary changes.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A popular class of blood-pressure medications thought to be safe in the first trimester of pregnancy appear to have caused serious birth defects in about 7 percent of babies whose mothers took them, a new study has found.

ACE inhibitors carry a warning that pregnant women should not use them in the last two trimesters because they can cause kidney damage to the fetus. The number of women taking them early in pregnancy is unknown but probably is small, the study suggests.

ACE inhibitors are the second-most commonly prescribed class of pharmaceuticals in the United States, with 149 million prescriptions dispensed last year. They came on the market 25 years ago.

"It would be important for a pregnant woman and her health-care provider to be aware of this, so they can identify an alternative medicine to treat her hypertension," said William O. Cooper, a pediatrician at Vanderbilt Children's Hospital who headed the study, published in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

Exposure to ACE inhibitors early in pregnancy nearly tripled the risk of birth defects, the study showed. "We all believe that we want to see more data. But this is important enough and impressive enough to tell people about," said Robert Temple of the Food and Drug Administration, who spoke to reporters about the findings.

The agency will consider broadening the "black box" warning against taking ACE inhibitors late in pregnancy, he said. The message is that women trying to get pregnant should switch to a different blood-pressure drug, Temple said.

One-third of the defects involved the heart, one-quarter the limbs or face, and one-tenth the brain or spinal cord, the study found. Many defects, especially the heart problems, are curable with surgery or other treatment. Others, however, cause permanent disability or retardation.

Cooper and his colleagues looked at 29,507 births to women covered by Medicaid in Tennessee between 1985 and 2000.

Of that group, 209 babies were born to women who took an ACE inhibitor, and 18 had birth defects. Among 202 babies born to mothers taking some other blood-pressure medication, four had defects. The fraction of babies with defects was 7.1 percent in the ACE-inhibitor group; 1.7 percent in the other anti-hypertensive group; and 2.6 percent in the group taking no blood-pressure medication.

That such an effect was first noticed a quarter-century after ACE inhibitors arrived on the market points up the lack of data about the effect of drugs in pregnancy.

All new drugs are tested on pregnant animals to see whether they cause malformations, but those tests can be misleading. It's considered unethical to include pregnant women in studies of new drugs unless the medication is intended to treat pregnancy-related conditions.

As a consequence, the labels on nearly all medications carry a statement saying their safety to fetuses has not been established.

"I think it is safe to say that not a lot is known about the options for women in pregnancy," said Sandra L. Kweder of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.

Studies of large databases such as Medicare records or registries that enroll pregnant women already taking particular drugs are the chief ways to discover and measure possible risks to the fetus from prescription drugs.

Increasingly, the FDA is seeking such data. It paid for the ACE-inhibitor study with help from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The alternatives that clinicians might want to consider are diuretics, alpha-methyldopa, some beta-blockers, and the calcium-channel blocker nifedipine, according to the FDA officials and an editorial accompanying the study.

Blood pressure often falls slightly in pregnancy, and women with mild hypertension may be able to go without medicines, experts say. Some pregnant women develop hypertension that can be life-threatening to them and their babies.

ACE inhibitors -- the acronym stands for angiotensin-converting enzyme -- have become more popular. A government survey of visits to doctors' offices found that their use doubled from 1995 to 2002.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article referred to the original retrospective study and where it could be found (New England Journal of Medicine). 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A Diet High In Fiber May Help Protect Against Breast Cancer

If the advice to eat more fiber seems easy to ignore, you're not alone. Most Americans don't get the 25 to 38 grams a day that's recommended, depending on age and gender.

But if you're skimping on fiber, the health stakes are high, especially if you're a teenage girl.

A study published Monday in the journal Pediatrics concludes that eating lots of fiber-rich foods during high school years may significantly reduce a woman's risk of developing breast cancer.

The findings are based on a long-term study of 44,000 women who were surveyed about their eating habits in high school. The women also completed detailed questionnaires about their dietary habits every four years.

The researchers found that women who consumed high levels of fiber (28 grams per day, on average) had a 24 percent lower risk of developing breast cancer before menopause, compared with women who ate low levels of fiber (14 grams per day, on average). For the women on the high-fiber diet, the lifetime risk of developing breast cancer was also cut by 16 percent.

Of course, the idea that high-fiber diets can help keep us healthy is not new. It's well-known that fiber can prevent constipation and keep the bowel moving by making stools bulkier and absorbing water. Prior studies have shown dietary fiber can protect against colorectal cancer and may lower the risks of diabetes and heart disease. There's also a growing body of evidence linking fiber to weight management.

This new study provides some evidence of yet another potential benefit.

"This is a really important study ... [suggesting] that the more fiber you eat during your high school years, the lower your risk is in developing breast cancer," says Kimberly Blackwell, a breast cancer specialist at the Duke Cancer Center.

In a commentary accompanying the study in Pediatrics, Blackwell writes, "There is longstanding evidence that dietary fibers may reduce circulating estrogen levels." And this may help explain the reduced risk of breast cancer.

The authors point to other possible explanations, too. For instance, high-fiber diets may reduce the risk of breast cancer by improving insulin sensitivity, since fiber can slow down the absorption of sugars and help keep blood sugar levels more stable.

Maryam Farvid, a fellow at the Harvard School of Public Health who is lead author of the study, says the influence of fiber on cancer risk may be time-sensitive. Adolescence is "a period when breast cancer risk factors appear to be particularly important," she says.

One limitation of this new study is that it relies on data from women who had to recall what they ate during high school. They were in their 30s and 40 when asked, so there could be "recall bias" — the women's memories may be foggy.

"The recollection of dietary habits more than a decade earlier must be questioned," writes Blackwell. On the other hand, she says, "people's dietary habits don't really change a lot. ... In general, what you eat as a teenager is really formative as to what you eat later in life."

So, how might the message of this new study linking high-fiber diets to a lower risk of breast cancer be communicated to teenagers?

This is a question Kristi King, a dietitian at Texas Children's Hospital, has thought about a lot.

She says it can be hard to get the attention of teenagers about healthy eating. "Unfortunately for teenagers, they're [into] instant gratification," and they're not necessarily focused on how their actions today will influence their future health, she says.

But, she says, explaining that dietary choices may influence their risk of breast cancer may grab their attention. "Most teenage girls do know someone that has been affected by breast cancer," says King. "So I feel like that touches a nerve with them."

Given the known benefits of high-fiber diets and the growing evidence that fiber may play a role in preventing disease, the government's Dietary Guidelines for Americans also say most people need to consume more.

Women are advised to consume 25 grams a day. Men are advised to consume 38 grams a day.

So, how best to reach these targets? "Add fiber at each meal," says King, in the form of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, beans, nuts or seeds. Pears are a great bet with 7 grams of fiber apiece.

And check out fiber-rich snacks, like popcorn and edamame.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of describing the study, and also explicitly addresses a potential weakness in the work: namely, that it “relies on data from women who had to recall what they ate during high school. They were in their 30s and 40 when asked, so there could be “recall bias” — the women’s memories may be foggy.” The story would have been even stronger if it had noted that this was an observational study, rather than a clinical study, which means that using causative verbs to describe the results (e.g. fiber “may help protect” against breast cancer) is not justified. Stories on studies like this should always state the dietary element is “associated with” or “linked to” a beneficial outcome.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental therapy for type 1 diabetes, widely derided by mainstream diabetes researchers, lowered blood sugar levels to near normal, a small, ongoing trial found. Patients in the trial, whose blood sugar levels have remained near normal for five to eight years, take about one-third less insulin than they did before, reducing their risk of hypoglycemia, in which insulin lowers blood sugar to dangerously low levels.

The experimental treatment, a decades-old generic vaccine for tuberculosis called bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), seems to alter both cellular metabolism and the immune system, said Dr. Denise Faustman of Massachusetts General Hospital, senior author of the study published Thursday in npj Vaccines. “This cheap, old vaccine is lowering blood sugar to levels never achieved before,” she said.

While the results, from only nine patients, must be replicated in a larger study, said Dr. Joseph Bellanti of Georgetown University Medical Center, “if what they found is true, they really have something here.” Bellanti, who was not involved in the research, said the study’s eight-year follow-up and use of a placebo control arm made him “cautiously optimistic” that two doses of the BCG vaccine “can decrease levels of A1c,” a measure of blood glucose that predicts the likelihood of serious complications such as stroke and kidney failure.

JDRF (formerly the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation), the Joslin Diabetes Center, and several university diabetes centers all declined to speak about Faustman’s results. She has been a voice in the diabetes wilderness for nearly two decades, angering the establishment diabetes community by pursuing low-tech research very different from more popular approaches, such as embryonic stem cells and immunosupression.

Critics have gone so far as to send letters to newspapers that covered her work apologizing to patients “on behalf of Dr. Faustman” for “having their expectations cruelly raised.” She has also struggled for funding, receiving much of her research support from the private Iacocca Family Foundation, rather than in federal grants.

In Faustman’s Phase 1 clinical trial, three participants with type 1 diabetes received two doses of BCG vaccine, a month apart. After the vaccine showed signs of effectiveness, an additional six patients were vaccinated five years ago, and 111 more recently. The new paper and a presentation scheduled for a meeting of the American Diabetes Association this weekend focus on the patients who have been followed for more than five years.

All of those patients who received BCG had a statistically significant change in hemoglobin A1c. A normal level is below 6. In the vaccinated patients, A1c levels fell from an average of 7.36 before the first dose to 6.18 after five years, holding almost steady at 6.65 in the eighth year. In patients receiving a sham injection, levels showed almost no change from their initial levels of 7.10: 7.07 in the fifth year and 7.22 in the eighth.

“We wanted it to be good, but we didn’t know it would be this good,” Faustman said.

All of the patients remain on insulin, she said, but less of it. They are also able to monitor their blood sugar less frequently, which can be several times an hour. (The standard of care is a continuous glucose monitor, in which a probe is inserted into the abdomen, plus an insulin pump.) “If we can gradually move people to where they can control their blood sugar, their minute-to-minute lifestyle can improve dramatically,” Faustman said.

The A1c reductions could also bring significant health benefits. Every 10 percent drop, research shows, reduces complications such as stroke and heart attack by about one-third. The BCG vaccine lowered A1c levels 9 percent to 16 percent.

The new paper describes how the BCG vaccine, which has been used for nearly 100 years against tuberculosis and is considered extremely safe, might affect diabetes. According to studies in mice, it has two effects. It alters the immune system so as to increase levels of T regulatory cells; T regs keep other immune cells in check, including those that attack the pancreas’s insulin-making cells — the root cause of type 1 diabetes. In addition, BCG alters metabolism so cells consume higher levels of glucose, drawing more of it out of the blood, in a process called aerobic glycolysis.

“The clinical effects and the proposed mechanism demonstrated are exciting and add to the emerging consensus that the BCG vaccine can have a lasting and valuable impact on the immune system,” said Dr. Mihai Netea of Radboud University Medical Center in the Netherlands, who was not involved in the study.

A Phase 2 clinical trial of BCG is currently underway at Mass. General. It is testing multiple BCG doses in 150 patients with longstanding type 1 diabetes.

Although many studies of BCG are underway around the world in diabetes and other autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis, there has been little interest among U.S. researchers outside Faustman’s lab.

“There is not a lot of enthusiasm because we’re all rewarded for discovering for-profit drugs,” she said. “Potential funders come [to my lab] and ask, ‘How can we make money off this?’”

BCG, whose one licensed manufacturer in the U.S. is Merck subsidiary Organon Teknika, costs less than a dollar a dose. (Faustman used a strain made by Sanofi.) The U.S. market for insulin meters and insulin pumps is $20 billion. “With everyone thinking they need a pump and a meter, if you come along with an inexpensive vaccine that can change this standard of care, of course there will be pushback,” Faustman said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story notes in the headline that it’s a small study and explains that the study involved only nine patients. However, it also notes that these patients were followed up for five to eight years and that there was a placebo control group (of three patients). It also notes that 111 additional patients have received the vaccine more recently, though the study’s follow-up data did not include this larger group.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON – November 13, 2015 – A clinical trial among more than 300 patients has found that the drug ranibizumab (Lucentis) is highly effective in treating proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), a complication of diabetes that can severely damage eyesight. The results, published by the Journal of the American Medical Association, demonstrate the first major therapy advance for the condition in nearly 40 years.

Funded by the National Eye Institute (NEI) and conducted by the Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net), the trial compared Lucentis injections with a type of laser therapy called panretinal photocoagulation, which has remained the gold standard for PDR since the mid-1970s. Although laser therapy preserves central vision, it can damage night and side vision, so researchers have sought therapies that lack these side effects.

The trial results “provide crucial evidence for a safe and effective alternative to laser therapy against PDR,” said NEI Director Paul A. Sieving, M.D., Ph.D.

“Patients who received Lucentis showed a little bit better central vision, much less loss of their side vision, and substantially less risk for surgery than patients who received laser treatment,” said Lloyd Paul Aiello, M.D., Ph.D., director of the Beetham Eye Institute at Joslin Diabetes Center and Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School. “These findings will change the available treatment options for patients with PDR.”

Diabetic retinopathy damages blood vessels in the light-sensitive retina in the back of the eye. As the disease worsens, blood vessels can swell and lose their ability to function properly. Diabetic retinopathy becomes proliferative when lack of blood flow in the retina increases production of a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which can stimulate the growth of new, abnormal blood vessels. These new vessels are prone to bleeding into the center of the eye, sometimes requiring a surgical procedure called a vitrectomy to clear the blood. The abnormal blood vessels can also cause scarring and retinal detachment. Untreated, PDR is associated with high risk of visual loss. Lucentis is among several drugs that block the effects of VEGF.

Dr. Aiello and George King, M.D., Chief Scientific Officer at Joslin Diabetes Center and Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School, pioneered the study of VEGF in diabetic eye disease, beginning in the early 1990s. (Their work followed a distinguished Joslin tradition—the basic laser photocoagulation technique was developed in the 1960s by Dr. Aiello’s father, Lloyd M. Aiello, M.D., and grandfather, William P. Beetham, M.D.)

About 7.7 million U.S. residents have diabetic retinopathy, a leading cause of blindness among working-age Americans. Among these, about 1.5 percent have progressed to PDR.

The DRCR.net enrolled 305 participants (394 eyes) with PDR in one or both eyes at 55 clinical sites across the country. Eyes were assigned randomly to treatment with Lucentis or laser. About half of the eyes assigned to the laser group required more than one round of laser treatment. In the other group, Lucentis was injected into the eye once per month for three consecutive months, and then as needed until the disease resolved or stabilized.

Because Lucentis is commonly injected to treat diabetic macular edema (DME)—a build-up of fluid in the center of the retina—the study permitted the use of Lucentis for DME in the laser group, if necessary. Slightly more than half (53 percent) of eyes in the laser group received Lucentis injections to treat DME. About 6 percent of eyes in the Lucentis group received laser therapy, mostly for issues other than DME.

At two years, vision in the Lucentis group improved by an average of about half a line on an eye chart, compared with virtually no change in the laser group.

Participants treated with laser generally lost substantial peripheral vision, but those given injections did not, emphasized Jennifer Sun, M.D., M.P.H., Associate Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School and physician at the Beetham Eye Institute.

“This was a clear benefit associated with the anti-VEGF medication,” said Dr. Sun, who as the DRCR.net nationwide Protocol Working Investigator was instrumental in the study’s development. “Many of our patients who have laser treatment notice that they have more tunnel vision, which can lead to difficulties as they go about activities of daily life. The use of anti-VEGF treatment rather than laser for PDR could help prevent these symptoms.”

Additionally, the need for vitrectomy surgery was lower in the Lucentis group (8 of 191 eyes) than in the laser group (30 of 203 eyes).

Overall, the drug’s benefits are particularly clear for people with both PDR and DME. “We know that this drug will help treat both conditions at the same time, so this is an especially appealing treatment alternative for these patients,” Dr. Aiello noted.

“Lucentis should be considered a viable treatment option for people with PDR, especially for individuals needing anti-VEGF for DME,” said Jeffrey G. Gross, M.D., of the Carolina Retina Center in Columbia, South Carolina, who chaired the clinical study.

The study also suggested that Lucentis may help prevent DME. Among people without this condition at the start of the study, only 9 percent of Lucentis-treated eyes developed it, compared with 28 percent in the laser group. Scientists will follow up on that result as the DRCR.net continues to track patients for a total of five years.

A separate clinical trial, now getting underway, will examine whether anti-VEGF injections given at an earlier stage of diabetic eye disease can help prevent people from developing both DME and the sight-threatening PDR stage of the disease at all, Dr. Aiello said.

The trial reported today “is a major study that may substantially change our approach to treatment of PDR,” summed up Dr. Sun. “Laser still has a role in the treatment of PDR for some patients, but anti-VEGF therapy gives us another tool in our search for better vision outcomes in our patients with diabetes.”

Founded in 1898, Joslin Diabetes Center is world-renowned for its deep expertise in diabetes treatment and research. Joslin is an independent, non-profit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and a federally-designated Diabetes Research Center. Joslin is dedicated to finding a cure for diabetes and ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives. We develop and disseminate innovative patient therapies and scientific discoveries throughout the world.

Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit www.joslin.org.

Joslin Research comprises the most comprehensive and productive effort in diabetes research under one roof anywhere in the world. With 30‐plus faculty‐level investigators, Joslin researchers focus on unraveling the biological, biochemical and genetic processes that underlie the development of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and related complications.

Joslin research is highly innovative and imaginative, employing the newest tools in genetics, genomics and proteomics to identify abnormalities that may play a role in the development of diabetes and its complications. Joslin Clinic patients, and others with diabetes, have the option of participating in clinical trials at Joslin to help translate basic research into treatment innovations.

Joslin has one of the largest diabetes training programs in the world, educating 150 M.D. and Ph.D. researchers each year, many of whom go on to head diabetes initiatives at leading institutions all over the globe. For more information, visit www.joslinresearch.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a good job of describing the study design, the number of participants, and the fact that this was a randomized clinical trial. A few words about the limitations of the study — e.g. the investigators and patients could not be masked to which treatment they were getting, would have be useful as well.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A year-long, head-to-head study of four widely used diets found that overweight women who followed the very low-carbohydrate Atkins diet had no adverse health effects and lost slightly more weight than women on the other three.

The study by Stanford University researchers compared the Atkins approach with three others: the standard low-fat, reduced-calorie regimen long recommended by many physicians and weight-loss experts; the Zone, a reduced-carbohydrate approach developed by author Barry Sears; and the very low-fat, high-carbohydrate regimen created by Dean Ornish.

The latest findings add to a growing body of evidence that the high-protein Atkins diet does not cause the harmful heart and artery effects long feared by many researchers.

Women who followed the Atkins plan had a significant drop in triglycerides, one of the unhealthful blood fats linked to a higher risk of heart disease. Their blood pressure also dropped the most of the four groups, a finding that the researchers think may relate to their slightly greater weight loss. Those in the Atkins group also experienced the largest increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL), a protective type of cholesterol.

Most important, the Atkins group did not develop the soaring levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) that some experts have thought might result from eating a diet rich in saturated fat and cholesterol found in fatty cuts of meat, butter and cream. High levels of LDL are a major risk factor for heart disease. The study found that while LDL rose slightly for those in the Atkins group, their blood levels did not differ statistically from the other groups.

"This is the best study so far to compare popular diets," said Walter Willett, chair of the department of nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health, because of its size, duration and the small number who dropped out. The findings confirm, he said, that reducing carbohydrates, "especially those with refined starch and sugar like that found in the U.S. diet, has metabolic benefits." It also shows that replacing these carbohydrates with either fat or protein "can improve blood cholesterol fractions and blood pressure," he said.

The findings "are pretty much in line with what all the other studies have shown comparing Atkins and low-fat diets," said Bonnie Brehm, assistant professor of nutrition at the University of Cincinnati College of Nursing and co-author of two, independent studies of the Atkins diet. "We have found the same thing with all of our trials."

As for weight loss, the goal that concerns dieters the most, none of the groups managed to shed the large numbers of pounds touted by weight-loss programs and television shows such as "The Biggest Loser."

All the participants reported eating about 2,000 calories a day when the study began. All also reported having cut their intake -- some by as much as 500 calories per day at two to six months -- but then gradually adding back many of those calories. But as researchers noted, if participants ate as little as they said, all the groups would have lost much more weight.

At first, the Atkins group lost weight faster. But as in previous studies, the pounds shed began to even out across the four groups. After a year, women in the Atkins group averaged a modest 10-pound loss compared with about six pounds for those in the other groups.

Both the authors and other weight-loss experts were quick to note that the new findings did not answer the question of what is the best way for most people to shed weight.

"This isn't a study testing how well you would do if you followed these diets to the letter," notes Christopher Gardner, assistant professor of medicine at the Stanford Prevention Research Center and lead author of the study, which appears in tomorrow's Journal of the American Medical Association. "This is a study that shows what happens if you bought the book and tried to follow" the diets, as most dieters do.

The 311 overweight and obese women in the study were randomly assigned to one of the four groups. Each received a book detailing her prescribed diet. For the first eight weeks, the women also attended one-hour weekly group sessions with a registered dietitian trained to explain the diet in detail. Participants received follow-up phone calls and e-mails to remind them of appointments, and they were paid $25 to $75 for each appointment they made.

Reactions to the findings were mixed.

"It's bad science, good publicity," said the Zone's Sears.

"For all practical purposes, the programs all worked about the same," said Kelly D. Brownell, director of Yale University's Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity and creator of the Lifestyle, Exercise, Attitudes, Relationships and Nutrition (LEARN) program for weight management, one of the diets studied. The extra four pounds lost by the Atkins group are not very meaningful, Brownell said.

Others were more critical.

"This study is seriously flawed, and its conclusions misleading," said Ornish, clinical professor of medicine at the University of California at San Francisco. A careful read of the study shows "no significant difference in weight loss between the Atkins and Ornish or LEARN diets after one year!" he noted in an e-mail. "There was significantly more weight loss on the Atkins diet after one year only when compared with the Zone diet. This directly contradicts their primary conclusion."

All low-carbohydrate diets are not necessarily created equal, however. A study last year by Willett and his colleagues in the New England Journal of Medicine found that women on low-carb diets who ate mostly animal fat and animal protein did not reduce their risk of heart disease. But those who ate vegetable forms of protein, such as soy, and fat, such as olive oil, did reduce their risk of heart disease. As Willett said yesterday, "lower-carbohydrate diets look like a good option, but if you consider them, eat olive oil and fish rather than butter and sausage."
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story presented the results of a recently published scientific article on a randomized trial comparing four popular weight loss diets.  It presented estimates of the weight loss observed after one year and mentioned changes in other clinical parameters (triglcyerides, blood pressure, HDL cholesterol) without providing precise details about these. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Advising patient with chronic sinus congestion to use nasal irrigation - a popular nonpharmacologic treatment - improved their symptoms, but steam inhalation did not, according to a randomized controlled trial published in CMAJ (Canadian Medical Association Journal).

More than 25 million people in the United States and about 2.5 million Canadians suffer from chronic rhinosinusitis, or sinus infection, and experience compromised quality of life. To alleviate symptoms, steam inhalation and nasal irrigation are widely suggested as an alternative to common treatment with antibiotics, which are often not effective and contribute to antibiotic resistance.

Researchers from the United Kingdom conducted a randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of advice from primary care physicians to use nasal irrigation and/or steam inhalation for chronic sinusitis. The study involved 871 patients from 72 primary care practices in England who were randomly assigned to 1 of 4 advice strategies: usual care, daily nasal and saline irrigation supported by a demonstration video, daily steam inhalation, or combined treatment with both interventions.

"We have found that even a very brief intervention of a video showing patients how to use saline nasal irrigation can improve symptoms, help people feel they do not need to see the doctor to manage the problem, and reduce the amount of over-the-counter medication they need to use," said Dr. Paul Little, Primary Care and Population Sciences Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Patients who were instructed to use nasal irrigation showed improvement at 3 and 6 months, as measured by the Rhinosinusitis Disability Index. Steam inhalation did not appear to alleviate symptoms of sinusitis.

"We found potentially important changes in other outcomes; in particular, fewer participants in the nasal irrigation group than in the no-irrigation group had headaches, used over-the-counter medications and intended to consult a doctor in future episodes," write the authors. "Although there was no significant difference in either physician visits or antibiotic use, as might be expected over only a 6-month follow-up period, our findings concerning consultations are important in the longer term, given antibiotic use increases the risk of antimicrobial resistance."

Since the impact was less than in previous studies that had used more intensive coaching about nasal irrigation, the authors suggest that further research is needed to understand how much coaching of patients is required.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release makes clear that this was a randomized controlled trial of about 871 patients who were followed for six months. We think this helps the reader judge the quality of the evidence.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Hamilton, ON August 11, 2016 - A study led by McMaster University researchers has found that, contrary to recent reports, flu nasal sprays provide similar protection against influenza as standard flu shots.

Published today in the scientific journal Annals of Internal Medicine, the study shows that the nose spray had a similar effect to the standard flu shot. Previous recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) had previously called for nasal sprays, or live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV), not be used during the 2016-2017 flu season.

Dr. Mark Loeb, lead author of the study, says his team's findings challenge the ACIP's recommendations towards flu shots, or inactivated vaccines.

"Our study is the first blinded randomized controlled trial to compare the direct and indirect effect of the live vaccine versus the inactivated vaccine," said Loeb, a professor in McMaster's Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine.

"Our results are important because in previous years the live vaccine had first been preferred for children. In fact, as late as June 2014, the live vaccine was preferred. Then, subsequently, it was no longer preferred and now not recommended at all. Our trial showed no difference between the two in protecting entire communities."

For the study, Loeb's team conducted a three-year trial in a Hutterite colony, where people live communally and are relatively isolated from cities and towns, to determine whether vaccinating children and adolescents with the flu nasal spray provided better direct and community protection than the standard flu shot.

The researchers randomly assigned 1,186 children in 52 Hutterite colonies in Alberta and Saskatchewan, Canada to receive either the nasal spray vaccine or the flu shot and also followed 3,425 community members who did not receive a flu vaccine.

Average vaccine coverage among children in the nasal spray group was 76.9 per cent versus 72.3 per cent in the flu shot group.

The original intention of the study was to show that nasal spray vaccines would provide better protection than flu shots, but Loeb says the conclusions of the study are now especially important, given the ACIP's recommendations.

"The ACIP's decision was an unprecedented decision in influenza vaccine policy-making for children. Our study challenges previous studies because our results show conclusively that the vaccines show similar protection when both direct and indirect effects are taken into account."

Loeb says his team will continue to study herd immunity with different vaccine formulations by vaccinating children. They are also looking at the effect of repeated vaccination of children.

This study was funded by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.

A downloadable photo of Dr. Mark Loeb is available here
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release points out that the study was the “first blinded randomized controlled trial” done in children within largely closed communities and it found similar efficacy in using the two modes of immunization.
However, we do wish the release had addressed limitations, as well as some of the complexity of making these results generalizable to a larger population, as we saw with NPR’s take on the news.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Eric P. Winer, chief of women’s cancers at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, said that even women who completed their five years of tamoxifen months or years ago might consider starting on the drug again.

Tamoxifen blocks the effect of the hormone estrogen, which fuels tumor growth in estrogen receptor-positive cancers that account for about 65 percent of cases in premenopausal women. Some small studies in the 1990s suggested that there was no benefit to using tamoxifen longer than five years, so that has been the standard.

About 227,000 cases of breast cancer are diagnosed each year in the United States, and an estimated 30,000 of them are in premenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive cancer and prime candidates for tamoxifen. But postmenopausal women also take tamoxifen if they cannot tolerate the alternative drugs, known as aromatase inhibitors.

The new study, known as Atlas, included nearly 7,000 women with ER-positive disease who had completed five years of tamoxifen. They came from about three dozen countries. Half were chosen at random to take the drug another five years, while the others were told to stop.

In the group assigned to take tamoxifen for 10 years, 21.4 percent had a recurrence of breast cancer in the ensuing 10 years, meaning the period 5 to 14 years after their diagnoses. The recurrence rate for those who took only five years of tamoxifen was 25.1 percent.

About 12.2 percent of those in the 10-year treatment group died from breast cancer, compared with 15 percent for those in the control group.

There was virtually no difference in death and recurrence between the two groups during the five years of extra tamoxifen. The difference came in later years, suggesting that tamoxifen has a carry-over effect that lasts long after women stop taking it.

Whether these differences are big enough to cause women to take the drug for twice as long remains to be seen.

“The treatment effect is real, but it’s modest,” said Dr. Paul E. Goss, director of breast cancer research at the Massachusetts General Hospital.

Tamoxifen has side effects, including endometrial cancer, blood clots and hot flashes, which cause many women to stop taking the drug. In the Atlas trial, it appears that roughly 40 percent of the patients assigned to take tamoxifen for the additional five years stopped prematurely.

Some 3.1 percent of those taking the extra five years of tamoxifen got endometrial cancer versus 1.6 percent in the control group. However, only 0.6 percent of those in the longer treatment group died from endometrial cancer or pulmonary blood clots, compared with 0.4 percent in the control group.

“Over all, the benefits of extended tamoxifen seemed to outweigh the risks substantially,” Trevor J. Powles of the Cancer Center London, said in a commentary published by The Lancet.

Dr. Judy E. Garber, director of the Center for Cancer Genetics and Prevention at Dana-Farber, said many women have a love-hate relationship with hormone therapies.

“They don’t feel well on them, but it’s their safety net,” said Dr. Garber, who added that the news would be welcomed by many patients who would like to stay on the drug. “I have patients who agonize about this, people who are coming to the end of their tamoxifen.”

Emily Behrend, who is a few months from finishing her five years on tamoxifen, said she would definitely consider another five years. “If it can keep the cancer away, I’m all for it,” said Ms. Behrend, 39, a single mother in Tomball, Tex. She is taking the antidepressant Effexor to help control the night sweats and hot flashes caused by tamoxifen.

Cost is not considered a huge barrier to taking tamoxifen longer because the drug can be obtained for less than $200 a year.

The results, while answering one question, raise many new ones, including whether even more than 10 years of treatment would be better still.

Perhaps the most important question is what the results mean for postmenopausal women. Even many women who are premenopausal at the time of diagnosis will pass through menopause by the time they finish their first five years of tamoxifen, or will have been pushed into menopause by chemotherapy.

Postmenopausal patients tend to take aromatase inhibitors like anastrozole or letrozole, which are more effective than tamoxifen at preventing breast cancer recurrence, though they do not work for premenopausal women.

Mr. Peto said he thought the results of the Atlas study would “apply to endocrine therapy in general,” meaning that 10 years of an aromatase inhibitor would be better than five years. Other doctors were not so sure.

The Atlas study was paid for by various organizations including the United States Army, the British government and AstraZeneca, which makes the brand-name version of tamoxifen.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Clearly, evenly presented and referenced.
One observation: as the story noted, about 40% of patients assigned to take tamoxifen stopped prematurely.  This could have an impact on the results of this study and we would like to have seen more discussion about limitations of the results.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Community screening for osteoporosis could prevent more than a quarter of hip fractures in older women, according to new research.

A new study, published in The Lancet, has shown that a simple questionnaire, combined with bone mineral density measurements for some, would help identify those at risk of hip fracture.

The research, involving more than 12,000 older women and carried out in collaboration between the universities of Birmingham, East Anglia, Bristol, Leicester, York and Sheffield, found that screening through GP practices allowed patients to be targeted for treatment. In women agreeing to participate, this led to a 28 per cent reduction in hip fractures over five years.

Professor Neil Gittoes, of the University of Birmingham's Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, said: "Our findings showed that screening led to a statistically significant decrease in hip fractures. "Our data has the potential to influence national policies around prevention of hip fractures, which is particularly relevant in our ageing society. The consequences of hip fractures to older people can be devastating, including impaired mobility and loss of independence. "While we have demonstrated clinical effectiveness of screening, we are also exploring cost-effectiveness of this approach; initial analyses also look promising in this respect."

Professor Lee Shepstone, from UEA's Norwich Medical School, said: "Approximately one in three women and one in five men aged over 50 year will suffer a fragility fracture during their remaining lifetime. In the UK around 536,000 people suffer fragility fractures each year, including 79,000 hip fractures.

"A hip fracture can be devastating with a loss of independence and less than one third of patients make a full recovery. Mortality at one-year post-fracture is approximately 20 per cent."

"We wanted to find out whether screening, like screening for breast cancer, could help identify those at risk of suffering a fracture."

The team used a University of Sheffield developed tool called FRAX, which predicts the probability of a hip fracture or a major osteoporotic fracture (a hip, spine, upper arm or lower arm fracture), to identify older women at high risk.

A total of 12,483 women aged 70-85 were recruited from 100 GP practices in seven regions -Birmingham, Bristol, Manchester, Norwich, Sheffield, Southampton, and York. Half of the women were screened to compare screening with routine care.

Among those screened, treatment was subsequently recommended for one in seven women deemed at high risk of hip fracture. This recommendation was acted upon by the women and their GPs so that over three quarters of the women at high risk were on osteoporosis medications within six months of screening.

While screening did not reduce the incidence of all osteoporosis-related fractures, there was strong evidence for a reduction in hip fractures.

In the screening group, there were 54 fewer women who suffered one or more hip fractures compared to the routine care group.

The study suggests that one hip fracture could be prevented for every 111 women screened and early analysis suggests the approach is likely to be cost-effective.

Professor Shepstone added: "This is the first trial to show that a community-screening approach based on the FRAX fracture risk tool is both feasible and effective. Given that the number of costly and debilitating hip fractures are expected to increase with an ageing population, the results of this study potentially have important public health implications."

Professor Eugene McCloskey, of the University of Sheffield, said: "Low-cost screening with FRAX among the older population could result in effective, targeted intervention to reduce the human and socioeconomic burden of hip fractures.

"If the SCOOP screening strategy was taken up in exactly the same way as in the study in all UK women aged 70-85 years, we estimate that the strategy could prevent up to 8000 hip fractures per year in the UK. Even greater gains could be made if we could reach out to women similar to those who did not take part in the study."

The randomised controlled trial 'SCreening for Osteoporosis in Older women for the Prevention of fracture' (SCOOP) was funded by the Medical Research Council and Arthritis Research UK.

Dr Natalie Carter, head of research liaison and evaluation at Arthritis Research UK, said: "Ten of thousands of people a year present with hip fractures in the UK. As well as significantly increasing mortality, a hip fracture can stop a person's ability to live independently, with 43% no longer being able to walk independently in the year after the fracture. "We welcome this community based screening programme and any other research that reduces the likelihood of fractures."

For further information or interviews contact Emma McKinney, Press Office, University of Birmingham, at +44 (0)121 414 6681 or contact the Press Office out of hours on 44-0-7789-921165.
• The University of Birmingham is ranked amongst the world's top 100 institutions. Its work brings people from across the world to Birmingham, including researchers, teachers and more than 5,000 international students from over 150 countries.
• Shepstone et al (2017). 'Screening in the community to reduce fractures in older women (SCOOP): a randomised controlled trial'. The Lancet.
• FRAX® is a simple calculation tool that integrates clinical information in a quantitative manner to predict a 10-year probability of major osteoporotic fracture for both women and men in different countries. The tool, launched by the then WHO Collaborating Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases in 2008, was developed at the Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of Sheffield, UK in collaboration with international researchers. It assists primary health-care providers to better target people in need of interventions to reduce fracture risk, thus improving the allocation of health-care resources towards patients most likely to benefit from treatment. The FRAX calculator is now freely available for 63 countries and in 34 languages.
• The International Osteoporosis Foundation (IOF) is the world's largest nongovernmental organization dedicated to the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis and related musculoskeletal diseases. IOF members, including committees of scientific researchers as well as 240 patient, medical and research societies in 99 locations, work together to make fracture prevention and healthy mobility a worldwide heath care priority.
• Arthritis Research UK invests in breakthrough treatments, the best information and vital support for everyone affected by arthritis. We believe that by harnessing the power of exceptional science we can overcome the pain, isolation and fatigue arthritis causes, making everyday life better for all 10 million people with arthritis in the UK.

* Researchers involved in this study are affiliated to the following:

School of Medicine, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK 

Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, UK 

Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK 

Department of Rheumatology, University Hospitals Bristol, Bristol, UK 

Medical Research Council Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK 

College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK 

Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK 

Leicester Medical School, Centre for Medicine, University of Leicester, UK 

National Institute of Health Research Manchester Musculoskeletal BRU, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust & 

Arthritis Research UK Centre for Epidemiology, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK 

Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York, UK 

Centre for Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK 

Mellanby Centre for Bone Research, Centre for Integrated Research into Musculoskeletal Ageing, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK 

Australian Catholic University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release goes into great detail about the study design, the number of participants, and the sampling procedure. The release indicates that 12,000 women were randomized and notes that the follow up was 5 years, which is helpful information.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — BOSTON – (February 19, 2015) – In the first clinical trial directly comparing three drugs most commonly used to treat diabetic macular edema, researchers found all were effective in improving vision and preventing vision loss. However, one drug, aflibercept, provided greater improvement for people with more severe vision loss when treatment was initiated. The trial was conducted by the National Eye Institute Diabetic Retinopathy Clinical Research Network (DRCR.net) including researchers from Joslin Diabetes Center. The results appeared in the February online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.

Diabetes is a significant risk factor for developing eye diseases. The most common diabetic eye disease and a leading cause of blindness is diabetic retinopathy, which is caused by elevated blood sugar levels damaging the blood vessels of the retina and affects approximately 7.7 million Americans. About 750,000 Americans with diabetic retinopathy have diabetic macular edema (DME) in which fluid leaks into the macula, the area of the retina used when looking straight ahead. The fluid causes the macula to swell, blurring vision. “DME is the leading cause of moderate vision loss in working-age adults with diabetes. With the rate of diabetes increasing dramatically worldwide, many individuals will be at risk for vision loss from diabetic eye complications and DME is a major global health concern,” says Jennifer K. Sun, M.D., M.P.H., a member of the study research team and writing committee, and an Investigator in the Section on Vascular Biology, an ophthalmologist in Beetham Eye Institute at Joslin and an Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical School.

In an earlier study, Joslin researchers reported that VEGF, a major growth factor for blood vessels, is elevated in the eye fluids of patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy and DME, causing leakage and the growth of abnormal blood vessels. Over the past few years, drugs that target VEGF have become a standard treatment for DME, providing a preferred alternative or adjunct to laser treatment. The standard Medicare per-injection costs of the three anti-VEGF drugs evaluated in the study are about $1960 for aflibercept (Eylea), $1200 for ranibizumab (Lucentis) and $70 for bevacizumab (Avastin).

At the start of the trial, 660 adults with DME were enrolled: their average age was 61 years and 90 percent had type 2 diabetes. About half of the participants had 20/32 or 20/40 vision and the other half had vision of 20/50 or worse. They were randomized into three treatment groups and received the assigned study drug by injection into the eye until the DME resolved or stabilized. Participants on bevacizumab and ranibizumab received, on average, 10 injections, versus nine for those on aflibercept.

One year after starting treatment, all participants had improved vision. Those with mild vision loss (20/32 to 20/40) at baseline in all three treatment groups gained on average almost two lines on an eye chart. For participants with more severe vision loss (20/50 or worse), aflibercept improved vision on average nearly four lines, bevacizumab about 2.5 lines, and ranibizumab almost three lines.

“The results clearly remove any doubts about anti-VEGF drugs’ efficacy in treating DME. All three drugs improved vision substantially, with aflibercept showing more visual gains in patients with worse vision at the start of the trial. Physicians now have robust data to help them counsel patients and make informed decisions regarding treatment options,” says study co-author Lloyd P. Aiello, M.D., Ph.D., Professor of Ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, Director of Joslin’s Beetham Eye Institute, co-head of Joslin's Section of Vascular Cell Biology, and founding chair of the DRCR Network.

In light of these positive results, “it is more important than ever for patients with diabetes to be evaluated on a regular basis for eye disease and receive treatment promptly once indicated as we now have excellent success in treating patients with DME,” says Dr. Aiello.

The trial was supported through a cooperative agreement from the National Eye Institute and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Regeneron Pharmaceutical provided the aflibercept and Genentech provided the ranibizumab for the study. The DRCR.net had complete control over the design of the study, data ownership and content of presentations and publications related to this study.

Joslin Diabetes Center, based in Boston, Massachusetts, undertakes diabetes research, clinical care, education and health and wellness programs on a global scale. Joslin is dedicated to ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives and offers real progress in preventing and curing diabetes. Joslin is an independent, nonprofit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and is recognized worldwide for driving innovative solutions in diabetes prevention, research, education, and care.

Our mission is to prevent, treat and cure diabetes. Our vision is a world free of diabetes and its complications. For more information, visit www.joslin.org.

Joslin Research comprises the most comprehensive and productive effort in diabetes research under one roof anywhere in the world. With 30‐plus faculty‐level investigators, Joslin researchers focus on unraveling the biological, biochemical and genetic processes that underlie the development of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and related complications.

Joslin research is highly innovative and imaginative, employing the newest tools in genetics, genomics and proteomics to identify abnormalities that may play a role in the development of diabetes and its complications. Joslin Clinic patients, and others with diabetes, have the option of participating in clinical trials at Joslin to help translate basic research into treatment innovations.

Joslin has one of the largest diabetes training programs in the world, educating 150 M.D. and Ph.D. researchers each year, many of whom go on to head diabetes initiatives at leading institutions all over the globe. For more information, visit www.joslinresearch.org.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release tells us that the results were published in the New England Journal of Medicine. And while the story does not include the statistical comparisons of the three drugs, it does show, by vision improvement, the outcomes. Also included are the numbers of patients and the general study methodology. It’s clear from the release that this was a well-conducted study that has important implications for practice.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, July 6, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- For the millions of Americans with chronic low back pain, a silver bullet to alleviate the condition has yet to be identified, a new study suggests.

Reviewing 26 studies comparing spinal manipulative therapy (SMT) to other treatments such as medication, exercise or physical therapy, researchers from the Netherlands found that SMT appears to be no better or worse than other options at relieving back pain long-term.

The analyses indicated that SMT -- which involves manual manipulation of the spine and surrounding muscles -- has only a short-term impact on pain relief, although it eases pain faster than other treatments.

"In short, no single therapy is better than another, although some individuals are likely to have more success with one therapy than another," said study author Sidney Rubinstein, a research fellow at VU University Medical Center in Amsterdam.

"Current studies are focusing on which subjects are more likely to benefit from spinal manipulation, exercise, or other therapies," he added. "Spinal manipulation should be considered a viable treatment option for those with non-specific, chronic low back pain."

The study was recently published in the journal Spine.

More than 6,000 patients were included in the compilation of results, which the study authors said were sparse in data indicating participants' overall recovery, quality of life and ability to return to work. The studies also varied in quality, with only nine of 26 considered "low [in] bias," according to background information accompanying the study.

In all evaluations, patients were randomly assigned to SMT or another comparison treatment, including active treatments such as exercise or inactive placebo treatments.

About two-thirds of the studies were not included in a previous review published in 2004, and all patients had suffered from lower back pain for 12 weeks or longer.

While chiropractors often perform SMT on patients, it is also administered by physical therapists and osteopaths. But which treatment is right for any patient depends not only on their specific pain, but their doctor's recommendations and their own comfort level with various options, said Stephen Perle, a spokesman for the American Chiropractic Association.

The cost of SMT sessions varies widely depending on the region, Perle said.

"Nobody has the answer at this time," Perle said. "I guess people in almost every profession like to say, 'We have a compelling treatment and it will work almost every time,' but that's just not the case."

"With low back pain, there are many reasons people don't get better," added Perle, also a professor of clinical sciences in the College of Chiropractic at the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut. "So the finding was not unexpected."

An unrelated study of 401 patients with low back pain, published July 5 in Annals of Internal Medicine, suggested that massage may be better than medication or exercise for short-term pain relief.

Seattle researchers found that those who received either relaxation massage or structural massage, which involved manipulation of muscles and ligaments, had less pain and better functioning for up to a year compared to those getting "usual medical care," which included medication and physical therapy.

The U.S. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has more information about low back pain.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The article provided the reader with an adequate amount of information about the study design and the inherent difficulties in interpretation of existing studies.

 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A new migraine drug that can halve the length of attacks has been hailed as “the start of real change” in how the condition is treated.

Erenumab, a laboratory-made antibody that blocks a neural brain pathway called CGRP, is the first drug in 20 years proven to prevent migraine attacks.

Phase three trial data on nearly 1,000 patients showed that it typically cut between three and four “migraine days” per month. In half the patients treated, migraine duration was reduced at least by half.

Migraines are characterised by an intense, throbbing headache, sensitivity to light and noise, nausea, vomiting, low energy, and visual disturbances. Attacks can last anything from four to 72 hours.

Each year more than 8.5 million people in the UK are thought to experience migraine – more than the number affected by asthma, diabetes and epilepsy combined.

The condition is linked to depression and sick days caused by migraine are estimated to cost the UK economy more than £2bn per year.

The trial, called Strive, compared patients taking erenumab for six months with others given a non-active placebo dummy drug. 



The research revealed that by months four to six, at least a 50% reduction in mean migraine days per month was achieved for just over 43% of patients injected under the skin with 70-mg of erenumab each month, while half of patients injected with the higher dose of 140-mg had such results. However, those given a placebo also saw benefits, with 26.6% of participants in this group experiencing such a reduction.



Lead investigator Prof Peter Goadsby, from King’s College hospital, London, said: “Strive … represents an incredibly important step forward for migraine understanding and migraine treatment.”

The findings, reported in the New England Journal of Medicine, clearly showed that blocking the CGRP pathway could reduce the impact of migraine, he said. “The results of Strive represent a real transition for migraine patients from poorly understood, re-purposed treatments, to a specific migraine-designed therapy.”

Simon Evans, chief executive of the charity Migraine Action, said: “Migraine is too often trivialised as just a headache when, in reality, it can be a debilitating, chronic condition that can destroy lives. The effects can last for hours, even days in many cases.

“An option that can prevent migraine and that is well tolerated is therefore sorely needed, and we hope that this marks the start of real change in how this condition is treated and perceived.” 



“Broadly speaking I think this is a very interesting study and I think it is a good step forward for the field and I think it is a good day for migraine sufferers,” said professor Zameel Cader, Director of the Oxford Headache Centre who was not involved in the research, pointing out that the results were on a par with currently available therapies for migraine.

“Placebo responses [in migraine studies] are quite high and I think that is partly due to the subjective nature of pain and because of the strong psychological effects that being treated have on that experience of pain and those symptoms,” he said, adding that injections generally result in an even stronger placebo effect than tablets.



Cader said that he too was looking at running trials using antibodies, and said he was excited about the approach since it might result in fewer side effects than current therapies, and would mean individuals would not have to remember to take a table every day.

“This is probably the first example of a migraine preventing drug that was rationally designed, rather than serendipitously found,” he added.

Amgen and Novartis, the codevelopers of erenumab, funded the trial, while Amgen also supplied the drug and conducted the data analyses.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Some key numbers from the study are recapped, including how roughly half of patients in the erenumab groups saw an approximately 50% decline in migraine-days-per-month. But the article also compared this result to the placebo group’s result of 26.6%, which suggests perhaps half of the effect might not be attributable to the drug — and added a source’s brief explanation as to why that number may have been so high. (Injections, the source says, tend to trigger strong placebo effects.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, Oct. 28, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A new noninvasive test to detect pre-cancerous polyps and colon tumors appears to be more accurate than current noninvasive tests such as the fecal occult blood test, Mayo clinic researchers say.

The search for a highly accurate, noninvasive alternative to invasive screens such as colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy is a "Holy Grail" of colon cancer research.

In a preliminary trial, the new test was able to identify 64 percent of pre-cancerous polyps and 85 percent of full-blown cancers, the researchers reported.

Dr. Floriano Marchetti, an assistant professor of clinical surgery in the division of colon and rectal surgery at University of Miami Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, said the new test could be an important adjunct to colon cancer screening if it proves itself in further study.

"Obviously, these findings need to be replicated on a larger scale," he said. "Hopefully, this is a good start for a more reliable test."

Dr. Durado Brooks, director of colorectal cancer at the American Cancer Society, agreed. "These findings are interesting," he said. "They will be more interesting if we ever get this kind of data in a screening population."

"There are 150,000 new cases of colon cancer each year in the United States, treated at an estimated cost of $14 billion," noted Dr. David A. Ahlquist, professor of medicine and a consultant in gastroenterology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.

"The dream is to eradicate colon cancer altogether and the most realistic approach to getting there is screening," he said. "And screening not only in a way that would not only detect cancer, but pre-cancer. Our test takes us closer to that dream."

Ahlquist was scheduled to present the findings of the study Thursday in Philadelphia at a meeting on colorectal cancer sponsored by the American Association for Cancer Research.

The new technology, called the Cologuard sDNA test, works by identifying specific altered DNA in cells shed by pre-cancerous or cancerous polyps into the patient's stool.

If a DNA abnormality is found, a colonoscopy would still be needed to confirm the results, just as happens now after a positive fecal occult blood test (FOBT) result.

To see whether the test was effective, Ahlquist's team tried it out on more than 1,100 frozen stool samples from patients with and without colorectal cancer.

The test was able to detect 85.3 percent of colorectal cancers and 63.8 percent of polyps bigger than 1 centimeter. Polyps this size are considered pre-cancers and most likely to progress to cancer, Ahlquist said.

The sensitivity of the test is much better than what has been seen in other stool screening tests, the ACS' Brooks added. "But, showing that in a small group of samples is very different from demonstrating that in a population where only a small number of individuals are going to have polyps of that size. Then we will know if this is a big step forward," he said.

According to Ahlquist, Cologuard is the first noninvasive test to detect pre-cancerous polyps, he added.

In addition, the test is the only one that is able to identify cancer in all locations throughout the colon, something which other tests either can't or don't do well, Ahlquist said.

One more advantage: patients do not need to do any special preparation before taking the test, something that other tests require, he added.

Ahlquist noted that the test still needs to be refined. "We learned there are still some bugs and we can make the test even better," he said.

Cologuard is not yet available for sale. Clinical trials comparing the test with colonoscopy are slated to start next year. Ahlquist hopes that the test will be approved and available within two years.

Ahlquist noted that the cost of the test has not yet been established. It is expected to cost more than a fecal occult blood test, but far less than a colonoscopy. A fecal occult blood test can cost as little as $23 while a colonoscopy can total $700.

Another benefit is that it would probably need to be done once every three years, while the fecal occult blood test is usually done yearly. Savings over time on a more accurate test done fewer times could justify the higher cost of the Cologuard test, Ahlquist said.

In two other presentations at the meeting, researchers have linked key gene variants to the risk for colon cancer and also to the prognosis of the disease.

In one study, researchers found that people who have long telomeres, the small strips of DNA that cover the ends of chromosomes, have a 30 percent increased risk of developing colon cancer.

"Even for people their age, their telomeres were longer than you'd expect for healthy people," lead researcher Dr. Lisa A. Boardman, an associate professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic, said in a statement. "This suggests that there may be two different mechanisms that affect telomere length and that set up susceptibility to cancer," she said.

In the other study, a research team led by Kim M. Smits, a molecular biologist and epidemiologist in the GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology at Maastricht University Medical Center in the Netherlands, uncovered a surprise when it came to a gene variant on the KRAS gene called the G variant. This variant, long linked to poorer outcomes in advanced colorectal cancer, actually predicted a better prognosis in early-stage colon cancer.

"You would intuitively think that the G variant would be associated with a poorer prognosis, as it is in late-stage colorectal cancer, but that is not the case," Smits said in a statement.

Experts point out that studies presented at scientific meetings do not have to pass the rigorous peer review of studies published in reputable journals.

For more information on colon cancer, visit the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story makes an effort to address the limitations of reporting on the topic of a talk that hasn’t even been given yet (!) when it states: “Experts point out that studies presented at scientific meetings do not have to pass the rigorous peer review of studies published in reputable journals.”  We applaud that effort but it could be improved easily.   The story should state that that’s a limitation of drawing conclusions from such data! Wouldn’t that be far more explicit and clear to readers?
It did include an important independent perspective from Dr. Durado Brooks of the American Cancer Society, who called the findings interesting but said, “They will be more interesting if we ever get this kind of data in a screening population….Showing that in a small group of samples is very different from demonstrating that in a population where only a small number of individuals are going to have polyps of that size.”
Ideally, the story would have explained that initial accuracy studies in non-representative samples of cases and non-cases (like this one) usually overestimate performance. That is why they are planning another study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Are lung cancer scans really ready for prime time?

News that annual CT lung scans can reduce the risk of lung cancer death among former and current heavy smokers was celebrated by national heath officials this month. A major government study found the screening scans saved the life of one person for every 300 current or former smokers who were scanned.

But now cancer and screening experts are worried that the limited findings will be used by private screening centers to promote the test to a broader group than was studied. That, in turn, could lead to thousands of unnecessary lung scans, causing excess radiation exposure and unnecessary biopsies and surgery.

Dr. Otis W. Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, said he was stunned to hear a radio advertisement for an Atlanta screening center cite the study just a few days after the government had announced the results. The wording of the ad seemed to be aimed at a broad group, ranging from heavy smokers to women who had never smoked, Dr. Brawley said.

“We really need to weigh the harms associated with screening,” he said. “The scientific community still needs to digest this. To take a trial that involves people at high risk for lung cancer and to extrapolate it and say it’s good for people with intermediate or low risk is not appropriate.”

The study, called the National Lung Screening Trial, focused on a specific high-risk group: 53,000 current and former heavy smokers, aged 55 to 74, who had smoked for at least 30 pack-years. That means someone who smoked one pack a day for 30 years, two packs a day for 15 years or three packs a day for at least 10 years would qualify for the study.

Former smokers who had accumulated 30 pack-years were included only if they had stopped smoking within the previous 15 years.

The smokers and former smokers were given either annual CT lung scans or chest X-rays. Compared with conventional X-rays, the CT, or computed tomography, scans create a detailed three-dimensional image of the lungs. The study was stopped when it was found that the scanning group had a 20 percent lower risk of dying from lung cancer than those being screened with X-rays.

But the early results also showed a downside of scanning: one of every four lung scans showed an abnormality, which often led to additional worry, radiation exposure from follow-up scans and, sometimes, lung biopsies and even risky surgery. But because the study was stopped early, a full analysis of the harms caused by screening scans is still months away.

Reading the scans is tricky because harmless nodules can be misinterpreted as suspect lesions. In the study, even experienced radiologists at major cancer centers had a high rate of false positives, suggesting that the rate would be even higher in the real world.

“There is a learning curve to reading spiral CTs,” Dr. Brawley said. “I’m concerned that some radiologists might be early in that learning curve and some patients may be harmed because of it.”

While the study found a benefit to scanning a specific group of high-risk smokers, that doesn’t mean other groups will get the same benefit, says Dr. Peter B. Bach, a pulmonologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. In lower-risk groups, for instance, it’s likely that thousands of people would need to be exposed to the risks of screening before a single life was saved. And it’s possible that many of those scanned unnecessarily could be seriously harmed.

“The aggregate harms to all the people’s lives who are not saved have to be taken into account,” Dr. Bach said. “Even in these highly controlled settings, about 1 percent of the people had surgery or a part of their lung removed for something they thought was cancer and it wasn’t.”

Low-dose CT scans expose patients to about the same radiation levels as mammograms.

For now, most consumers who want a scan will have to pay for it themselves, although it is expected that insurance companies eventually will approve scanning for those in high-risk groups. (Medicare officials have indicated that they will soon reconsider paying for the screening tests.) The government has estimated the cost at about $300 a scan, but some centers may charge $1,000 or more.

The day the government announced the study results, Westside Medical Imaging of Beverly Hills, Calif., issued a press release saying that the study “should once and for all settle the controversy” about whether CT lung scans save lives.

In the release, Dr. Norman E. Lepor said the scans were an “indispensable” part of annual exams for patients who have smoked for 10 years.

In an interview, Dr. Lepor said that he only offers lung scans to those at high risk, and that he turns people away who are at low risk but want the scan anyway because “they just want to know.”

Dr. Lepor said it would be “imprudent” not to incorporate the latest study data into his practice right away.

“There are people who, with good conscience and their take of the data, say it’s not ready for prime time, and there are people who look at the same data and they come to other conclusions,” Dr. Lepor said. “This is not the first study that has supported screening. We know from our own anecdotes that we have saved a lot of lives.”

Dr. Lepor said that he had just met a woman who had smoked for 50 years and was concerned about her risk. “She’s the poster person for this test,” he said.

Dr. Brawley said he’s worried that the few early press releases and radio advertisements are just the beginning of widespread promotion of screening lung scans.

“It was sort of ominous to be working Sunday evening in my home office and this thing comes on the radio,” he said. “A lot of people run out when there is a new announcement and get the new test. We’re very frightened some people are going to be harmed because of this.”

A version of this article appeared in print on Nov. 16, 2010, on page D5 of the New York edition of The Times.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: In clear language, the article explained key points about the study, including its limitations:
While the study found a benefit to scanning a specific group of high-risk smokers, that doesn’t mean other groups will get the same benefit.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Most Americans hear “colorectal cancer screening” and think “colonoscopy” — the unpleasant cleanse, the snakelike scope, the wobbly ride home. It’s a process that’s undeniably inconvenient, yet one we’re told is unquestionably necessary.

That’s a shame. Because although colonoscopy certainly has its advantages, direct evidence that it’s the best way to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer is not one of them. And the drawbacks of colonoscopy — including the time commitment, not-so-fun preparation, expense and small chance of harm — are probably keeping some people from participating in colorectal cancer screening.

According to public health experts, that’s a bad thing. The United States Preventive Services Task Force says the net benefit for screening adults age 50-75 is “substantial,” adding that colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in the country. But as of 2012, just 65 percent of eligible adults were being screened as recommended, and almost 28 percent had never been screened.

Among those who are screened, colonoscopy is by far the most popular method in the U.S. But there is a menu of options beyond colonoscopies — and they’re not necessarily any better or worse, according to the USPSTF’s recently finalized updated recommendations for screening among average-risk adults. The group said that while some tests are backed by more evidence than others, it found no head-to-head studies suggesting any strategy — including colonoscopy — is better than another. “Choose the one that fits your preferences and lifestyle,” said Douglas Owens, a physician and member of the task force.

Included on the list are two cheap, at-home poop tests intended to be done annually: the guaiac-based fecal occult blood test (gFOBT) and a more sensitive test called the fecal immunochemical test, or FIT. Both look for tiny amounts of blood in the stool that might be shed by cancer or polyps. You get one from your doctor, take a poop sample at home, and then return the sample to the doctor. Only if you get a positive result do you need to have a colonoscopy. (These are different from a new stool-based DNA test, which while on the USPSTF’s list is much more expensive and has been studied less.)

Of the two, Richard Wender, a physician and chief cancer control officer of the American Cancer Society, said the FIT is preferable, both because it’s more accurate and because it requires only one poop sample and no changes in diet. It costs about $25 or less and when done every year, the USPSTF’s models estimate, it will avert 20-23 deaths from colorectal cancer per 1,000 people screened. (Wender doesn’t recommend the OTC tests that are available.)

That’s comparable to the two “scope” tests on the USPSTF’s list, flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy, which have the advantage of both detecting and removing precancerous polyps in one procedure. (Flexible sigmoidoscopy, which looks at the lower part of the large intestine, has been shown by randomized trials to prevent deaths from colorectal cancer but isn’t reimbursed as well as colonoscopy and is on the decline in the U.S.)

Colonoscopy is the most popular test in the U.S. In addition to its polyp-removing ability, if you have a negative test, you don’t have to come back for another 10 years. There is indirect evidence it reduces colorectal cancer deaths, in the form of a large study following people who did and didn’t get the test over time. And it seems logical that if sigmoidoscopy cuts colorectal cancer deaths, the more extensive colonoscopy must provide a similar benefit. But that’s not yet been proved by randomized controlled trials. Based on the available evidence and its modeling, the USPSTF estimates it reduces deaths from colorectal cancer by 22-24 per 1,000 people screened.

But that lack of trial data is why the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care earlier this year recommended against using colonoscopy as a first-line screening method. “They were very clear: We’re going to stick to the evidence, and right now we don’t have evidence for colonoscopy,” said Aasma Shaukat, section chief of gastroenterology in the Minneapolis VA Health Care System.

Colonoscopy also has plenty of downsides. It’s expensive, running upward of $1,000. (The test is covered without cost sharing as preventive care under the Affordable Care Act.) Most people prefer to have sedation during the procedure, which means time off from work and finding a ride home. There’s variation in the quality of the test, depending on who’s doing it. There’s a small but real risk of harm, such as a perforation.

So why do so many people prefer it to the poop test? For many, because they’ve been told it’s the best test to get. A 2012 study found primary care physicians overwhelmingly said they thought it was the best colorectal screening option. Katie Couric’s on-air colonoscopy in March 2000 boosted awareness and increased colonoscopy rates. There’s also a “more is better” attitude when it comes to medicine among many people, said Shaukat. And colonoscopies are well-reimbursed for the physicians who perform them. Hospitals have focused on marketing colonoscopies rather than alternative tests.

No one is arguing colonoscopy is a bad test. It just hasn’t been shown to be better than an annual FIT, said James Allison, a clinical professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California-San Francisco. He said the public health message is slowly changing to reflect that. The 80% by 2018 campaign from the National Colorectal Cancer Roundtable, for example, which aims to increase the rate of screening, emphasizes a suite of options. “People are very motivated to get screened when they hear colorectal cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer-related death and if they know there are tests that are affordable and can be done at home,” said Wender.

So if you want a colonoscopy after talking with your physician and digging into all its pros and cons — fantastic. But if you prefer something less invasive but more frequent, you can test your poop every year without feeling like you’re opting for, um, No. 2.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story is quite open with the fact that comparative data assessing the various screening methods against each other are not available, but it strengthens its offerings by citing recommendations from both the US Preventive Services Task Force and the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care.  The recommendations of these independent groups are based on a rigorous evaluation of the highest-quality evidence available.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Older women being treated for the most common form of breast cancer who took drugs called aromatase inhibitors for 10 years rather than the usual five had a lower risk of their cancer returning, particularly in the opposite breast, physicians reported Sunday at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

In a randomized controlled trial, 959 women were given the drug and 959 a placebo. Thirteen of the women taking the drug for an additional five years developed breast cancer in the opposite breast during the study, compared with 31 taking the placebo; 55 and 68, respectively, developed a recurrence of cancer in the original breast.

For any individual woman, the odds of developing “contralateral” breast cancer — that is, in the opposite breast — are still lower than 200-to-1 per year.

Still, said Dr. Richard Schilsky, who serves as the chief medical officer of ASCO and who was not involved in the study, “there’s a substantial benefit” to continuing aromatase inhibitors out to 10 years to lower the chance of cancer developing in the other breast.

The study did not continue long enough to discover whether the lower risk of developing cancer in the opposite breast translated into a lower risk of death.

The study, which was also published Sunday in the New England Journal of Medicine, was partially funded by Novartis, which sells letrozole — the aromatase inhibitor used in the trial — as the branded drug Femara. Several of the authors have received speaking fees or consulting payments from Novartis, AstraZeneca (which makes letrozole), and Pfizer (maker of the aromatase inhibitor exemestane).

Letrozole is available as a generic for less than $100 a month.

The trial included 1,918 postmenopausal women who had what’s called hormone-receptor positive breast cancer, in which the hormones estrogen or progesterone fuel the proliferation of cells. About two-thirds of breast cancers are hormone-receptor positive, and they have a good prognosis. Aromatase inhibitors block an enzyme that the body needs to produce estrogen.

The women had taken another breast cancer drug, tamoxifen, for several years and then were started on an aromatase inhibitor, which doctors usually prescribe for five years.

After following the women for a median of just over six years, found Dr. Paul Goss of Massachusetts General Hospital and his colleagues, 95 percent of those taking letrozole for the additional five years remained free of breast cancer (meaning the disease had not returned in the original breast or developed in the opposite one). Of those taking an inert pill, or placebo, 91 percent did.

Put another way, the risk of cancer returning in the original or the opposite breast was 34 percent lower in women on 10 years of letrozole compared with those who stopped after five. There was no difference in survival, however: 100 women in each group died during the study.

“The reason this is a milestone trial is that it’s the first to show that 10 years [on letrozole] is better than five,” said Dr. Nicholas Robert, an oncologist with Virginia Cancer Specialists and a co-author of the study. But because the absolute benefits were not huge, and because the drug did cause side effects, it makes sense to consider this for women at the highest risk of a recurrence of breast cancer, he said.

Aromatase inhibitors cause side effects in some women, especially night sweats, hot flashes, and sexual dysfunction. Women receiving five more years of letrozole also had greater loss of bone in their hip, worse osteoporosis, and more fractures.

Experts said the study was significant because some women and their doctors choose to continue aromatase inhibitors past the standard five years. There had been no research on whether that was beneficial.

Dr. Debra Patt, a breast cancer specialist at Texas Oncology who was not involved in the study, called the difference of a few percentage points in the risk of recurrence (95 percent vs. 91 percent) “substantial. If you can tolerate the side effects, I think many women will opt to take the extra years of letrozole, so this study is practice-changing.”

Dr. J. Leonard Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society cautioned, however, that “one has to be cautious in interpreting these results,” partly because “based on what they show, there is no overall change in survival.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The type of conclusions drawn by the story are supported by the design study being a randomized controlled trial. A strong grasp of the quality of the evidence is exhibited by recognizing these important caveats:
The study did not continue long enough to discover whether the lower risk of developing cancer in the opposite breast translated into a lower risk of death.
There was no difference in survival, however: 100 women in each group died during the study.
Dr. J. Leonard Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society cautioned, however, that “one has to be cautious in interpreting these results,” partly because “based on what they show, there is no overall change in survival.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MADISON, Wis. -- More than 700 million adults and children worldwide are obese, according to a 2017 study that called the growing number and weight-related health problems a "rising pandemic."

New battery-free, easily implantable weight-loss devices developed by engineers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison could offer a promising new weapon for battling the bulge.

In laboratory testing, the devices helped rats shed almost 40 percent of their body weight. Results of the study were published today (Dec. 17, 2018) in the journal Nature Communications.

Measuring less than 1 centimeter across, or about a third of the area of a U.S. penny, the tiny devices -- which are safe for use in the body and implantable via a minimally invasive procedure -- generate gentle electric pulses from the stomach's natural churning motions and deliver them to the vagus nerve, which links the brain and the stomach.

That gentle stimulation dupes the brain into thinking that the stomach is full after only a few nibbles of food.

"The pulses correlate with the stomach's motions, enhancing a natural response to help control food intake," says Xudong Wang, a UW-Madison professor of materials science and engineering.

Unlike gastric bypass, which permanently alters the capacity of the stomach, the effects of the new devices also are reversible. When Wang and his collaborators removed the devices after 12 weeks, the study's rats resumed their normal eating patterns and weight bounced right back on.

Wang's device has several advantages over an existing unit that stimulates the vagus nerve for weight loss. That existing unit, "Maestro," approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2015, administers high-frequency zaps to the vagus nerve to shut down all communication between the brain and stomach. It requires a complicated control unit and bulky batteries which frequently must be recharged.

That ongoing maintenance can be a big barrier to use, says Luke Funk, a surgery professor in UW-Madison's Division of Minimally Invasive, Foregut and Bariatric Surgery. "One potential advantage of the new device over existing vagus nerve stimulators is that it does not require external battery charging, which is a significant advantage when you consider the inconvenience that patients experience when having to charge a battery multiple times a week for an hour or so."

In fact, Wang's device contains no batteries, no electronics, and no complicated wiring. It relies instead on the undulations of the stomach walls to power its internal generators.

That means the device only stimulates the vagus nerve when the stomach moves.

"It's automatically responsive to our body function, producing stimulation when needed," says Wang. "Our body knows best."

Wang is a world expert in wearable and implantable capacitive electricity-generating devices, having previously created implantable nanogenerators that harvest energy from people's beating hearts and breathing, a motion-powered bandage for wound healing, and other such devices.

He and his collaborators patented the weight-loss device through the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and are moving forward with testing in larger animal models. If successful, they hope to move toward human trials.

"Our expectation is that the device will be more effective and convenient to use than other technologies," says Wang.

UW-Madison radiology professor Weibo Cai is also a senior author on the study.

This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (R01EB021336 and P30CA014520).
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We will give the release a satisfactory rating on this criterion because it clearly notes that the trial was done in rats and that further tests in larger animals, followed by human clinical trials, have yet to be done. However, news releases about animal trials should point out that the vast majority of “successful” animal trials fail to ultimately lead to clinical treatments in people. (See our toolkit for more reasons why you should be cautious of health claims based on animal and lab studies.)
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Phone support can help ease postpartum depression, a small study suggests, offering an option for mothers who are unable or unwilling to seek therapy in person.

In the study, women with postpartum depression received telephone counseling from other women who had previously suffered from the disorder and recovered. The new moms found that the conversations helped relieve symptoms.

“Postpartum depression is a problem for one in seven women, and many of them don’t get help because there’s a stigma and they don’t have time and it’s expensive,” said study leader Dr. Nicole Letourneau, a professor and research chair in parent-infant mental health at the University of Calgary. “Training peer counselors to do phone counseling is an effective, low-cost and non-stigmatizing way for new moms to get the help they need.”

Particularly for first-time mothers, postpartum depression can be hard to distinguish from the stress and fatigue that come with caring for a new infant around the clock, Letourneau said. Symptoms can include sadness, insomnia, difficulty concentrating and making decisions, feelings of shame or guilt, as well as difficulty bonding with the baby or thoughts about harming the baby.

To assess the effectiveness of phone counseling for easing these symptoms, Letourneau and colleagues identified 64 mothers with symptoms of major depression within 24 months after delivery and offered them up to 12 weekly peer support calls.

The average mom with depression was about 26 years old. Most had symptoms of depression before they got pregnant, and many had previously been treated with medication or professional counseling.

The women who volunteered as peer counselors attended an eight-hour training course and received reference materials about postpartum depression. They also had nurses available for phone consults if they had concerns about anything the moms said during their conversations.

By midway through the study, 37 new moms had received at least one call from a peer counsellor. On average, the women spoke more than eight times and the calls typically lasted about 38 minutes, the researchers reported in the Journal of Advanced Nursing.

Over the second half of the study, 34 mothers had at least one phone conversation with a peer counsellor. On average, they spoke about three times.

Mothers who left the study said they no longer needed support, sought counseling from mental health professionals, or didn’t have time for the phone calls.

While all of the mothers were depressed at the start of the study, at mid-point only 32 percent were at risk for depression, and this declined to 15 percent at the end. Furthermore, at mid-point, 60 percent of the mothers had low depression scores; this percentage rose to 75 percent at end.

Even though the small study had several women drop out and lacked a control group of moms who received different treatment, the results are consistent with previous research that has proven peer counseling works, said Dr. Ruta Nonacs, a psychiatrist at the Center for Women’s Mental Health at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.

“It is a very powerful experience to be able to talk to a woman who has gone through the same thing and come out the other side,” said Nonacs, who wasn’t involved in the study. “A lot of first-time moms wonder what’s normal, what’s depression, and what to do with the fact that they feel overwhelmed and alone and like their experience looks nothing like the happy moms they see smiling in all of the baby food and diaper commercials.”

Because postpartum depression is the most common complication of childbirth, it makes sense to explore peer counseling and other interventions that can reach women in rural or suburban areas where access to mental health professionals may be limited, said Dr. Samantha Meltzer-Brody, director of the perinatal psychiatry program at the Center for Women’s Mood Disorders at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

“Most people in the world have access to a telephone,” said Meltzer-Brody, who wasn’t involved in the study. “This study, while small, suggests that peer phone counseling could be a very effective, widespread public health intervention.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story clearly notes that the study was small, lacked a control group, and had “several” women drop out. It also quotes more than one outside source, one of whom notes that the results align with previous studies that show benefits for peer counseling. That’s sufficient for a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Lost Posture: Why Some Indigenous Cultures May Not Have Back Pain

Editor's note, June 10: We have added an acknowledgement of several sources that Esther Gokhale used while developing her theories on back pain. These include physiotherapy methods, such as the Alexander Technique and the Feldenkrais Method, and the work of anthropologist Noelle Perez-Christiaens.

Back pain is a tricky beast. Most Americans will at some point have a problem with their backs. And for an unlucky third, treatments won't work, and the problem will become chronic.

Believe it or not, there are a few cultures in the world where back pain hardly exists. One indigenous tribe in central India reported essentially none. And the discs in their backs showed little signs of degeneration as people aged.

An acupuncturist in Palo Alto, Calif., thinks she has figured out why. She has traveled around the world studying cultures with low rates of back pain — how they stand, sit and walk. Now she's sharing their secrets with back pain sufferers across the U.S.

About two decades ago, Esther Gokhale started to struggle with her own back after she had her first child. "I had excruciating pain. I couldn't sleep at night," she says. "I was walking around the block every two hours. I was just crippled."

Gokhale had a herniated disc. Eventually she had surgery to fix it. But a year later, it happened again. "They wanted to do another back surgery. You don't want to make a habit out of back surgery," she says.

This time around, Gokhale wanted to find a permanent fix for her back. And she wasn't convinced Western medicine could do that. So Gokhale started to think outside the box. She had an idea: "Go to populations where they don't have these huge problems and see what they're doing."

[Added June 10] So Gokhale studied findings from anthropologists, such as Noelle Perez-Christiaens, who analyzed postures of indigenous populations. And she studied physiotherapy methods, such as the Alexander Technique and the Feldenkrais Method.

Then over the next decade, Gokhale went to cultures around the world that live far away from modern life. She went to the mountains in Ecuador, tiny fishing towns in Portugal and remote villages of West Africa.

"I went to villages where every kid under age 4 was crying because they were frightened to see somebody with white skin — they'd never seen a white person before," she says.

Gokhale took photos and videos of people who walked with water buckets on their heads, collected firewood or sat on the ground weaving, for hours.

"I have a picture in my book of these two women who spend seven to nine hours everyday, bent over, gathering water chestnuts," Gokhale says. "They're quite old. But the truth is they don't have a back pain."

She tried to figure out what all these different people had in common. The first thing that popped out was the shape of their spines. "They have this regal posture, and it's very compelling."

And it's quite different than American spines.

If you look at an American's spine from the side, or profile, it's shaped like the letter S. It curves at the top and then back again at the bottom.

But Gokhale didn't see those two big curves in people who don't have back pain. "That S shape is actually not natural," she says. "It's a J-shaped spine that you want."

In fact, if you look at drawings from Leonardo da Vinci — or a Gray's Anatomy book from 1901 — the spine isn't shaped like a sharp, curvy S. It's much flatter, all the way down the back. Then at the bottom, it curves to stick the buttocks out. So the spine looks more like the letter J.

"The J-shaped spine is what you see in Greek statues. It's what you see in young children. It's good design," Gokhale says.

So Gokhale worked to get her spine into the J shape. And gradually her back pain went away.

Then Gokhale realized she could help others. She developed a set of exercises, wrote a book and set up a studio in downtown Palo Alto.

Now her list of clients is impressive. She's helped YouTube CEO Susan Wojcicki and Matt Drudge of the Drudge Report. She has given classes at Google, Facebook and companies across the country. In Silicon Valley, she's known as the "posture guru."

Each year, doctors in the Bay Area refer hundreds of patients to Gokhale. One of them is Dr. Neeta Jain, an internist at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation. She puts Gokhale's method in the same category as Pilates and yoga for back pain. And it doesn't bother her that the method hasn't been tested in a clinical trial.

"If people are finding things that are helpful, and it's not causing any harm, then why do we have to wait for a trial?" Jain asked.

But there's still a big question looming here: Is Gokhale right? Have people in Western cultures somehow forgotten the right way to stand?

Scientists don't know yet, says Dr. Praveen Mummaneni, a neurosurgeon at the University of California, San Francisco's Spine Center. Nobody has done a study on traditional cultures to see why some have lower rates of back pain, he says. Nobody has even documented the shape of their spines.

"I'd like to go and take X-rays of indigenous populations and compare it to people in the Western world," Mummaneni says. "I think that would be helpful."

But there's a whole bunch of reasons why Americans' postures — and the shape of their spines — may be different than those of indigenous populations, he says. For starters, Americans tend to be much heavier.

"If you have a lot of fat built up in the belly, that could pull your weight forward," Mummaneni says. "That could curve the spine. And people who are thinner probably have less curvature" — and thus a spine shaped more like J than than an S.

Americans are also much less active than people in traditional cultures, Mummaneni says. "I think the sedentary lifestyle promotes a lack of muscle tone and a lack of postural stability because the muscles get weak."

Everyone knows that weak abdominal muscles can cause back pain. In fact, Mummaneni says, stronger muscles might be the secret to Gokhale's success.

In other words, it's not that the J-shaped spine is the ideal one — or the healthiest. It's what goes into making the J-shaped spine that matters: "You have to use muscle strength to get your spine to look like a J shape," he says.

So Gokhale has somehow figured out a way to teach people to build up their core muscles without them even knowing it. "Yes, I think that's correct," Mummaneni says. "You're not going to be able to go from the S- to the J-shaped spine without having good core muscle strength. And I think that's key here."

So indigenous people around the world don't have a magic bullet for stopping back pain. They've just got beefy abdominal muscles, and their lifestyle helps to keep them that way, even as they age.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This was a close call that we’ll give the benefit of the doubt on, with some reservations. The story presents no evidence, other than a general assurance and an undocumented reference to a tribe in central India, that indigenous cultures have lower rates of back pain. It might very well be true, but the premise is not supported in the story. In addition, the story includes some lines that beg to be backed up with evidence, such as: “Everyone knows that weak abdominal muscles can cause back pain.” How does everyone know that?
However, even though it comes late, the story does make clear that the Gokhale Method has never been tested in a clinical trial — and that no one has done a study on traditional cultures to see why some have lower rates of back pain (if, in fact, they do have lower rates of back pain). Because it does eventually address the lack of evidence to support Gokhale’s claims — the main hook for the piece — we’ll give the story a satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Next time you order takeout wonton soup and a spicy Number 82, you might want to make sure it comes with brown rice.

Brown rice is a whole grain — white rice before it has been refined and polished and stripped of the bran covering, which is high in fiber and nutrients. Brown rice also has a lower glycemic index than white rice, which means it doesn’t cause blood glucose levels to rise as rapidly.

Now a new study from researchers at Harvard reports that Americans who eat two or more servings of brown rice a week reduce their risk of developing Type 2 diabetes by about 10 percent compared to people who eat it less than once a month. And those who eat white rice on a regular basis — five or more times a week — are almost 20 percent more likely to develop Type 2 diabetes than those who eat it less than once a month.

Just replacing a third of a serving of white rice with brown each day could reduce one’s risk of Type 2 diabetes by 16 percent, a statistical analysis showed. A serving is half a cup of cooked rice.

The study, which was published in The Archives of Internal Medicine and used data from two Harvard nurses’ health studies and a separate study of health professionals, isn’t the first to point a finger at foods like white rice as a culprit in Type 2 diabetes. A 2007 study of Chinese women in Shanghai found that middle-aged women who ate large amounts of white rice and other refined carbohydrates were also at increased risk for diabetes compared to their peers who ate less.

But the Harvard study is one of the first to distinguish between brown rice and white rice consumption in the United States, where rice is not a staple food and relatively little is eaten overall, said Dr. Qi Sun, an instructor in medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, which is affiliated with Harvard Medical School. Many food studies simply lump brown and white rice together.

“The bottom line is we showed evidence that increased consumption of white rice – even at this low level of intake — is still associated with increased risk,” said Dr. Sun, who was at the Harvard School of Public Health when the study was done. “It’s really recommended to replace white rice with the same amount of brown rice or other whole grains.”

The researchers who did the study analyzed rice consumption among 39,765 men and 57,463 women who participated in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study and the Nurses’ Health Study I and II; participants in the three groups ranged in age from 26 to 87.

They had filled out food frequency questionnaires when the studies started — in 1986, 1984 and 1991, respectively — and updated their diet information every four years subsequently, through 2005 and 2006. They were also asked about their medical histories. During the course of the studies, more than 10,000 participants developed Type 2 diabetes.

Such food studies can be unreliable, since they rely on self-reported surveys. And correlation does not necessarily mean a cause-and-effect relationship, since factors other than brown rice consumption may have accounted for the decreased diabetes risk that was observed. The researchers tried to control for the fact that Americans who eat brown rice tend to be more healthy overall — they eat more fruits and vegetables and less red meat and trans fats, and they also tend to be thinner, more active and less likely to smoke than those who don’t eat brown rice.

But, Dr. Sun said, there were many possible explanations for why brown rice eaters are at lower risk for Type 2 diabetes. In addition to having a lower glycemic index than white rice, brown rice also contains important nutrients like magnesium that are stripped during the refining process; it also contains much more fiber. Earlier studies have found that having these nutrients in the diet protects against diabetes, Dr. Sun said.

Correction: An earlier version of this story misidentified the amount of cooked rice in a serving. A serving is one-quarter cup of uncooked rice, or about half a cup when cooked.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Rather than give the story an unsatisfactory grade for both the "evidence" criterion and the "benefits" criterion, we’ll choose to focus on the good thing it did in discussing the limitations of the evidence, with these excerpts: 

<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
At issue are controversial spiral CT scans, where a rotating scanner views the lungs at various angles to spot growths when they are about half the size that a standard chest X-ray can detect. Some previous studies have suggested that the earlier detection helps, while other research concluded it may do more harm than good by spotting too many benign growths.

The massive National Lung Screening Trial enrolled 53,000 current or former smokers to try to settle the debate. It found 20 percent fewer deaths from lung cancer among those screened with spiral CTs than among those given chest X-rays, the NCI said Thursday, a difference significant enough that it ended the study early.

The actual number of deaths averted was fairly modest - 354 died in the spiral CT group over the eight-year study period compared with 442 deaths among those who got chest X-rays.

The NCI said it is not clear that all smokers should get the scans, which are not risk-free.

The best advice for avoiding lung cancer remains to quit smoking, said NCI Director Dr. Harold Varmus.

Still, "a validated approach that can reduce lung cancer mortality by even 20 percent has the potential to spare very significant numbers of people from the ravages of this disease," he said.

About 200,000 new lung cancers are diagnosed in the U.S. each year, and the disease kills about 159,000 people annually. It is most often diagnosed at advanced stages, and the average five-year survival rate is just 15 percent.

Many smokers already had sought out spiral CTs, even though the American Cancer Society hasn't recommended the test - citing a lack of clear evidence that they work - and most insurance doesn't cover the $300 to $400 cost.

The scans aren't risk-free: They frequently mistake scar tissue from an old infection or some other benign lump for cancer, leading to unnecessary biopsies or surgery that in turn can cause a collapsed lung, infection or other problems.

The NCI still is compiling rates of false alarms and other risks from the study.

Nor is it clear if the study results are applicable to all smokers. The trial enrolled people ages 55 to 74 who were or had been very heavy smokers and gave them one scan a year for three years.

While the spiral CTs emit less radiation than standard CT scans used to diagnose disease, researchers also will analyze whether the radiation exposures from three scans changes a smoker's lifetime risk of other radiation-related cancers. Letters being mailed to study participants advise them to discuss with their doctors whether they should have additional scans or not.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


The story explains that 53,000 current or former smokers were given either CT scans or chest x-rays and that researchers tracked the number who died of lung cancer. However, readers may be confused by a reference to “the eight-year study period.” While it has been eight years since the trial began, the participants were followed for up to five years. Also, the story leads with a vague statement that this trial provides “the first evidence that a screening test may help fight the nation’s top cancer killer.” It would have been better for the story to be clear that this trial provides evidence about a difference in lung cancer death rates. The story could have done a better job of explaining that the randomization and other features of this trial set it above any other investigation of this topic.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Strobe lighting has been shown to reduce levels of the toxic proteins seen in Alzheimer’s disease, in findings that raise the tantalising possibility of future non-invasive treatments for the disease.

The study, in mice, found that exposure to flickering light stimulated brain waves, called gamma oscillations, that are known to be disturbed in Alzheimer’s patients. Boosting this synchronous brain activity appeared to act as a cue for the brain’s immune cells, prompting them to absorb the sticky amyloid proteins that are the most visible hallmarks of the disease in the brain’s of people with Alzheimer’s.

The authors caution that a “big if” remains over whether the findings would be replicated in humans – and whether cognitive deficits as well as visible symptoms of the disease would be improved.

“If humans behave similarly to mice in response to this treatment, I would say the potential is just enormous, because it’s so non-invasive, and it’s so accessible,” said Li-Huei Tsai, director of the Picower Institute for Learning and Memory at MIT, and the paper’s senior author.

Alzheimer’s research has faced a number of major setbacks – most recently the failure of Eli Lily’s drug trial – after promising results in rodents did not translate into clinical improvements for patients.

The latest intervention, scientists predict, should be quicker and cheaper to confirm in humans than pharmaceuticals, which typically take more than a decade to develop and assess for safety before the clinical efficacy is even examined.

The study, published on Wednesday in the journal Nature, hinges on the observation that Alzheimer’s patients show a loss of synchronised brain activity, known as gamma oscillations, which is linked to attention and memory.



To restore the activity, the scientists first used mice that had been genetically engineered such that the neurons that generate gamma activity in the brain were sensitive to light. The technique, known as optogenetics, allowed the scientists to artificially cause groups of neurons to fire in unison by pulsing light into the brains of the mice.



After an hour of stimulation, the researchers found a roughly 50% reduction in the levels of beta amyloid proteins in the hippocampus, the brain’s memory centre. Closer inspection showed that the amyloid had been taken up by microglia, the brain’s immune cells.

In a healthy brain, microglia act as chemical rubbish collectors, surveying the local environment, clearing up unwanted compounds, but in Alzheimer’s these cells can lose this function and switch into an inflammatory state in which they secrete toxic compounds instead. Strengthening gamma oscillations appeared to switch the microglia back into a productive state.

Next, the scientist showed that gamma oscillations could also be stimulated non-invasively in the visual brain region simply by exposing the mice to a flickering light. At 40Hz the flicker of the light is barely discernible and would be “not offensive at all” for a person to have in the background.

After being given one hour of flickering light each day for a week, the scientists saw a 60% reduction of harmful amyloid plaques in the brains of the mice.

Ed Mann, an associate professor of neuroscience at the University of Oxford, said: “I was surprised, and it’s exciting, that such a simple stimulus can target a molecular pathway and have such an effect in an hour.”

Questions remain, however, about whether boosting gamma oscillations and sweeping amyloid plaques out of the visual brain region would help with memory, which is centred in the hippocampus, or broader cognitive abilities.

David Reynolds, chief scientific officer at Alzheimer’s Research UK, said: “It is conceivable that changing brain cell rhythms could be a future target for therapies, but researchers will need to explore how light flickering approaches could not only reduce amyloid in the visual area of the brain but in those areas more commonly affected in Alzheimer’s.”

The authors suggest that it may be possible to take a multi-sensory approach, using a combination of flashing lights and vibrating chairs. Tsai and Ed Boyden, a colleague at MIT and co-author, have started a company called Cognito Therapeutics to pursue tests in humans.

There are 850,000 people with dementia in Britain and this figure is expected to reach 1 million by 2025. Earlier this year, dementia overtook heart disease as the leading cause of death in England and Wales.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story acknowledges in the third paragraph that the study involved only mice and notes that more research will be needed to determine whether this intervention has any relevance to people. It also acknowledges recent failed drug trials and notes that drugs typically take more than a decade to develop before clinical efficacy is even examined. We’ll award a Satisfactory grade on that basis, but we renew our concern that this is mice–and nothing here is relevant to the lay reader. We think that this is the kind of research that’s better left communicated amongst research audiences, not the general public.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla., July 26, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- New research published in Lancet Neurology and reported by CNN has found using a green tea extract (decaffeinated) in combination with cognitive training improves some measures of cognition and behavior in subjects with Down syndrome.

Eighty-seven volunteers aged 16 to 34 with Down syndrome were enrolled in the phase 2, randomized, controlled trial. The study was conducted at the IMIM-Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute in Barcelona, Spain.

Participants were randomly assigned to take the decaffeinated green tea extract or placebo for one year. All subjects also underwent cognitive training during the 12-month trial.

After one year of treatment, functional brain scans (fMRI) showed that epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)-treated subjects had improved neuronal connectivity in certain brain regions. Participants who took the green tea extract also scored significantly better on assessments of visual recognition memory, inhibitory control, and adaptive behavior compared with those who took the placebo.

"It's an important trial," says Dr. Steven Hirsh, director of clinical research for Life Extension in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. "The findings are very noteworthy and support further study in randomized controlled trials with larger sample sizes and durations. It is very encouraging that this catechin, EGCG, from green tea extract, has the potential to benefit people with Down syndrome."

Down syndrome is a genetic condition that affects about 250,000 Americans. Individuals with Down syndrome have an extra full or partial copy of chromosome 21.

The team of researchers, led by Dr. Rafael de la Torre, program director of IMIM Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute and study co-principal investigator, and Dr. Mara Dierssen, group leader at Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, and study co-principal investigator, proposed that EGCG might have conferred these benefits by inhibiting an enzyme called DYRK1A, which has been implicated in Down syndrome and neurodegenerative conditions including Alzheimer disease.

The level of DYRK1A-positive cells is elevated in certain regions of Alzheimer disease patients' brains, and is roughly 20-fold higher in the frontal cortex, compared to normal brains. DYRK1A is implicated in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles (via tau hyperphosphorylation) and amyloid plaques, both of which are features of Alzheimer disease.

Tea catechins may also modulate the damaging effects of amyloid-beta. Several animal studies have found that EGCG and related compounds from tea suppress amyloid-beta-induced cognitive dysfunction and neurotoxicity. Other possible mechanisms by which EGCG may influence cognition include epigenetic regulation, restoration of mitochondrial function, and anti-oxidative functions.

In an earlier pilot study supported by Life Extension, Drs. de la Torre and Dierssen's team showed that three months of EGCG treatment improved symptoms in individuals with Down syndrome, and in mice with a Down-syndrome-like condition characterized by overexpression of DYRK1A.

"We are excited that the benefits observed in the early pilot and preclinical research extended to this larger trial," says Luke G. Huber, ND, MBA, vice president of product innovation and scientific development at Life Extension. "This new research adds to the growing body of evidence that suggests compounds in green tea, such as EGCG, may support cognitive health."

In acknowledging the novelty of their findings and calling for more research, the Spanish research team noted that "…this study is the first well-powered trial that shows improvement in adaptive behavior (functional academics) and brain-related changes in young adults with Down's syndrome. However, more research is needed to clarify the nature of the beneficial association between the EGCG and cognitive training intervention (ie, synergistic or additive)."
• de la Torre R, de Sola S, Hernandez G, et al. Safety and efficacy of cognitive training plus epigallocatechin-3-gallate in young adults with Down's syndrome (TESDAD): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. The Lancet Neurology. 2016;15(8):801-810.
• Senthilingam M. Cable News Network (CNN) U. S. Edition [online]. Can green tea boost your brainpower and treat disease? http://www.cnn.com/2016/06/16/health/green-tea-health-brain-down-syndrome/. Last updated 6/20/2016. Accessed 7/1/2016. 2016.
• CDC. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Birth Defects. Key Findings: Prevalence of Down syndrome in . http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/features/key-findings-down-syndrome-prevalence.html. Last updated 2/29/2016. Accessed 7/18/2016. 2016.
• NDSS. What Is Down Syndrome? 2012; http://www.ndss.org/Down-Syndrome/What-Is-Down-Syndrome/. Accessed 6/8/2016.
• Souchet B, Latour A, Gu Y, et al. Molecular rescue of DYRK1A overexpression in cystathionine beta synthase-deficient mouse brain by enriched environment combined with voluntary exercise. Journal of molecular neuroscience : MN. 2015;55(2):318-323.
• Wegiel J, Gong CX, Hwang YW. The role of DYRK1A in neurodegenerative diseases. The FEBS journal. 2011;278(2):236-245.
• Kim TI, Lee YK, Park SG, et al. l-Theanine, an amino acid in green tea, attenuates β-amyloid-induced cognitive dysfunction and neurotoxicity: reduction in oxidative damage and inactivation of ERK/p38 kinase and NF-κB pathways. Free Radical Biology and Medicine. 2009;47(11):1601-1610.
• Rezai-Zadeh K, Arendash GW, Hou H, et al. Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) reduces β-amyloid mediated cognitive impairment and modulates tau pathology in Alzheimer transgenic mice. Brain research. 2008;1214:177-187.
• Haque AM, Hashimoto M, Katakura M, Hara Y, tea catechins prevent cognitive deficits caused by Abeta1-40 in rats. The Journal of nutritional biochemistry. 2008;19(9):619-626.
• De la Torre R, De Sola S, Pons M, et al. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate, a DYRK1A inhibitor, rescues cognitive deficits in Down syndrome mouse models and in humans. Molecular nutrition & food research. 2014;58(2):278-288.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release does a good job mentioning the study inclusion criteria and pointing out that the study was a phase 2, randomized, controlled trial. It also gets points for drawing attention (a little obliquely) to some of the trial limitations when it calls for “further study in randomized controlled trials with larger sample sizes and durations.”
The limitations identified in the study include the relative small study size and the acknowledgement that the “choice of their assessment instruments” could have caused them to have overlooked some of the supplement’s effects.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Douglas P. Zipes, a professor at the Indiana University School of Medicine in Indianapolis, said the new device could someday displace existing models used in many patients Every month, about 10,000 patients in this country get a defibrillator, either for the first time or as replacements for devices whose batteries have worn out.

In recent years, the safety of defibrillator wires has come in particular focus because a model made by Medtronic has been prone to fracturing. Hundreds of patients who received the model have had to undergo new operations to replace it. Also, scar tissue often builds up around intravenous wires, a process that can make removing and replacing them difficult or dangerous.

Dr. Bardy said in a telephone interview that the deaths of several patients many years ago because of wire-related injuries were a factor in his interest in developing the new device.

“You are looking at a therapy that can avert, we hope, complications and be as effective,” he said.

In the study published Wednesday, Dr. Bardy and others reported that the new device had undergone several successful initial trials, including one in which it was used for a year in about 60 patients.

The device is being developed by Cameron Health, a small company in San Clemente, Calif., that was co-founded by Dr. Bardy. Since the cardiologist began work on the project about a decade ago, the defibrillator he helped design has gone through several iterations.

The device will not be suitable for a significant number of heart patients, particularly those who require units that also include a pacemaker, which regulates a heart that is beating too fast or too slowly.

But Dr. Bardy estimated that the device could work in about 25 percent of patients who now get a defibrillator. These are largely patients at risk, because of genetic factors or certain types of heart diseases, for a type of erratic cardiac rhythm that can cause sudden death. Dr. Bardy said the cost of the new device is about the same as a standard defibrillator. However, he said it could help reduce health care costs, because implanting it is much simpler.

Before the device can be sold here, Cameron Health will have to submit more extensive human trial data to the F.D.A.. Dr. Bardy said a larger study of the device has just begun in this country and overseas and that it will most likely take a year or more to assemble data from it for the agency’s review.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 
In the lead, this story appropriately characterizes the new report as a step toward implantable defibrillators that do not have wires attached directly to the hearts of patients. It points out that much of the new data is based on the experiences of about 60 patients who had one of the new devices for a year. The story makes more than one reference to the need for further trials before the developers of the new device would have enough evidence to apply for FDA approval.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The researchers report that nearly half of the cases of prostate cancer among the roughly 5,000 men in the study could be attributed to the five gene regions and a family history, with some men having one or two of the gene variants and others having all five and a family history.

Prostate cancer becomes more common as men age — autopsies of elderly men find that most had prostate cancer, whether they knew it or not. But the men in this study had an average age of about 65, when the disease is less common and more likely to kill.

William B. Isaacs, a professor of urology and oncology at Johns Hopkins University and an author of the new report, said that if research validates what has been found, men may want to get the new genetic test when they are young, 35, say. Those at high risk because of their genetics might then choose to start prostate-cancer screening earlier than the usual age of about 50, using a blood test that looks for proteins secreted by prostate tumors.

“I think that makes sense,” said Dr. Howard Sandler, a professor of radiation oncology at the University of Michigan and a spokesman for the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

But others worry that more frequent testing could exacerbate what is already a major problem: most prostate cancers grow so slowly that they would have been harmless if left alone. But since doctors cannot tell which are dangerous, they treat nearly all that they find. And treatment has serious side effects, including, often, impotence and incontinence. Nonetheless, researchers say, the test is a harbinger of things to come.

“It’s the boutique medicine of the future,” said Dr. Peter C. Albertsen, a surgery professor and prostate cancer specialist at the University of Connecticut. “We can know what diseases we will have to face in the rest of our lives.”

That worries him, as it does Dr. Edward P. Gelmann, deputy director of the Comprehensive Cancer Center at Columbia University. “Technology today enables us to find out a huge amount of information,” Dr. Gelmann said. “But how does the public deal with this information? How does it help them make decisions? And if they make a decision, does that lead to a day, a week, a month, of life saved?”

The study, by scientists at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, the Karolinska Institute in Sweden, the Harvard School of Public Health, and Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, will appear in the Feb. 28 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine. It was released online on Wednesday, a journal spokeswoman said, because “it is a very active area of research with a lot of competition.”

Researchers long knew that the disease often runs in families. Though scientists spent years looking for genes, they found none that were reproducibly associated with a marked effect.

With new technology to scan the entire length of a person’s DNA, researchers tried a new approach. They began looking for small variations in tiny DNA regions that were associated with prostate cancer. That resulted in the discovery, by several groups of investigators in Iceland and the United States, of the gene variants, small alterations in gene sequences. Unlike traditional genetic links to disease, the variants are not mutations that destroy a gene’s function. In fact, no one knows what their effect is.

The next step was to ask whether those variants really could predict who had prostate cancer. So Dr. Jianfeng Xu, a professor of epidemiology and cancer biology at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and his colleagues studied a Swedish population of 2,893 men with prostate cancer and 1,781 men who did not have it. That led to their finding that each of the five variants independently predicted prostate cancer risk.

“Each confers a moderate risk,” Dr. Xu said, adding that the effect of having just one of the variants — a 10 or 20 percent increase in a man’s chance of having prostate cancer — was not enough to justify using a single variant for screening. But, he added, because each conferred an independent risk, the risks added up so that the more men had, the greater their risk. Then they found that family history of the cancer added an independent risk. “That was very, very surprising to us,” Dr. Xu said.

The next step, Dr. Isaacs said, is to look in other populations. “We think that can happen almost instantaneously,” he said, explaining how scientists have blood samples and family histories of thousands of men who were tested for prostate cancer.

But some said that if the test leads to more screening, it is not necessarily a good thing. There is already too much prostate-cancer screening, they say, resulting in too much treatment. “To me, it is a nightmare,” Dr. Albertsen said. “We are just feeding off of this cancer phobia.”

What is needed, and what the new test does not provide, is a way to decide which cancers are dangerous and which are not, Dr. Isaacs said. Still, he said the new test could help patients if it was used with caution. “We may be premature with this idea — everyone has a different way of thinking about this — but it should not take five years to know if we are on the right track. All this can happen very rapidly.”

“We have worked with enough families that have a positive family history to know that people are anxious to know their risk of prostate cancer,” he said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story was about variant forms of several genes each of which appear to confer some risk for the development of prostate cancer by the time a man reached the age of 65.  It explained that this was a single study and that the contention that these alleles can be put to predictive use needs to be tested in several different populations in order to confirm the contention that they have merit for this use.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WHIPPANY, N.J., Sept. 19, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Bayer announced today that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Kyleena™ (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) 19.5 mg, a progestin-containing intrauterine system (IUS), for the prevention of pregnancy for up to five years.1 Kyleena will be available by prescription only in October 2016.

"Data show that the use of effective, long-acting birth control methods including intrauterine devices – or IUDs – have helped to reduce unintended pregnancies in the United States but we still have a long way to go," 2 said Anita L. Nelson, M.D., Professor and Chair, Obstetrics and Gynecology at Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, Calif. "Kyleena is highly effective at preventing pregnancy and may be an appropriate choice for women who want a low-dose, non-daily birth control method."

Kyleena is a small, flexible plastic T-shaped device containing 19.5 mg of a progestin hormone called levonorgestrel. Kyleena is placed by a healthcare provider during an in-office visit and prevents pregnancy for up to five years, but may be removed by a healthcare provider at any time.

"With the approval of Kyleena, women have an important new birth control option that provides pregnancy prevention for up to five years," said Dario Mirski, M.D., Senior Vice President and Head of Medical Affairs for the Americas, Bayer. "Kyleena expands Bayer's IUD portfolio and is part of our commitment to provide women and their healthcare providers with a variety of contraceptive choices to meet their individual needs."

The use of long-acting reversible contraception (LARCs) has increased nearly five-fold in the last decade.3

Because Kyleena slowly releases levonorgestrel into a woman's uterus, only small amounts of the hormone enter the blood. For the first 3 to 6 months, a woman's period may become irregular and the number of bleeding days may increase. Women may also have frequent spotting or light bleeding. Some women have heavy bleeding during this time. After using Kyleena for a while, the number of bleeding and spotting days is likely to lessen. For some women, periods will stop altogether. When Kyleena is removed, menstrual periods should return.

About the Clinical Trial for Kyleena1

The contraceptive efficacy of Kyleena was evaluated in a clinical trial that enrolled generally healthy women aged 18 to 35, of whom 1,452 received Kyleena. Of these, 40% (574) were nulliparous women, 870 (60%) women completed 3 years of the study, 707 (49%) elected to enroll in an extension phase up to a total of 5 years, and 550 (38%) completed 5 years of use. The trial was a multicenter, multi-national, randomized, open-label study conducted in 11 countries in Europe, Latin America, the U.S. and Canada. Women less than six weeks postpartum, with a history of ectopic pregnancy, with clinically significant ovarian cysts or with HIV or otherwise at high risk for sexually transmitted infections were excluded. A total of 563 (39%) were treated at U.S. sites and 889 (61%) were at non-U.S. sites. The racial demographics of enrolled women who received Kyleena was: Caucasian (80%), Black/African American (5.1%), Other (2.6%) and Asian (1.2%); 11% indicated Hispanic ethnicity. The clinical trial had no upper or lower weight or BMI limit. The weight range was 38 to 173 kg (mean weight: 68.7 kg) and mean BMI was 25.3 kg/m2 (range 15.2–57.6 kg/m2). Of Kyleena-treated women, 22% discontinued the study treatment due to an adverse reaction, 5.0% were lost to follow-up, 2.3% withdrew for unspecified reasons, 1.2% discontinued due to a protocol deviation, 0.9% discontinued due to pregnancy, and 20% discontinued due to other reasons.

The pregnancy rate calculated as the Pearl Index (PI) in women aged 18-35 years was the primary efficacy endpoint used to assess contraceptive reliability. The PI was calculated based on 28-day equivalent exposure cycles; evaluable cycles excluded those in which back-up contraception was used unless a pregnancy occurred in that cycle. The Year 1 PI was based on 2 pregnancies and the cumulative 5-year pregnancy rate was based on 13 pregnancies that occurred after the onset of treatment and within 7 days after Kyleena removal or expulsion.

About 71% of 163 women who desired pregnancy after study discontinuation and provided follow-up information, conceived within 12 months after removal of Kyleena.

The most common adverse reactions (occurring in ≥ 5% users) were vulvovaginitis (24%), ovarian cyst (22%), abdominal pain/pelvic pain (21%), headache/migraine (15%), acne/seborrhea (15%), dysmenorrhea/uterine spasm (10%), breast pain/breast discomfort (10%), and increased bleeding (8%). In the combined studies, 22% discontinued prematurely due to an adverse reaction. The most common adverse reactions (> 1%) leading to discontinuation were increased bleeding (4.5%), abdominal pain/pelvic pain (4.2%), device expulsion (3.1%), acne/seborrhea (2.3%), and dysmenorrhea/uterine spasm (1.3%). In the clinical trials, serious adverse reactions occurring in more than a single subject included: ectopic pregnancy/ruptured ectopic pregnancy (10 subjects); pelvic inflammatory disease (6 subjects); missed abortion/incomplete spontaneous abortion/spontaneous abortion (4 subjects); ovarian cyst (3 subjects); abdominal pain (4 subjects); depression/affective disorder (4 subjects); and uterine perforation/embedded device (myometrial perforation) (3 subjects).

Indication for Kyleena 

Kyleena™ (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) is a hormone-releasing IUD that prevents pregnancy for up to 5 years.
• If you have a pelvic infection, get infections easily, or have certain cancers, don't use Kyleena. Less than 1% of users get a serious pelvic infection called PID.
• If you have persistent pelvic or stomach pain or if Kyleena comes out, tell your doctor. If Kyleena comes out, use back-up birth control. Kyleena may attach to or go through the uterus and cause other problems.
• Pregnancy while using Kyleena is uncommon but can be life threatening and may result in loss of pregnancy or fertility.
• Ovarian cysts may occur but usually disappear.
• Bleeding and spotting may increase in the first 3 to 6 months and remain irregular. Periods over time usually become shorter, lighter, or may stop.

Kyleena does not protect against HIV or STDs.

Only you and your healthcare provider can decide if Kyleena is right for you. Kyleena is available by prescription only.

For important risk and use information about Kyleena, please see the Full Prescribing Information

Bayer: Science For A Better Life

Bayer is a global enterprise with core competencies in the Life Science fields of health care and agriculture. Its products and services are designed to benefit people and improve their quality of life. At the same time, the Group aims to create value through innovation, growth and high earning power. Bayer is committed to the principles of sustainable development and to its social and ethical responsibilities as a corporate citizen. In fiscal 2015, the Group employed around 117,000 people and had sales of EUR 46.3 billion. Capital expenditures amounted to EUR 2.6 billion, R&D expenses to EUR 4.3 billion. These figures include those for the high-tech polymers business, which was floated on the stock market as an independent company named Covestro on October 6, 2015. For more information, go to www.bayer.us.

© 2016 Bayer 

Bayer and the Bayer Cross are registered trademarks of Bayer. Kyleena is a trademark of Bayer.

Forward-Looking Statement

This news release may contain forward-looking statements based on current assumptions and forecasts made by Bayer Group or subgroup management. Various known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors could lead to material differences between the actual future results, financial situation, development or performance of the company and the estimates given here. These factors include those discussed in Bayer's public reports which are available on the Bayer website at www.bayer.com. The company assumes no liability whatsoever to update these forward-looking statements or to conform them to future events or developments.

1Kyleena Prescribing Information, September 2016.

2 Finer LB and Zolna MR, Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 2008–2011, New England Journal of Medicine, 2016, 374(9):843–852, http://nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMsa1506575.

3 Branum AM, Jones J. Trends in long-acting reversible contraception use among U.S. women aged 15–44. NCHS data brief, no 188. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2015.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release describes the relevant clinical trial in detail, earning this a satisfactory rating. That said, there is one question that the release does not address at all — whether the trial had a control group. That’s an important point, and it’s not clear why this issue isn’t addressed.
There is a strong implication that there was no control group. The lack of control group is not necessarily a problem since the main outcome of interest is prevention of pregnancy.  A control group would be helpful in putting the rates of adverse effects into context.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
An experimental Ebola vaccine was highly protective against the deadly virus in a major trial in Guinea, according to results published today in The Lancet. The vaccine is the first to prevent infection from one of the most lethal known pathogens, and the findings add weight to early trial results published last year. [1]

The vaccine, called rVSV-ZEBOV [2], was studied in a trial involving 11,841 people in Guinea during 2015. Among the 5,837 people who received the vaccine, no Ebola cases were recorded 10 days or more after vaccination [3]. In comparison, there were 23 cases 10 days or more after vaccination among those who did not receive the vaccine.

The trial was led by the World Health Organization, together with Guinea's Ministry of Health and other international partners.

"While these compelling results come too late for those who lost their lives during West Africa's Ebola epidemic, they show that when the next Ebola outbreak hits, we will not be defenceless," said Dr Marie-Paule Kieny, WHO's Assistant Director-General for Health Systems and Innovation, and the study's lead author [4].

The vaccine's manufacturer, Merck, Sharpe & Dohme, this year received Breakthrough Therapy Designation from the United States Food and Drug Administration and PRIME status from the European Medicines Agency, enabling faster regulatory review of the vaccine once it is submitted.

Since Ebola virus was first identified in 1976, sporadic outbreaks have been reported in Africa. But the 2013-2016 West African Ebola outbreak, which resulted in more than 11,300 deaths, highlighted the need for a vaccine.

The trial took place in the coastal region of Basse-Guinée, the area of Guinea still experiencing new Ebola cases when the trial started in 2015. The trial used an innovative design, a so-called "ring vaccination" approach - the same method used to eradicate small pox.

When a new Ebola case was diagnosed, the research team traced all people who may have been in contact with that case within the previous 3 weeks, such as people who lived in the same household, were visited by the patient, or were in close contact with the patient, their clothes or linen, as well as certain "contacts of contacts". A total of 117 clusters (or "rings") were identified, each made up of an average of 80 people.

Initially, rings were randomised to receive the vaccine either immediately or after a 3-week delay, and only adults over 18 years were offered the vaccine. After interim results were published showing the vaccine's efficacy, all rings were offered the vaccine immediately and the trial was also opened to children older than 6 years.

In addition to showing high efficacy among those vaccinated, the trial also shows that unvaccinated people in the rings were indirectly protected from Ebola virus through the ring vaccination approach (so-called "herd immunity"). However, the authors note that the trial was not designed to measure this effect, so more research will be needed.

"Ebola left a devastating legacy in our country. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to developing a vaccine that will prevent other nations from enduring what we endured" said Dr KeÏta Sakoba, Coordinator of the Ebola Response and Director of the National Agency for Health Security in Guinea [4].

To assess safety, people who received the vaccine were observed for 30 minutes after vaccination, and at repeated home visits up to 12 weeks later. Approximately half reported mild symptoms soon after vaccination, including headache, fatigue and muscle pain but recovered within days without long-term effects. Two serious adverse events were judged to be related to vaccination (a febrile reaction and one anaphylaxis) and one was judged to be possibly related (influenza-like illness). All three recovered without any long term effects.

It was not possible to collect biological samples from people who received the vaccine in order to analyse their immune response. Other studies are looking at the immune response to the vaccine including one conducted in parallel to the ring trial among frontline Ebola workers in Guinea.

"This both historical and innovative trial was made possible thanks to exemplary international collaboration and coordination, the contribution of many experts worldwide, and strong local involvement," said Dr John-Arne Røttingen, Specialist Director at the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, and the chairman of the study steering group [4].

In January, GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance provided US$5 million to Merck towards the future procurement of the vaccine once it is approved, prequalified and recommended by WHO. As part of this agreement, Merck committed to ensure that 300,000 doses of the vaccine are available for emergency use in the interim, and to submit the vaccine for licensure by the end of 2017. Merck has also submitted the vaccine to WHO's Emergency Use and Assessment Listing procedure, a mechanism through which experimental vaccines, medicines and diagnostics can be made available for use prior to formal licensure.

Additional studies are ongoing to provide more data on the safety of the vaccine in children and other vulnerable populations such as people with HIV. In case of Ebola flare-ups prior to approval, access to the vaccine is being made available through a procedure called "compassionate use" that enables use of the vaccine after informed consent. Merck and WHO's partners are working to compile data to support license applications.

The rapid development of rVSV-EBOV contributed to the development of WHO's R&D Blueprint, a global strategy to fast-track the development of effective tests, vaccines and medicines during epidemics.

Also published in The Lancet (embargo as above), is a phase 2 trial of a different Ebola vaccine candidate, the recombinant adenovirus type-5 Ebola vaccine. The trial was led by the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology and was conducted in Sierra Leone in 2015. It involved 500 healthy participants, followed for 6 months - 250 were given a high dose vaccine, 125 a low-dose and 125 a placebo. The study found that the vaccine was safe and induced an immune response that peaked at 28 days, but decreased during the six months post injection. One serious adverse event was reported, in an individual with a history of asthma. Further research on this vaccine is needed in order to assess its efficacy.

The rVSV-ZEBOV trial is funded by WHO, with support from the Wellcome Trust, the United Kingdom Department for International Development, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Norwegian Institute of Public Health through the Research Council of Norway, the Canadian Government through the Public Health Agency of Canada, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, International Development Research Centre and Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development and Médecins Sans Frontières.

The trial team includes experts from The University of Bern, the University of Florida, the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Public Health England, the European Mobile Laboratories among others. The trial was designed by a group of experts including the late Professor Donald A. Henderson of John Hopkins University, who led the WHO smallpox eradication effort by using the ring vaccination strategy.

[1] http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(15)61117-5/abstract 

[2] VSV-EBOV was developed by the Public Health Agency of Canada. The vaccine was licensed to NewLink Genetics, who in turn licensed it to Merck & Co. The vaccine works by replacing a gene from a harmless virus known as vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) with a gene encoding an Ebola virus surface protein. The vaccine does not contain any live Ebola virus. Earlier trials have shown the vaccine to be protective in animals, and be safe and produce an immune response in humans. 

[3] Analysis only included cases occurring 10 days after receiving the vaccine to account for the incubation period of the Ebola virus. 

[4] Quotes direct from authors and cannot be found in the text of the Article.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release notes that the trials involved 5,837 people who received the vaccine and 6,004 who did not. The fact that no patients in the vaccination group developed Ebola suggests that the vaccine does indeed have some effect. The statistical significance in the two groups for all patients was p = 0.01, suggesting that the result was unlikely to have occurred by chance alone.  On the other hand, the fact that the study was stopped early does raise the possibility that a longer lasting study would have found a smaller difference between the two groups as this is typically found in studies stopped early for effect.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, May 3, 2018 (HealthDay News) -- Much of the debate over when to start having mammograms has focused on lives saved, but new research suggests that early screening might also translate into smaller tumors and less aggressive breast cancer treatments.

"There are multiple benefits of mammography in terms of early detection. Not only do we save lives, but we reduce the likelihood of needing more aggressive treatment," said study author Dr. Elisa Port. She directs the Dubin Breast Center at Mount Sinai and is chief of breast surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital, both in New York City.

Currently, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that biennial screenings start at age 50 for most women, while the American Cancer Society advises that annual screenings begin at age 45. Earlier guidelines had suggested annual screenings begin at age 40.

Port noted that screening guidelines tend to be based on the ability of mammograms to save lives and how often they give a false positive result.

"But isn't there some benefit to getting tested earlier, like needing fewer lymph nodes removed and not needing chemotherapy? I think it's safe to say that most women, if they could be assured the same survival, would choose not to get more aggressive therapies," she said.

Port's study included more than 1,100 women diagnosed with breast cancer at the Dubin Breast Center. All of the women were older than 40.

The women were separated into two groups. One group had a mammogram within the 24 months before their breast cancer diagnosis. The other group had a screening 25 months or more before their diagnosis. The second group also included women who had never had a mammogram.

Women in the second group were 50 percent more likely to need chemotherapy. They were also 32 percent more likely to need surgery to remove the whole breast (mastectomy), and 66 percent more likely to need lymph nodes removed. And the women who were screened earlier had smaller tumors.

Port also looked at the 40- to 49-year-old age group, and found those who had never had a mammogram were much more likely to need chemotherapy. They were also more likely to have larger tumors (by 10 millimeters, on average) and to need a mastectomy than those in the 24 months or less group. But only 29 women fell into the "never had a mammogram" group.

However, the study did not prove a cause-and-effect link between earlier mammograms and smaller tumors and less aggressive treatment.

And Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer for the American Cancer Society, noted that this was an observational study that only looked at the experience of one institution.

Still, "the observations are consistent with what we have seen with the value of early detection. Clearly, the earlier a breast cancer is diagnosed, the less treatment that will be required. But this study doesn't tell us about long-term outcomes or what transpired over a long period of time," he said.

Also, because of the nature of the study and the small sample size in the young age group sub-analysis, Lichtenfeld said that "this cannot be interpreted as a study telling us what age to start mammograms."

The study is to be presented Thursday at the American Society of Breast Surgeons meeting, in Orlando, Fla. Findings presented at meetings are typically viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Learn more about mammography screening guidelines from the American Cancer Society.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did make clear some of the weaknesses of the study: The study found an association but did not prove causality and the study population was limited to a single health care institution. The story also mentions that the findings were presented at a meeting, which means they have not undergone peer-review.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters) - Eli Lilly and Co’s new Jardiance pill slashed deaths by 32 percent in patients with type 2 diabetes at risk of heart attack and stroke, a finding that could make it a mainstay diabetes treatment and triple its use, according to researchers and analysts.

Lilly shares jumped as much as 9 percent after data from the trial was released Thursday at a medical meeting in Stockholm.

“This is the first diabetes therapy to show robust effect in reducing cardiovascular death. It really is big news,” said Dr. Bernard Zinman, director of the Diabetes Centre at Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto, who led the three-year study of 7,000 people.

Because about one-half of the deaths in people with type 2 diabetes are caused by cardiovascular disease, reducing cardiovascular risk is considered essential to diabetes care. Type 2 diabetes is the most common form of the disease and is linked to obesity.

Jardiance, a once-a-day pill which won U.S. approval last year, belongs to a new family of treatments called SGLT2 inhibitors that include Johnson & Johnson’s Invokana and AstraZeneca Plc’s Farxiga. They lower blood sugar by inhibiting reabsorption of glucose in the kidneys.

Zinman, in an interview, predicted the new study would prompt medical societies to recommend that Jardiance be used by type 2 diabetics who have a history of heart disease or who are at risk of cardiovascular events.

About 26 million Americans have type 2 diabetes, according to federal data for 2014. The vast majority of those patients could be candidates for Jardiance, which costs over $4,000 per year, Morningstar analyst Damien Conover said.

“The big news here is that the drug reduced cardiovascular stuff. That has not been the case with all things in diabetes,” said David Marrero, president of health care and education at the American Diabetes Association. “It is probably going to be a more popular drug because of that.”

Sanford Bernstein analyst Tim Anderson more than tripled his annual sales forecast for Jardiance and combination drugs containing it to $2.7 billion by 2020. He cut his 2020 sales forecast for Merck & Co Inc’s Januvia, the leading member of a competing class of oral diabetes drugs called DPP-4 inhibitors, to $6 billion from $7.8 billion.

Anderson estimates Jardiance could boost Lilly’s earnings per share by 8 percent on average across 2016 to 2020.

In the study, patients taking Jardiance had a 38 percent reduction in cardiovascular death, including from heart attacks and strokes. There was no significant difference in non-fatal heart attacks or non-fatal strokes.

Those taking Jardiance had a 32 percent lower risk of dying from any cause, and a 35 percent lower rate of hospitalizations from heart failure.

The benefits were especially impressive because they added to protection that patients received from taking cholesterol fighters and other life-saving heart drugs, Zinman said.

“This is a wonderful thing,” said Dr. Jerome Tolbert of Mount Sinai Beth Israel Hospital in New York. He has not prescribed Jardiance and similar drugs as frequently as treatments like Januvia, but expects that may change based on the new data.

Zinman noted that Jardiance, like other SGLT2 drugs, causes weight loss and reduced blood pressure, besides lowering both blood sugar levels and body fat, and also reduces swelling, which all help the cardiovascular system.

Lilly and Boehringer last month disclosed that Jardiance met its primary study goal, becoming the first diabetes drug to show heart-protective results in a large cardiovascular trial. But they did not unveil detailed data until Thursday at the medical meeting.

Shares of Lily closed up 6.5 percent at $89.98 on Thursday, after rising as high as $92.83.

In calculating the combined number of cardiac deaths, non-fatal heart attacks and non-fatal strokes, 14 percent fewer events were seen in patients taking Jardiance in combination with standard treatments, compared with patients who took standard treatments alone, meeting the study’s main goal.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: A close call on this one. The story makes it clear that this was a trial comparing empagliflozin to placebo in patients with type 2 diabetes who were at high risk of cardiovascular disease. And it lays out the main outcomes. But beyond that, it doesn’t tell us much. And it allows the lead study author to speculate — prematurely perhaps — that the study “would prompt medical societies to recommend in their treatment guidelines that Jardiance be used for type 2 diabetics that have a history of heart disease or are at risk of cardiovascular events.” While that’s possible, we don’t really know what these societies will recommend until they actually synthesize this evidence together with other available data — and so the story could have pushed back on that point.
We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Study: Honey better than drugs for kids' coughs For kids' coughs, silence is golden and sweet

Parents might consider giving their coughing child honey instead of medicine, according to a study released Monday.

Buckwheat honey — a dark variety sold in most grocery stores — relieved children's coughs and helped them sleep better than dextromethorphan, the drug in most over-the-counter cough suppressants, according to a report published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Honey also beat out no treatment at all.

"(Honey) is a cheap and effective treatment," said Dr. Ian Paul, lead investigator for the study. "Consider using this as a treatment before going to the pharmacy to pick up an over-the-counter cough and cold medicine."

Honey has long been used by some parents as an alternative treatment for cough, although it should not be given to children under 1 year old.

The study comes at a time when parents are on the lookout for new ways to give sick children relief. A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended last month that children under the age of 6 not be given over-the-counter cough and cold medicines.

For the study, 105 children ages 2-18 with upper respiratory tract infections that kept them awake at night were given either a dose of buckwheat honey, honey-flavored cough syrup or no treatment half an hour before bedtime.

One dose measured one-half teaspoon for children aged 2-5, one teaspoon for children aged 6-11 and two teaspoons for children aged 12-18.

Parents of the 35 children who received honey, given either on its own or with a non-caffeinated drink, reported they coughed less and slept better than those who gave their children nothing. The group that used honey also reported more favorable results than those who used cough syrup, but since the study group was small, those differences weren't statistically significant.

One local pediatrician said she wouldn't discourage parents from trying honey with their children, but more studies are needed to draw solid conclusions.

"In older children, if it makes them comfortable and it helps them sleep at night, then there may be a potential benefit," said Dr. Sara Rizvi, assistant professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine who also works at a primary care clinic at Texas Children's Hospital. "I would be reluctant to routinely recommend to all parents that they give honey, because in some rare cases children can have reactions to honey."

Paul, a pediatrician who practices at Penn State Children's Hospital and teaches at the university's College of Medicine, said he began the study because he was frustrated no treatment had been proven beneficial to relieve the common children's cough. Several years ago, he led another study that showed over-the-counter cough medicine was no more effective than placebos.

Honey is not only cheap and readily available, it's also generally safer than cough medicine, which can have side effects or be administered in the wrong dose.

Honey should not, however, be given to children under the age of 1 because it sometimes contains a bacteria that causes botulism, a rare paralytic illness that can result in death. Unlike older children, infants can't fight the bacteria.

Paul's group tested buckwheat honey instead of the lighter, more popular varieties because it's known to have more antioxidant and antimicrobial effects, which have been shown in other studies to help wounds heal. Honey may suppress cough because its sweetness causes salivation that coats the throat, authors of the study suggested.

"It's kind of amazing that something so simple could be an answer," Paul said.

The study was paid for by the National Honey Board, an industry-funded agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Under the provisions of the grant, the group was not involved in the study or the published results, Paul said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story adequately describes the design of the current study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Chicago, IL (May 6, 2017) -- A new study finds that individuals struggling with obesity who are not candidates for weight-loss surgery can benefit substantially from non-surgical endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty, according to research presented at Digestive Disease Week® (DDW) 2017, the largest international gathering of physicians, researchers and academics in the fields of gastroenterology, hepatology, endoscopy and gastrointestinal surgery.

Patients who underwent ESG -- a procedure performed through the mouth with an endoscope to "accordion" the stomach by suturing pleats to reduce its size -- achieved greater weight loss than laparoscopic banding, but less weight loss than laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy surgery. Patients who received treatment endoscopically had shorter hospital stays and lower costs than those who had laparoscopic surgery.

"Obesity continues to be a problem in America and it is an epidemic rapidly spreading around the world," said Reem Z. Sharaiha, MD, MSc, assistant professor of medicine at Weill Cornell Medicine and attending physician at New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center, the study's lead author. "Our research -- the first to compare these treatments -- demonstrates that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty is safe and effective in helping patients lead healthier lives. It should be considered as another tool available to clinicians and patients in the fight against obesity."

Dr. Sharaiha followed 278 patients who underwent ESG (91 patients), laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (120 patients) or laparoscopic banding (67). During the one-year follow-up period, patients went to an academic bariatric center of excellence as part of their treatment.

At one-year follow-up, patients who chose laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy surgery achieved the greatest percent total body weight loss at 29.28 percent, compared to 17.57 percent for endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty patients and 14.46 percent for laparoscopic banding patients. Researchers found that patients who received endoscopic treatment had lower complications (1 percent) than those who received surgical treatment (10 percent for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and 11 percent for laparoscopic banding).

Dr. Sharaiha noted that these findings do not suggest that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty will replace the two surgical treatments as weight-loss interventions. Instead, these results show that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty is another possibility that patients and health-care providers should consider when discussing options.

While endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty is performed with an endoscopic device through the mouth, laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy involves a small surgical incision in the belly to place a tube in the abdomen, allowing doctors to reduce the stomach's volume. With laparoscopic banding, doctors insert a tube through an incision in the belly to place a band around the stomach, restricting food intake.

The team also reported that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty patients customarily left the hospital on the same day of treatment, while laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy patients stayed for about three days and laparoscopic banding patients for a day and a half.

When examining cost, researchers reported endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty resulted in the lowest-cost, with an average institutional procedure cost of $12,000, compared to $22,000 for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and $15,000 for laparoscopic banding.

"For years, patients seeking weight-loss interventions had limited options because they could not tolerate or did not want surgery, or it was not even an option for them," added Dr. Sharaiha. "Our research shows that endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty can be the treatment they've been looking for. It's less invasive than surgery and helps them reach their health goals."

Obesity is associated with heart disease, stroke, diabetes and some cancers, and researchers estimate that it is the second-leading cause of preventable death, after tobacco use. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that more than one in three U.S. adults is obese, having a body mass index of 30 or more. The CDC estimated the medical cost of obesity in the U.S. at approximately $147 billion in 2008. Globally, the World Health Organization estimates that more than 600 million people were obese in 2014.

Dr. Reem Z. Sharaiha will present data from the study, "Endoscopic Sleeve Gastroplasty, Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy, and Laparoscopic Band for Weight Loss: How Do They Compare?" abstract 334, on Saturday, May 7, at 11:54 a.m. CT, in S504 of McCormick Place. For more information about featured studies, as well as a schedule of availability for featured researchers, please visit http://www. . Dr. Sharaiha did not have any disclosures for DDW research.

Digestive Disease Week® (DDW) is the largest international gathering of physicians, researchers and academics in the fields of gastroenterology, hepatology, endoscopy, and gastrointestinal surgery. Jointly sponsored by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Institute, the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE), and the Society for Surgery of the Alimentary Tract (SSAT), DDW takes place May 6-9, 2017, at McCormick Place, Chicago. The meeting showcases more than 5,000 abstracts and hundreds of lectures on the latest advances in GI research, medicine and technology. More information can be found at http://www. .
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does an adequate job of describing the study. However, there are two things that could have made the release significantly better. First, there could have been some information about the patients involved — including age, sex, and other characteristics that could potentially affect outcomes. (e.g., the conference abstract notes that a lower age was a predictor for weight loss at six months.) Were there any factors that informed physicians to choose one procedure over another? Since this was not a randomized trial, the release could have noted that factors other than the treatment itself likely played a role in how much weight was lost.
Second, while the release notes that “patients went to an academic bariatric center of excellence as part of their treatment,” it could have made it clear that changes to diet and exercise are an important factor in determining the outcome of medical interventions for weight loss.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
DALLAS — Heart patients should be regularly screened for signs of depression, the American Heart Association recommended Monday.

Depression is about three times more common in heart attack survivors and those hospitalized with heart problems than the general population, according to the recommendations published in the journal Circulation. The authors said only about half of heart doctors say they treat depression in their patients — and not all those diagnosed with depression are treated.

“I think we could reduce considerable suffering and improve outcomes,” by screening, said Erika Froelicher, professor of nursing at the University of California, San Francisco. “I know we can do more.”

Although there’s no direct evidence that heart patients who are screened fare better, depression can result in poorer outcomes and a poorer quality of life, the panel said. Depressed patients may skip their medications, not change their diet or exercise or take part in rehabilitation programs, they said.

Anyone from cardiologists to nurses to primary care doctors can and should be involved in determining whether a patient is depressed, said Froelicher, who was co-chairwoman of the panel that wrote the recommendations.

The panel suggests that heart patients be screened by first asking two standard questions: In the past two weeks, have you had little interest or pleasure in doing things? Have you felt down, depressed or hopeless?

If the patient answers yes to one or both, a questionnaire is recommended to determine if the patient is depressed and the severity. If depression is indicated, the patient may need to see a professional qualified in treating depression, the panel said, adding that treatment options include antidepressants, seeing a psychotherapist and exercise.

“Some physicians are qualified to treat it — others may be more comfortable referring the problem to a qualified mental health professional,” Froelicher said.

Psychiatrist Michelle Riba said the statement’s emphasis on frequent screening is important.

“What you want to see in a particular patient is how they do over time,” said Riba, past president of the American Psychiatric Association, which has endorsed the heart association’s recommendations.

One doctor said screening isn’t enough; patients need close monitoring to make sure they get help.

“A lot of patients with depression don’t follow up on it,” said Dr. Mary Whooley, a professor of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, who was not on the panel.

Barbara Forman, 62, struggled with depression after her double bypass about five years ago. She said she spent most of her time at her Englewood, Ohio, home sitting in her chair, frequently crying for no reason. When she did get out, she was often winded, even from a walk up a sidewalk to deliver cupcakes to her grandchild’s classroom.

“I’m thinking, is this the way it’s going to be for the rest of my life? Since I’ve had a heart event, is my life over?” she said. “It also made me afraid to do things. I didn’t know how a heart attack felt. I would think, ‘Is this a heart attack?’”

A couple of months after she got home she called Mended Hearts, a group affiliated with the heart association that provides support to heart patients, and talked to someone who let her know depression was common in heart patients.

Her family doctor sent her to a psychologist, and after some initial reluctance, she started taking an antidepressant. That, along with starting a walking routine and volunteering with Mended Hearts and the heart association, improved her outlook.

“You can’t sit in your house and just vegetate,” she said. “Over the last 18 months to two years — It’s really gotten better.”
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does mention that there is no direct evidence that screening for depression can improve outcomes. The story could have done more to describe the indirect evidence that support its use in heart patients.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
"It would certainly be premature to suggest taking statins to prevent rheumatoid arthritis ," he tells WebMD. "But one important message is that people who have been prescribed them should adhere to treatment. Right now about 75% of people who begin taking statins stop within two years."

Study researcher Gabriel Chodick, MD, called the risk reduction "important and meaningful," but he says more research is needed to confirm the association.

The regular use of statins was associated with a 42% reduction in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) risk in a newly reported study of patients enrolled in one of Israel's largest health plans .

Sept. 8, 2010 -- People who take cholesterol -lowering statin drugs to reduce heart disease risk may also be cutting their risk for developing the painful inflammatory joint disease rheumatoid arthritis .

The most widely prescribed class of drugs in the world, statins such as Crestor, Lescol, Lipitor, Pravachol, and Zocor reduce cholesterol in the blood by blocking an enzyme in the liver associated with its production.

There is also a suggestion that statins reduce systemic inflammation and may be protective against RA and other chronic inflammatory diseases.

Several studies have suggested a role for statins in slowing the progression of disease among patients with rheumatoid arthritis, but others failed to find a protective benefit for statin use.

In the newly published study, Chodick and colleagues examined data on 1.8 million members of Israel's Maccabi Healthcare Services HMO. Between 1998 and 2007, 2,578 new cases of rheumatoid arthritis were identified in this group.

The analysis revealed that patients who took statins for at least eight years during the decade-long study period were roughly 40% less likely to develop rheumatoid arthritis than people who did not take statins at all or who took them less persistently.

A more modest 15% reduction in osteoarthritis risk was seen in persistent statin users. Like rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis is a chronic, degenerative joint disease. But it is not driven by inflammation, so statin use is not as likely to affect its development or progression.

The study appears in the September issue of the journal PLoS Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 


Although the story headline and lead suggest the study evaluated whether statins could prevent rheumatoid arthritis, overall the story was clear that the study was observational and that all it can offer is an indication of an association between statin use and arthritis rates. Indeed, the story clearly pointed out that the results of this study merely suggest experimental trials and other research should evaluate the potential benefits of statin use in regard to rheumatoid arthritis. This is not the kind of evidence that can reveal whether statins were responsible for the lower risk seen among participants who took the drugs over an extended period.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
“I’m very favorably impressed they were able to pull this study off so successfully, and it clearly shows the importance of early intervention,” said Dr. William T. Carpenter, a professor of psychiatry at the University of Maryland School of Medicine, who was not involved in the study.

Dr. Mary E. Olson, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, who has worked to promote approaches to psychosis that are less reliant on drugs, said the combined treatment had a lot in common with Open Dialogue, a Finnish program developed in the 1980s. “These are zeitgeist ideas, and I think it’s thrilling that this trial got such good results,” Dr. Olson said.

In the new study, doctors used the medications as part of a package of treatments and worked to keep the doses as low as possible minimizing their bad effects. The sprawling research team, led by Dr. John M. Kane, chairman of the psychiatry department at Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, randomly assigned 34 community care clinics in 21 states to provide either treatment as usual, or the combined package.

The team trained staff members at the selected clinics to deliver that package, and it included three elements in addition to the medication. First, help with work or school such as assistance in deciding which classes or opportunities are most appropriate, given a person’s symptoms. Second, education for family members to increase their understanding of the disorder. And finally, one-on-one talk therapy in which the person with the diagnosis learns tools to build social relationships, reduce substance use and help manage the symptoms, which include mood problems as well as hallucinations and delusions.

For example, some patients can learn to defuse the voices in their head — depending on the severity of the episode — by ignoring them or talking back. The team recruited 404 people with first-episode psychosis, mostly diagnosed in their late teens or 20s. About half got the combined approach and half received treatment as usual. Clinicians monitored both groups using standardized checklists that rate symptom severity and quality of life, like whether a person is working, and how well he or she is getting along with family members.

The group that started on the combined treatment scored, on average, more poorly on both measures at the beginning of the trial. Over two years, both groups showed steady improvement. But by the end, those who had been in the combined program had more symptom relief, and were functioning better as well.The researchers expect to have lowered average doses in the combined program but had not yet finished analyzing that data.

“One way to think about it is, if you look at the people who did the best — those we caught earliest after their first episode — their improvement by the end was easily noticeable by friends and family,” Dr. Kane said. The gains for those in typical treatment were apparent to doctors, but much less obvious.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: While we would have liked a few more numbers, the story does explain that the comprehensive study included many clinics nationwide and two years of follow up on 404 patients. Since schizophrenia is a chronic condition, studies going beyond two years would help solidify these results — and the study itself mentioned that the researchers plan to follow patients out to five years. Overall, however, we think the description of the evidence is sufficient to warrant a Satisfactory rating.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
WEDNESDAY, Jan. 5, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have taken another step in the hunt to find a treatment for an aggressive, likely-to-recur form of breast cancer.

In a study published in the Jan. 5 online edition of the New England Journal of Medicine, the experimental drug iniparib not only shrank tumors and increased the time they took to progress, but also surprised researchers by prolonging survival in women with what's known as triple-negative breast cancer.

This type of breast cancer lacks receptors for estrogen and progesterone and doesn't have large quantities of HER-2/neu protein, which the most successful cancer therapies target. This means that many currently available drugs simply won't affect it.

"We were surprised [at the results] because triple-negative breast cancer is very difficult to treat," said study lead author Dr. Joyce O'Shaughnessy.

"The big, big surprise was survival," added O'Shaughnessy, who nevertheless stressed that the trial was small and preliminary.

The findings were enough to generate the interest of Dr. Lisa A. Carey, the co-author of an accompanying editorial.

"It is early, but it's really exciting because it's a new class of drugs. It isn't that often that we have a completely new approach to treating cancer," said Carey, medical director of the University of North Carolina Breast Center in Chapel Hill. "This is a new book. We've just opened it up."

Iniparib inhibits a pathway that helps repair DNA; researchers call it the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) pathway. If this chain is interrupted, cancer cells don't have the necessary tools to repair themselves.

"[PARP inhibitors] work by preventing the cells from repairing damage to their DNA," Carey explained.

A similar drug, in fact, has shown benefit in patients with BRCA 1 or BRCA 2 mutations predisposing them to breast and ovarian cancer.

In this study, 123 patients with triple-negative breast cancer were randomized to receive a commonly used, well-tolerated chemotherapy regimen (gemcitabine and carboplatin) or to receive chemo plus iniparib.

More than one-half of the women responded to the combination treatment (meaning the tumor volume decreased) versus only about one-third of those receiving chemo alone.

Women receiving iniparib plus chemo lived an average of 12.3 months compared to just 7.7 months in the chemo-alone group. This may not seen like very long in either group, but for this serious a cancer, it is impressive, the researchers noted.

This was a phase 2 trial. O'Shaughnessy, who is co-director of breast cancer research at Baylor-Sammons Cancer Center, US Oncology, and Texas Oncology in Dallas, said the results of a larger (about 500 patients) phase 3 trial should be available within one to three months.

"The whole field is still preliminary and we have to be careful not to overhype the results [as] we're waiting on the results of the phase 3 trial," she said. "Phase 2 was quite positive, but we really don't know if this is going to end up benefiting patients until we get to phase 3."

In her editorial accompanying the study, Carey agreed. "Both excitement and caution are appropriate in interpreting the trial," she wrote. "Some clear drawbacks should be noted." Among them, she said, were the small size of the study group, "imbalances at baseline" favoring the iniparib group, and the "unconventional" chemotherapy regimen. But caveats notwithstanding, she concluded, the results may herald improved therapy "for an underserved subgroup of patients with breast cancer."

O'Shaughnessy added that the drug was "extremely well tolerated [by patients]. It didn't seem to add any appreciable toxicity to chemotherapy."

In the meantime, she pointed out, a woman walking through a clinic door who is diagnosed with triple-negative breast cancer shouldn't panic. "If it's only in the breast or lymph nodes, we cure most triple-negative cancers. But when it recurs and becomes metastatic, it's very difficult to treat," she explained.

The study was funded by BiPar Sciences, a subsidiary of Sanofi-Aventis which makes the drug.

The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more on breast cancer.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The evaluation of the evidence was good.  The piece included cautionary quotes from the researcher.  Quotes from a journal editorial also specified drawbacks of the study.
Three of the four drawbacks listed were not explained in the piece.  Explanations would have been helpful especially since the piece termed the chemotherapy regimen “commonly used” but one drawback was “the unconventional chemotherapy regimen.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A new look at the medical evidence shows zinc supplements may take the edge off the common cold.

But not a whole lot.

Although the precise estimate is still uncertain, researchers found that people who started taking zinc-loaded lozenges or syrups within 24 hours of showing symptoms — a sore throat, say, or runny nose — shortened their cold by one day. By comparison, a normal cold lasts about a week.

Still, with an infection that currently has no good treatment and leads to an estimated 275 million lost work days a year in the U.S., well, what a difference a day makes.

The review, published by the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organization that evaluates medical research, also shows that people taking the supplements tended to have milder symptoms.

“I think one can give it a try,” said Dr. Meenu Singh, a pediatrician at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research in Chandigarh, India, who led the new work.

“But giving zinc over a long period of time for prevention should be done very carefully,” she told Reuters Health.

Zinc may interfere with other metals in the body, and that may have unpredictable consequences over the long haul, Singh said.

An earlier Cochrane review from 1999 didn’t find any signs that zinc supplements would work. But since then several new studies - known as randomized controlled trials - have been completed.

The new review is based on 13 trials with 966 participants who either took zinc or a dummy treatment at the beginning of their symptoms. Another two trials found that zinc helped stave off colds, but the quality of that research was low.

The bottom line: After seven days of treatment, those taking the supplements had less than half the chance of still being sick.

A typical adult has a few colds every year. While the episodes usually aren’t serious, the resulting visits to the doctor alone cost the U.S. an annual $7.7 billion, according to the new report.

Singh said the side effects of zinc lozenges, which can be bought for a few dollars in any drug store in the U.S., come down to bad taste and some cases of nausea.

The researchers did not study nasal zinc remedies, however.

In 2009, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration warned Matrixx Initiatives to stop selling its widely used supplement Zicam after more than 130 users reportedly lost their sense of smell.

Singh said there was no evidence of a similar danger from the lozenges or syrups.

Exactly how well zinc works is a matter of future research, and the one day estimate may well change, the researchers note. They add it is currently unclear what dose and particular formulation of the supplement will be most helpful.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a better job than the WebMD story on the same topic of walking readers through the review. It says, for example, high up, “The new review is based on 13 trials with 966 participants who either took zinc or a dummy treatment at the beginning of their symptoms. Another two trials found that zinc helped stave off colds, but the quality of that research was low.The bottom line: After seven days of treatment, those taking the supplements had less than half the chance of still being sick.” The story also says, “Exactly how well zinc works is a matter of future research, and the one day estimate may well change, the researchers note. They add it is currently unclear what dose and particular formulation of the supplement will be most helpful.”
The published article is 58 pages long, so it is not surprising that a story can’t do it all in reporting on the results. For example, the story suggests that 13 trials were included in the review. That is true but not all of the trials were included in the each analysis due to different reporting methods. People who took zinc preparations are said to have had symptoms that lasted about a day shorter than those who took a placebo, which is based on six of the trials. The paper notes a mean reduction of about one day. That is a subtle but big difference. The story also notes that people taking zinc products had less severe symptoms, which was based on five of the trials and not 13. A bit more attention to the detail would have provided readers with a better understanding of the review methods.
Nonethless, we’ll give it the benefit of the doubt, as the overall tone of the story drove home the uncertainties:  “may take the edge off the common cold…but not a whole lot.” … “I think one can give it a try,” said the researcher who led the new work.  “But giving zinc over a long period of time for prevention should be be done very carefully.”  All appropriate caveats.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - Women who take part in exercise, diet programs or a combination of the two during pregnancy can prevent excessive weight gain, according to a fresh review of past research.

The review incorporates dozens of new studies to update a previous review that did not find enough evidence to support the use of diet and exercise during pregnancy.

After including the new studies, the new review found “high-quality evidence” to show diet, exercise or both can reduce the risk of excessive weight gain during pregnancy, write the researchers in The Cochrane Library.

Other benefits may include a lower risk of cesarean delivery, excessive birth weight, and respiratory

problems in the newborn, “particularly for high-risk women receiving combined diet and exercise interventions,” add the researchers, led by Benja Muktabhant of Khon Kaen University in Thailand.

The U.S. Institute of Medicine says the amount of weight women should gain during pregnancy varies depending on their non-pregnancy weight.

For example, a normal-weight woman should gain between 25 and 35 pounds, while an overweight woman should gain between 15 and 25 pounds. Obese women should gain even less.

Gaining too much weight is tied to an increased risk of complications for both mother and child, according to the researchers, who completed the review for The Cochrane Collaboration, an international organization that evaluates medical research.

For the new review, the researchers examined data from 65 randomized controlled trials, which are considered the “gold standard” of medical research. They were able to combine data from 49 trials involving a total of 11,444 pregnant women.

The women were randomly assigned to a diet, exercise, a combination of the two or standard care. The diets and exercise programs varied, but could include low-glycemic diets and unsupervised exercise.

Women who took part in diet, exercise or combination programs were about 20 percent less likely than women in standard-care groups to gain too much weight while pregnant, the researchers report.

The women who took part in diet, exercise and combination programs were also less likely to develop high blood pressure during pregnancy, compared to those in the standard care group.

There was no clear benefit among the women in the diet and exercise groups when the researchers looked at other complications, such as cesarean delivery, but it did look like there may be some benefit, they write.

While the new study generally did not show fewer complications in the diet and exercise group, Dr. Loralei Thornburg told Reuters Health that it’s good that there was no increase in complications.

“This was very reassuring that there wasn’t an increased risk of preterm birth with moderate exercise,” said Thornburg, a high-risk pregnancy expert at the University of Rochester Medical Center in New York.

“Most people gain more weight than they probably should during pregnancy,” Thornburg, who was not involved with the review, told Reuters Health.

She said women who gain too much weight may not be able to lose it after the baby is born. Then, during the next pregnancy the woman is already heavier and that may increase the risk of complications.

“In the next pregnancy, if you don’t get it off, you may go from obese to very obese,” Thornburg said.

She cautioned, however, that women should check with their doctors before starting a diet and exercise program during pregnancy.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Another close one. The story states that “the researchers examined data from 65 randomized controlled trials, which are considered the ‘gold standard’ of medical research. They were able to combine data from 49 trials involving a total of 11,444 pregnant women.” Good. The story also says “the new review found ‘high quality evidence'” — not as good. The story never defines what it means by “high-quality evidence,” and we think that description could be somewhat misleading, since the paper notes that 20 of the studies it looked at were “at moderate-to-high risk of bias.” The paper also differentiated between findings for which it had “high-quality evidence” (those studies found “no clear difference” on excessive birth weight) and those for which it had “moderate-quality evidence” (those studies found that women in diet or exercise programs had less weight gain) — a distinction the story didn’t address.
With that being said, we acknowledge that it would have been difficult for the story to get into the details that would have clarified these issues, and we think the coverage is generally on target. We’ll give the benefit of the doubt here and award a Satisfactory.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
ILC 2017: The study evaluated the use of a direct-acting antiviral treatment in children aged 6 to 11, for whom the standard of care has been pegylated interferon plus ribavirin

April 21, 2017, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: A study presented today that evaluated an investigational dosage of once-daily ledipasvir 45 mg/sofosbuvir 200 mg (LDV/SOF) in children aged six to 11 years infected with the Hepatitis C virus (HCV), found that 99% of children (n=89/90) had undetectable levels of HCV-RNA 12 weeks after treatment. The study, presented at The International Liver Congress™ 2017 in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, also showed that the fixed-dose combination of LDV/SOF was well-tolerated, and no patients experienced a serious adverse event considered related to the study drug.

Around 180 million people globally have chronic HCV infection,1 including approximately 15 million people in the EU.2 The prevalence of HCV infection in children varies from 0.05%-0.36% in the United States and Europe and up to 1.8%-5.8% in some developing countries.3 While direct-acting antivirals have been used to treat and cure adult patients with HCV,4-7 until now children have been mainly treated for 24 to 48 weeks with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (RBV), an older treatment which causes severe side effects.8

"Direct-acting antivirals have transformed the treatment of adults with chronic HCV, however, studies of these new therapies in children are required," said Dr Karen Murray, University of Washington School of Medicine and Seattle Children's, Seattle, United States, and lead author of the study. "These data establish the use of the oral direct-acting antivirals as an important treatment option in HCV-infected children aged six to 11 years old."

This ongoing, open-label study enrolled 90 children aged between six and 11 years with chronic HCV, mostly genotype 1 (n=86). Children with HCV genotype 1 infection received 12 weeks of treatment (n=85) or 24 weeks of treatment if they had cirrhosis and failed prior treatment with pegylated interferon plus RBV (n=1); genotype 3 patients received LDV/SOF plus RBV for 24 weeks (n=2); genotype 4 patients received LDV/SOF for 12 weeks (n=2). Most children were male (59%), white (79%), treatment naïve (80%), and vertically infected (97%). Of the study population, 89/90 achieved a sustained virologic response 12 weeks after treatment (SVR12); one treatment-naïve genotype 1 patient with cirrhosis relapsed. No children discontinued the study due to side effects or had a severe or life-threatening adverse event related to the study drug. The most common side effects reported in 10% or more of patients were headache, fever, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting, cough, fatigue, sore throat and nausea.

"This study is a breakthrough for the management of children aged six to 11 years old with Hepatitis C, demonstrating that the new DAA regimen is highly efficacious and, more importantly, safe in this group of HCV-infected children", said Prof Frank Tacke, University Hospital Aachen, Germany, and EASL Governing Board Member.

This annual congress is the biggest event in the EASL calendar, attracting scientific and medical experts from around the world to learn about the latest in liver research. Attending specialists present, share, debate and conclude on the latest science and research in hepatology, working to enhance the treatment and management of liver disease in clinical practice. This year, the congress is expected to attract approximately 10,000 delegates from all corners of the globe. The International Liver Congress™ 2017 will take place from April 19 - 23, at the RAI Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

About The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL)

Since its foundation in 1966, this not-for-profit organisation has grown to over 4,000 members from all over the world, including many of the leading hepatologists in Europe and beyond. EASL is the leading liver association in Europe, having evolved into a major European Association with international influence, with an impressive track record in promoting research in liver disease, supporting wider education and promoting changes in European liver policy.

For more information, please contact the ILC Press Office at:

Session title: Parallel session: Advances in the treatment of HCV 

Time, date and location of session: 16:00 - 18:00, Friday 21 April, Hall 5 

Presenter: Karen Murray, United States of America 

Abstract: Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir ± ribavirin for 12 or 24 weeks is safe and effective in children 6-11 years old with chronic hepatitis C infection (PS101), 17:30 - 17:45

1 EASL Recommendation on Treatment of Hepatitis C 2016. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

2 World Health Organization. Global Alert and Response - Hepatitis C. Available from: http://www. . Last accessed: April 2017.

3 Pawlowska M, Malgorzata et al. What's new in hepatitis C virus infections in children? WJG. 2015;21(38):10783-10789.

4 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for untreated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1889-98.

5 Afdhal N, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for previously treated HCV genotype 1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1483-93.

6 Kowdley KV, et al. Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 8 or 12 weeks for chronic HCV without cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 2014 May 15;370(20):1879-88.

7 Sulkowski MS, et al. Daclatasvir plus sofosbuvir for previously treated or untreated chronic HCV infection. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 16;370(3):211-21.

8 Jara P, Hierro L. Treatment of Hepatitis C in children. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;4(1):51-61.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The news release gives information about the length of the study, the number of participants, and the study population. It states that most were male, white, and had no prior treatment, and had been infected by their mothers at birth. And it states that this is an open-label study, so no standard treatment or placebo was used as a comparison.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
SUNDAY, Aug. 28, 2011 (HealthDay News) -- An experimental drug, apixaban (Eliquis), appears better than the old standby warfarin in preventing strokes in people with the abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation, a new study finds.

Over 2.6 million Americans are affected by atrial fibrillation, and many take warfarin (also known as Coumadin) to prevent dangerous clots that can cause a stroke. Warfarin is notoriously tricky to modulate, however, and needs to be closely monitored -- usually through monthly doctors' visits. If the drug's activity isn't checked regularly it can trigger severe bleeding episodes, the most serious of which can happen in the brain.

"Warfarin is labor-intensive to manage," said study researcher Dr. Jack Ansell, chairman of the department of medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. "Sometimes it impairs the patient's quality of life and the outcomes are very dependent on how well the drug dosing is managed," he added. "This [new] drug has a lot of advantages over warfarin."

With apixaban, patients can use a standard dose that doesn't need monitoring and adjusting, Ansell said. Also, unlike warfarin, apixaban has few interactions with other drugs or foods, he added.

The study was funded by Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer, the makers of apixaban.

Apixaban is a so-called Xa inhibitor, a class of anticoagulants (anti-clotting drugs) that work by blocking factor X, a protein involved in blood clotting. Ansell expects drugs in this class will have a major effect on how atrial fibrillation is managed in the future.

Another similar drug, Pradaxa (dabigatran), has been on the market for about a year and many patients with atrial fibrillation have been switched or started on it, he said.

"Once [apixaban] is available it is going to be very difficult to avoid offering this drug to patients," he said.

The issue of cost remains a factor, however. While generic warfarin is just pennies a dose, any new brand-name drug is likely to be much more expensive. According to Laura Hortas, a spokeswoman for Bristol-Myers Squibb, because apixaban is still an experimental drug its price tag remains uncertain.

The new report was published online Aug. 28 in the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with its presentation at the European Society of Cardiology Congress in Paris.

For the trial, more than 18,000 patients with atrial fibrillation and a heightened risk for stroke were randomly assigned to receive either apixaban or warfarin.

Over an average of 1.8 years of follow-up there were fewer strokes or clots among patients taking apixaban (1.27 percent a year), compared with patients taking warfarin (1.6 percent per year), the researchers found.

This means that apixaban prevented six patients from having a stroke, 15 patients from having a major bleeding event and eight patients from dying, the researchers said in a Duke University news release.

The major effect on stroke was preventing hemorrhagic stroke, which is caused by bleeding in the brain and is the most serious type of stroke. According to the researchers, apixaban reduced this risk by 50 percent, preventing four patients from having this type of stroke and two patients from having an ischemic stroke (cause by a vessel blockage) or stroke of uncertain origin.

As to apixaban's expected higher price tag, Ansell said that since the drug does not require monitoring and the incidence of stroke and major bleeding are less, savings in doctors' visits and stroke treatment should more than compensate.

The new trial comes on the heels of another study on apixaban that was stopped early due to safety concerns. In that trial, published in July in the New England Journal of Medicine, apixaban's use was associated with raised odds for bleeding -- without providing patients with any reduction in heart attack risk.

However, "in that case, apixaban was given to patients with coronary artery disease who were also taking two other blood thinners," Ansell noted. "The three of them together showed that the risk of bleeding was just too high and there was no real benefit in that population. But, that's an entirely different problem, compared with atrial fibrillation," he said.

Commenting on the latest study, Dr. Gregg C. Fonarow, a professor of cardiology at the University of California, Los Angeles agreed that "atrial fibrillation substantially increases the risk of stroke and death."

Warfarin reduces the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, but it also boosts the odds of bleeding and is often difficult to manage, he said.

"Apixaban is now the first oral anticoagulant [blood thinner] to show a statistically significant improvement in survival over warfarin in atrial fibrillation patients," Fonarow said. "This represents a very important therapeutic advance in the care of patients with atrial fibrillation."

For more information on atrial fibrillation, visit the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provided a clear explanation about the nature of the patients, the size of the study, and the fact that it was a randomized clinical trial.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Human Genome Sciences, based in Rockville, Md., is sharing development and marketing rights to the drug with GlaxoSmithKline. Results from a second Phase 3 trial are due in November. If that succeeds, the companies will apply for regulatory approval in the first half of next year.

Lupus is an autoimmune disease, in which the defense system against pathogens attacks the body’s own tissues. The disease, which primarily affects women of child-bearing age, can cause rashes, arthritis, mouth sores, kidney damage and other problems.

One recent study estimated that 322,000 Americans definitely or probably have systemic lupus erythematosus, the most common form of the disease and the one against which Benlysta was tested. The Lupus Foundation of America estimates that 1.5 million Americans have some form of lupus.

Because the disease’s symptoms wax and wane on their own and vary considerably from one patient to another, it has been hard to demonstrate the efficacy of drugs in clinical trials.

Among the companies that have had setbacks or outright failures in clinical trials are Roche and Biogen Idec with their drug Rituxan; La Jolla Pharmaceutical with Riquent; Bristol-Myers Squibb with Orencia; ZymoGenetics and Merck Serono with atacicept; Genelabs Technologies with Prestara; Teva Pharmaceutical Industries with edratide; and Aspreva Pharmaceuticals and Roche with CellCept.

Benlysta, which was previously called Lymphostat-B and is known generically as belimumab, also failed in its Phase 2, or midstage, trial.

But Human Genome Sciences, in consultation with the Food and Drug Administration, restricted the Phase 3 trials to a subset of patients who seemed to respond better to the drug in the earlier trial. It also changed the measurement of success and lengthened the trial to give the drug more time to work.

“We knew the drug was safe and biologically active,” H. Thomas Watkins, chief executive of the company, said in an interview. “The question was, ‘Can you prove in a very large trial what we’ve proven here?’ ”

The 865 patients in the trial, who were mainly in Asia, South America and Eastern Europe, received either Benlysta or a placebo in addition to the drugs they were already taking.

More patients on the drug had the required improvement in symptom severity. In addition, about 20 percent of patients taking Benlysta were able to reduce their use of the steroid prednisone by at least 25 percent, compared with about 12 percent of those on placebo.

Although the difference between the treated patients and those given the placebo in the trial might appear modest, Dr. Joan T. Merrill, a lupus expert at the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, said Benlysta’s safety and its ability to reduce steroid use would make it attractive to doctors. Steroids can cause severe weight gain, acne and the weakening of bones, among other side effects.

“I think it looks good,” Dr. Merrill said. “And we are in a field where we haven’t even had anything fair.”

Benlysta, which is given by infusion once every four weeks, inhibits the action of a protein in the body called B-lymphocyte stimulator, which helps B cells in the blood respond to infections. The company said high levels of the protein might spur the immune system to attach the body’s own tissues.

Human Genome, a pioneer in studying human genes, discovered the gene for the stimulator protein. If Benlysta gets to market, it will be the first drug from the company, and one of the first in the industry, to result from genomics.

In 2000, the company’s share price soared to over $100 on anticipation that understanding the human DNA blueprint — the human genome — would lead to a cornucopia of drugs. On Friday, it closed at $3.32 a share.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story was clear that the information about this drug comes from a phase 3 clinical trial and that the results have not yet been published or examined by outside experts.
It would have been better for readers if the story had included some insight about the type of symptoms that were monitored and measured as well as the particular subset of patients that were included in the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, May 1, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- Researchers have found new evidence showing that resveratrol, a compound found in red wine, may play a role in preventing cell aging.

The study in rodents found that when mice had a particular gene -- SIRT1 -- knocked out, or turned off, resveratrol had no effect on them. But tests of muscle tissue in mice with a normal SIRT1 gene that were given resveratrol found that the substance boosted mitochondrial function.

Mitochondria provide the energy that cells need to function. A decrease in mitochondrial energy production has been linked to a variety of diseases, including diabetes and Alzheimer's disease, as well as to the aging process itself, said senior study author David Sinclair, a professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

But don't go reaching for that Chianti yet. Yes, resveratrol is found in the skin of red grapes. But "the amounts we gave to our mice would be like drinking 100 glasses of red wine a day," Sinclair said.

Instead, the goal is to develop synthetic resveratrol compounds that activate SIRT1 and could be taken as medication. "My colleagues are in the middle of developing better molecules that we hope will be medicines that will be used to treat diseases of aging, not to extend lifespan, though that may be a side effect," Sinclair said.

The study is in the May 1 issue of Cell Metabolism.

While previous studies have also suggested that resveratrol may have anti-aging properties, the precise mechanism of resveratrol has been controversial. Several studies, including work with yeast, worms and flies, have found that resveratrol acts on a class of seven genes known as sirtuins and, in human cells, SIRT1 in particular.

But other researchers have argued that resveratrol may work by activating a separate energy pathway called AMPK, which is also related to mitochondrial energy production but does not involve sirtuin genes.

Testing the effect of resveratrol on SIRT1 in mice was difficult, Sinclair said. Mice that have their SIRT1 gene deleted are born with developmental defects and are unsuitable for experiments, he explained.

So Sinclair and two graduate students, Nathan Price and Ana Gomes, worked for years to come up with a method for knocking out SIRT1 in healthy adult mice.

"Our paper found you absolutely require the SIRT1 gene for resveratrol to improve the metabolism of the mice," Sinclair said.

The paper also showed that the AMPK pathway was activated in mice given high doses of resveratrol, yet there was no benefit to mitochondrial function. There was no effect on AMPK in mice given a lower dose of resveratrol.

Sinclair is co-founder and a consultant for Sirtris Pharmaceuticals Inc., which is developing resveratrol-like molecules for use as treatment for age-related diseases. In 2010, according to news reports, the company, which is owned by GlaxoSmithKline, halted clinical trials of resveratrol, but Sinclair said the company continues to develop improved synthetic molecules.

George Vlasuk, CEO of Sirtris, said the new findings offer the "first definitive evidence" for a direct link between SIRT1 and the metabolic benefits of resveratrol.

"The work by [first author] Price et al. strongly supports the basic rationale being pursued at Sirtris, which focuses on the development of small-molecule compounds that directly activate the enzymatic activity of SIRT1 as a new therapeutic approach to many diseases of aging," Vlasuk wrote in an email to the journal.

Philippe Marambaud, an investigator at the Litwin-Zucker Center for Research in Alzheimer's Disease and Memory Disorders at the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in Manhasset, N.Y, said the new research adds to a body of evidence that resveratrol can potentially combat aging by boosting mitochondrial activity.

"In this study, by using an elegant adult-inducible SIRT1 knock-out mouse model, the authors now provide compelling evidence that SIRT1 is required in vivo [in the animal] for the effect of resveratrol on AMPK activation and on mitochondrial function," Marambaud said.

While studies involving animals can be useful, they frequently fail to produce similar results in humans.

"A mouse model is not a human being, especially when you are genetically manipulating this animal model, you want to be very careful," Marambaud said. "This field has been extremely controversial. We should be very careful about claiming the importance of resveratrol for medical purposes. We have to wait and see, but this study is a big step forward."

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has more on healthy aging.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We’ll give this a qualified satisfactory score, largely because of the ending quote from an independent expert, who said:
“A mouse model is not a human being, especially when you are genetically manipulating this animal model, you want to be very careful,” Marambaud said. “This field has been extremely controversial. We should be very careful about claiming the importance of resveratrol for medical purposes.”
But the headline – as often happens – belies any caveat in the body of the story, blaring how this finding “might help you live longer.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(CNN) A saliva test may someday be able to diagnose a concussion and predict how long symptoms last, according to a study published Monday in the JAMA Pediatrics.

In their study, Penn State College of Medicine researchers found five small molecules called microRNAs in saliva with real potential for identifying concussive symptoms in children, teens and young adults. MicroRNAs influence protein activities throughout the body, and they are easily measured in biofluids, including blood, cerebrospinal fluid and saliva, according to the authors.

Dr. Steve Hicks, senior author of the study and an assistant professor of pediatrics at Penn State College of Medicine, said the "five microRNAs in saliva could predict with approximately 85% accuracy which concussed children would have symptoms one month later. In comparison, standard survey measures that are typically used in clinics were approximately 65% accurate."

The study was funded in part by Quadrant Biosciences, a biotech company that hopes to bring a saliva test for concussion to market in the next 12 to 24 months, Hicks said.

"It's frustrating for both parents and physicians that we can't accurately and objectively predict how long a child's concussion symptoms might last, what those symptoms are likely to consist of and when it might be safe for them to return to sports or school," said Hicks, who, as a practicing pediatrician, has routinely cared for kids with concussions.

For the study, Hicks and his co-authors looked at 52 patients between the ages of 7 and 21, with an average age of 14.

MicroRNA expression was measured in saliva spit into a cup by the patients, who had been injured mostly in sports or car accidents, when they arrived at Penn State Hershey Medical Center for an evaluation. Of the 52, 30 had prolonged symptoms and 22 had short-term symptoms of mild traumatic brain injury.

"We found three microRNAs that were highly associated with specific symptoms one month after injury, such as headache, fatigue and memory difficulties," Hicks said. He added that creating an actual test for use by doctors will require collaboration on the part of researchers.

"Fortunately, the technology required to measure saliva RNA is already employed in medicine; we use it to check patients for upper respiratory viruses in our hospitals and clinics every day," Hicks said. "Modifying this approach for patients with concussions could potentially provide a rapid, objective tool for managing brain injury."

'Way too early to know'

However, the editorial authors, Dr. William P. Meehan III of Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention at Boston Children's Hospital in Massachusetts and Dr. Rebekah Mannix of Brain Injury Center at Boston Children's Hospital, noted that "the relatively small sample size in this study requires larger-scale studies to determine the reliability" of the results.

For example, they noted that the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications is common among those with more severe injury. In the study, those who had used anti-inflammatory medications were the ones with longer-term symptoms. Possibly, then, the drugs may be a potential 'confounding' variable, they wrote, meaning that medication may influence test results and symptoms, adding an element of confusion to the study and its possible interpretation.

Still, "the findings are promising, representing potential biomarkers for the diagnosis, recovery, and prognostic assessment of a sport-related concussion."

Dr. Jeffrey Kutcher, a neurologist and National Director of The Sports Neurology Clinic at The CORE Institute, said that "work like this is important because it does provide potential for tests that can be helpful in the clinical setting."

"I think the main caveat is, this is way too early to know what this type of tool can do for us," added Kutcher, who was not involved in the new research. "The main reason is that there's a difference between simply having a brain that experiences force and being concussed."

The saliva biomarker may be showing that neurons experienced force and not that a there is a concussion, with which the brain cannot perform its typical functions within a normal range, he said: "I would hesitate to assign too much potential groundbreaking science."

Other biomarkers, including blood, are being investigated as potential concussion tests, he said, though "nothing is at this stage or beyond this."

There are also tools that look at the electrical networks that brains form, he said, disclosing that he is consulting for a company working on one such technology. A patient undergoes an electroencephalogram while doing a cognitive task, and the EEG records how the brain responds.

"By actually (measuring) the brain network activity directly, you can look at really what is the functional health of the brain," he said.

In addition, some scientists are exploring functional MRI techniques to look at the metabolic function of different areas of the brain to gain insight into concussion, he said.

Hicks said he and his colleagues are collaborating with others to examine saliva biomarkers in adult athletes and members of the armed services.

"Because the markers we identified in this study are not correlated with patient age, we are hopeful they may be applied in adult populations, as well," he said.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a fair job of describing the limitations of the research supporting use of the saliva test. First, the story notes that an editorial published with the study in JAMA Pediatric pointed out the small sample size (52), meaning additional large-scale studies would be required to determine whether the saliva test results would be reliable. The story also discusses the editorial’s warning that individuals with prolonged concussion symptoms are more likely than those with milder concussions to use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen, which could influence the presence of the microRNAs and thus confound the findings.
One limitation the story didn’t point out was that all these children already had a clinical diagnosis of concussion. In a more real-world setting, where that hasn’t been confirmed, the accuracy of the test may be lowered.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Just over a year ago, Catherine Price decided to start taking one of the cheapest, safest, oldest, most widely prescribed drugs for Type 2 diabetes. So much metformin is taken in the United States — some 72 million prescriptions were written for it in 2013 — that a recent study found higher trace levels of it (presumably from the urine of people taking it) in Lake Michigan than of any other drug, including caffeine.

But Price, a science and medical reporter in Oakland, Calif., doesn’t have Type 2 diabetes. She has Type 1, the far less common form of the disease, which requires lifelong treatment with insulin, to compensate for her body’s failure to produce enough of the hormone. However, she had read studies indicating that metformin combined with insulin might help Type 1 diabetics, too. Moreover, the drug was being studied in clinical trials as a way to lower the risk of cancer, heart disease and dementia — not just for diabetics, but for everyone.

For Price, there was yet another possible benefit — as a treatment for polycystic ovary syndrome, an endocrine disorder that doctors thought might explain the difficulty she and her husband had had conceiving.

Sure enough, a month and a half after she had started taking metformin pills and even as she was enjoying the benefits of better blood-sugar control, Price became pregnant, eventually giving birth to a girl.

“I’m still taking metformin along with my insulin,” said Price, 36, who was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes 14 years ago. “I remember eating Mexican food one night, which can be a potential disaster for people with diabetes because of the carbs, but I noticed I needed only two-thirds to a half of the insulin I normally needed.”

Synthesized in the 1920s, metformin was first approved for treatment of Type 2 diabetes in the United Kingdom in 1958. It took until 1995 to get approval in the United States after a potentially fatal disorder linked to a similar drug was found to be rarely if ever associated with metformin.

Unlike insulin shots, which help Type 1 diabetics break down sugar and starches in the blood, metformin lowers blood-sugar levels primarily by squelching the liver’s tendency to release stored-up sugar into the bloodstream. Keeping that extra sugar (actually a form of sugar called glucose) out of the blood helps to maintain normal blood-sugar levels, thereby preventing such long-term complications as blindness, kidney failure and lower-limb amputation.

About 29 million people in the United States have diabetes, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. More than 90 percent of them have Type 2, in which their bodies slowly fail to respond to normal levels of insulin, forcing their pancreas to produce so much that it’s eventually exhausted. The estimated 2.5 million with Type 1, in contrast, lose their ability to produce insulin, usually within a matter of months, due to an autoimmune attack by the body on itself.

Today, the range of ailments being targeted by metformin, a prescription drug sold under such names as Glucophage, Glumetza, Fortamet and Riomet, all share one characteristic: They are diseases related to aging.

“Metformin actually lowers the rate of cell turnover,” said Michael Pollak, who has been studying metformin’s effects on pancreatic cancer as chairman of oncology at McGill University in Montreal. “It makes cells divide less quickly. The rate-of-living theory defines aging as the number of cell divisions you undergo since you were a fertilized egg. If the theory is true, then people who age more gracefully have a slower rate of cell division. The question is whether the rate-of-living theory is operational in mammals.”

Pollak says that none of the most exciting possible benefits for the drug have yet been proved in randomized clinical trials of non-diabetics. For now, the evidence suggesting benefits is limited to large studies of diabetics that have found, on average that those who take metformin tend to have lower rates of cancer, heart disease and dementia, and to live longer overall than those who take other drugs for diabetes. Those effects have also been seen in animal studies. But such evidence often does not pan out in human studies.

At a medical meeting in May, Pollak reported disappointing results from his first randomized, placebo-controlled trial of metformin for people with pancreatic cancer. “It yielded no benefit,” he said. “Plain old metformin given in the same dose as we do for Type 2 diabetes doesn’t seem to be a breakthrough for cancer, at least for pancreatic cancer.”

Many other metformin clinical trials are underway for breast, colorectal, endometrial and other cancers.

For heart disease, the benefit of metformin over most other drugs for Type 2 diabetics has been seen repeatedly in clinical trials. For people without diabetes, only one study has been published, finding no apparent effect after 18 months. As with cancer, however, other studies are underway.

For dementia, which people with Type 2 diabetes have double the risk of developing compared with non-diabetics, metformin has been found in a number of studies to cut that risk substantially.

“There’s been a lot of excitement about metformin and dementia,” said Rachel Whitmer, an epidemiologist at Kaiser Permanente in California.

In 2013, Whitmer presented the results of a study of about 15,000 people newly prescribed a medication for Type 2 diabetes: By the end of the five-year study, those who received metformin had a 40 percent lower risk of having developed dementia than those prescribed sulfonylureas, another common type of diabetes drug.

But, Whitmer notes, “I don’t think the story is complete. There needs to be more work in this area with all drugs for diabetes.”

For Type 1 diabetes, researchers at the University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine published a study in May in which they added either a low dose of metformin or placebo pills to the insulin regimen of 74 adolescents. Those who received metformin lost weight — generally a benefit for those with diabetes — and needed less insulin after six months. Those who received the placebo needed more insulin than at the beginning of the study and saw their blood pressure rise. The one goal the study did not achieve was better blood-sugar control.

“There is some benefit, but it wasn’t the full benefit we hoped for,” said Helen Nickerson, senior scientific program manager at JDRF, formerly known as the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, which partly funded the study. Even so, she said, she is hearing from doctors that growing numbers of them are prescribing metformin along with insulin to patients with Type 1 diabetes.

No one would suggest that a person with Type 1 diabetes stop taking their insulin. Doing so would be life-threatening. For those with Type 1, metformin is being tested only as an add-on to insulin.

JDRF, meanwhile, is funding a clinical trial to see if metformin will reduce the risk of heart disease in people with Type 1, and it is funding a trial in Britain to see if the drug will prevent children from developing Type 1 in the first place.

Terry Wilkin, a professor of endocrinology and metabolism at the University of Exeter, is leading the prevention trial. He theorizes that the risk of developing Type 1 rises when excess demand for insulin is placed on the pancreas in children who are even slightly overweight. His study will give low daily doses of metformin to children who are at high risk of developing Type 1.

“If we can even slightly lower their average blood sugar with metformin,” Wilkin said, “I believe we can have a big benefit on their risk of developing Type 1.”

Despite all these potential benefits of metformin — and despite a recommendation from the American Diabetes Association that it be tried before any other drug for newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetics — a recent study found that only about half of all such people get metformin as their first prescribed medication. The study does not explain why that might be. Among the possibilities, experts say, are that newer drugs are being pushed heavily in direct-to-patient advertising and that some patients are turned off by the common though mild side effect of metformin — stomach upset and diarrhea — which can usually be avoided by starting on a low dose.

The author of the study, Niteesh Choudhry, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, also found that newly diagnosed Type 2 diabetics who start on metformin are the least likely to need an additional diabetes drug later.

“It’s clear that physicians and patients are not always choosing to start on metformin,” he said. “There are legitimate reasons to put patients on one drug rather than another. But the guidelines do recommend metformin first.”

For patients with Type 2 whose doctor started them on a drug other than metformin, he said, “I certainly would encourage people to talk with their doctor. That’s always a good thing.”

Hurley is a New Jersey-based science journalist who writes frequently on diabetes and health.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: While we have a problem with the story’s framing as discussed above under Benefits, we think the piece does a reasonable job of eventually describing the overall limited quality of evidence available to support the claims that are made. That effort strikes a tone of caution with a hint of anticipation, which seems appropriate.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A genetically modified poliovirus may help some patients fight a deadly form of brain cancer, researchers report.

The experimental treatment seems to have extended survival in a small group of patients with glioblastoma who faced a grim prognosis because standard treatments had failed, Duke University researchers say.

"I've been doing this for 50 years and I've never seen results like this," says Dr. Darell Bigner, the director emeritus of the The Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center at the Duke Cancer Institute, who is helping develop the treatment.

But the researchers and other brain-cancer doctors caution the research is at a very early stage. In the study, only 21 percent of patients experienced a prolonged survival. Much more follow-up research is needed to better assess and hopefully improve the treatment's effectiveness, the researchers say.

"We have to be careful," says Annick Desjardins, a Duke neuro-oncologist who helped conduct the study. "But we have long-term survivors. We are seeing something we don't normally see with patients with glioblastoma."

Dr. David Reardon, clinical director of the Center for Neuro-Oncology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, says the Duke group's results may represent "a good, solid, important step forward" for patients with no alternatives.

"Unfortunately, for most patients this is not going to be the answer yet," says Reardon, who used to work at Duke but wasn't involved in the new research. "My fear is that every patient and family dealing with the devastating disease of glioblastoma is going to think the poliovirus is the cure. Unfortunately, the patients who are benefiting do reflect a relatively small percentage of the population."

The Duke results were published online Tuesday by the New England Journal of Medicine to coincide with their presentation at the 22nd International Conference on Brain Tumor Research in Norway.

Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive malignant brain tumor in adults. It's the cancer that killed former Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., and former Vice President Joe Biden's son Beau. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., is fighting glioblastoma.

The Duke researchers decided to try to use a genetically modified version of the poliovirus, which can cause a devastating form of paralysis, because of the virus's ability to infect nervous system cells.

The scientists removed one of the virus's genes to prevent it from causing polio and replaced that gene with one from a harmless virus known as a rhinovirus, which ordinarily causes the common cold.

The engineered virus was then infused directly into tumors in patients' brains with a tube inserted through a hole in the skull. The modified virus retains the ability to infect and kill brain tumor cells, and also appears to trigger the patient's own immune system cells to attack the tumors, the researchers say.

Between 2012 and 2017, the researchers treated 61 patients, trying various doses of the modified virus to determine which was safest and most effective.

There are substantial risks. The treatment can cause a dangerous swelling in the brain that can lead to seizures and other complications, the researchers found. One patient suffered a life-threatening blood clot in the brain that required surgery.

But overall, the median length of survival was 12.5 months for patients treated with poliovirus, compared with 11.3 months for a similar group of patients treated in the past, the researchers report. And starting at two years after treatment, the two groups' survival rate began to diverge, the researchers reported.

After 24 months, 21 percent of the patients treated with the virus had survived compared with 14 percent of the historical comparison group. After three years, 21 percent of the poliovirus treated patients survived, compared with 4 percent of the other group, according to the researchers.

Two patients have survived more than six years, Bigner says. One has survived more than five years.

"You just don't see this percentage of long-term survivors with this disease," Bigner says. "Those that have survived more than two years are in remission, and we expect them to continue to be long-term survivors."

Some other researchers praised the results.

"We're extraordinarily encouraged by what we see with this data," says Mitchel Berger, chairman of neurosurgery at the University of California, San Francisco and director of its center for brain tumors. "It's phenomenal."

But some cancer doctors caution that comparing the outcomes for patients receiving the virus treatment to what would have happened to similar patients in the past could produce misleading conclusions.

The Duke researchers have started a follow-up study combining the treatment with a chemotherapy drug to try to improve the results. They also plan to combine the treatment with other drugs, including some called checkpoint inhibitors, to harness the immune system to fight cancer.

In addition, the researchers are planning to try the approach on children with brain cancer, as well as other types of cancer, including melanoma and breast cancer. "We believe we are going to be able to increase the results even more significantly," Bigner says.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: We applaud cautious framing in both the story and the headline. The lead refrained from overstating the evidence, saying the treatment “may help some patients.”
That conservative tone continued in the second paragraph, which said it “seems to have extended survival in a small group of patients.”
The story admonished that the research is “at a very early stage” and “much more follow-up” is needed, and also explained that the study’s use of a historical control group of patients “could produce misleading conclusions.”
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
The Food and Drug Administration has approved a new treatment that could help millions of older adults who are nearly blinded by macular degeneration. It’s a miniature telescope implanted directly into the eye that magnifies images to more than twice their size.

Findings from the clinical trials show that the telescope does improve vision for the majority of patients. Still, there are some concerns about corneal damage, since the telescope is relatively large inside the eye. And the population who might benefit from the new device is somewhat limited. The treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery. And for those who catch the disease early on, there may be better options.

But for 80-year-old Marian Orr, the implanted telescope was just what she needed. Orr has a big family: five children, eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. That means lots of graduations, weddings and school events. In other words, lots to see. So when Orr's vision began to decline in her mid 70s, she got worried. Both her father and uncle went blind in their 60s, and she knew macular degeneration was often inherited.

Orr says her sight gradually diminished. It got to the point "where I couldn't see. If I looked at you straight on, I couldn't see your face, could only see your head," she says. "I couldn't see the eyes and the nose. I could just see the round head that was all, sort of like a halo was all over it."

This blurred vision is pretty typical of macular degeneration.

Orr couldn't see things in a store. Her daughter took her grocery shopping. Orr couldn't identify pots, pans and dishes in her kitchen. And the outdoors became an unfamiliar, startling place.

So when Orr's cousin read about an experimental treatment for macular degeneration, Orr quickly got in touch with one of the researchers, had some basic tests, and before she knew it, she was one of more than 200 patients to have an experimental miniature telescope implanted in her eye.

Dr. Kathryn A. Colby, ophthalmic surgeon at Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston and assistant professor of ophthalmology at Harvard Medical School, calls the pea-sized technology a true "breakthrough" that could help millions of patients who, until now, have had no treatment options. Colby was one of the principal investigators in the clinical trials of the miniature telescopes. They were conducted at 28 leading ophthalmic centers and included 219 patients with end-stage, age-related macular degeneration. She was not Orr's doctor.

What happens with age-related macular degeneration is that the center of the retina deteriorates, and people gradually lose sight. Colby says if you think of the eye as an old-style camera with film, then the retina is the film. Over years of wear and tear, it degenerates and weakens and no longer transmits full images to the brain. That's why Orr saw blank spots where people's noses and eyes should be in their faces, sort of like "holes in the film," says Colby.

Colby says that by magnifying the image, the telescope allows the part of the vision that's missing to become smaller. And so the "blanks" in the image appear to fill up, presenting the individual with a nearly complete image.

But, like all telescopes, when vision is narrowly focused, the peripheral view gets lost. This is why the telescope is implanted in only one eye. The other eye is used for peripheral vision.

Colby says that's also why patients need to learn to use the implanted telescope eye for near activities. For example, if they're looking to see what time it is on a clock, they use the eye with the implanted telescope. But if they're scanning the room to see exactly where the clock is, they use the other eye, which also has end-stage macular degeneration.

After surgery, patients do a variety of eye exercises to train their eyes to work together. It wasn't hard for Orr, who was used to wearing contacts, one for distance and one for close-up. For her, the tiny new eye telescope has put the "bustle" back into her life.

"I'm very active in my church. And I am a lunch buddy at one of the schools nearby," she says. Orr has lunch every week with the children in the first and second grades. She reads a lot, even books with regular-sized print, which her daughter gives her. She can read the newspaper and watch TV. "I'm busy," she says. "That's for sure!"

Practically all the patients in the telescope study with Orr had their vision improve. And 75 percent of them, like Orr, had major improvement. But because the telescope is relatively large, patients risk damage to the cornea. In the study, 10 out of 219 patients had corneal problems. Five required a corneal transplant. As a result, the Food and Drug Administration plans to monitor safety for at least five years for the next set of patients who receive the telescope.

Despite its terrific potential, the new eye telescope isn't for everyone. Dr. George Williams is an ophthalmologist and retinal surgeon associated with the American Academy of Ophthalmology. He sees lots of patients who might qualify for the eye telescope.

But he also sees a lot of patients who cannot be candidates. For one, the treatment doesn't work for those who have had cataract surgery.

"In order to implant this device, we need to remove the natural lens, or the cataract, and then use a portion of the natural lens to position and support the telescope," says Williams.

Cataract surgery removes the natural lens and, in most cases, replaces it with an artificial lens, which means there is no foundation for the telescope.

And for patients who are in the early stages of macular degeneration, Williams says that medications approved just six years ago are effective and a lot less invasive than the telescope. The drugs are injected directly into the eye on a monthly basis. And with this treatment, doctors are able to prevent severe visual loss in over 90 percent of patients. In nearly half of all patients, visual improvement is significant.

So the take-home message: If you're over 60 and you begin to experience visual loss, get yourself to an eye specialist as soon as possible to see if you can be treated with medication to stabilize and even reverse the vision loss you've experienced. If that happens, Williams says, then patients may never get to the point where they need a telescope in their eye.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a good job of explaining the evidence in absolute numbers and in percentages. So, if you think that it sounds impressive that 75% of the patients had major improvements in their vision, you can check that against the fact that 10 out of 219 patients had corneal problems after the surgery. It would have been good to explain how vision improvement was measured. Was it through objective vision tests or through a Q&A with patients or both?
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>

• Medimetriks, in collaboration with Otsuka, announces the successful completion of a Phase 2 trial of MM36 (previously known as OPA-15406) in Atopic Dermatitis (AD)
• MM36 is a topical phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitor under development for the treatment of AD
• Results showed a therapeutic benefit as measured by percentage change in EASI score and improvement in IGA score
• MM36 is expected to be the 2nd topical PDE4 inhibitor available in the US and may offer unique benefits for patients suffering from AD

Medimetriks Pharmaceuticals, Inc. today announces the publication of Phase 2 results for MM36 (previously referred to as OPA-15406), a novel topical non-steroidal phosphodiesterase IV (PDE4) inhibitor for the treatment of mild-to-moderate atopic dermatitis.

The successful results of the Phase 2 trial of MM36 have been published by the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology (JAAD), the leading peer-reviewed journal in dermatology. The randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled study in 121 patients showed that MM36 demonstrates a statistically significant effect on the primary endpoints versus vehicle as measured by improvement in IGA score (Investigators Global Assessment) and percentage change in EASI score (Eczema Area and Severity Index). The mean percentage improvement in baseline EASI score was notable very early at week 1 (31.4% vs. 6% for vehicle; p=.0005) and at week 2 (39.0% vs. 3% for vehicle; p=.0001). These effects were sustained through week 8 of the study. MM36 was also associated with improvement in patient-reported outcomes, most notably rapid and sustained itch relief, with Visual Analog Scale scores showing improvement from moderate to mild within the first week (36.4% mean change; p=.0011).

MM36, a PDE4 inhibitor, reduces inflammation in affected skin by inhibiting production of cytokines and chemical mediators that are believed to cause the signs and symptoms of atopic dermatitis. In particular, MM36 exhibits highly selective inhibitory activity against PDE4 subtype B, an enzyme that may play a significant role in inflammation. MM36 is expected to be the 2nd topical PDE4 inhibitor in the market after the potential approval of Anacor Pharmaceuticals' crisaborole product.

"The results of the Phase 2 study suggest that MM36 represents a potentially safe, effective and well-tolerated non-steroidal treatment for mild-to-moderate atopic dermatitis," said Linda Stein Gold, MD, director of clinical research, Department of Dermatology at Henry Ford Hospital and co-author of the article. "Based on the results of this study, it appears that MM36 could address an important unmet need in dermatology."

"We are pleased that JAAD, the most respected peer-reviewed journal in dermatology, published the Phase 2 results," said Bradley Glassman, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Medimetriks. "We believe these Phase 2 results demonstrate compelling evidence of MM36's capacity to be a leading topical PDE4 inhibitor and are aggressively developing MM36 for atopic dermatitis in the US. Atopic Dermatitis patients have few treatment options and Medimetriks is dedicated to addressing this important unmet need."

The JAAD article discussing the Phase 2 results can be found by visiting www.jaad.org.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin condition characterized by red, swollen and cracked skin with intense itching. The onset of AD occurs most commonly between 3 and 6 months of age, with approximately 60% of patients developing the condition in the first year of life and 90% by 5 years of age. The majority of affected individuals have resolution of disease during childhood, although 10% to 30% of patients maintain the condition throughout their lives. A small percentage of the population develops first symptoms as adults. It has been estimated that approximately 18 million people are living with AD in the U.S. and this disease accounts for up to 20% of patient visits to dermatology offices.

Current treatments for atopic dermatitis include topical corticosteroids and topical calcineurin inhibitors. Topical steroids are typically used as first line therapies and are effective anti-inflammatory agents. However, topical steroids may be associated with local and systemic side effects when used for extended periods of time, including skin atrophy, acne and telangiectasias locally, and HPA axis suppression systemically. Topical calcineurin inhibitors (TCIs) are recommended as second-line treatment for people with atopic dermatitis who are at risk of steroid-related side effects. TCIs carry boxed warnings about a possible association with skin malignancies and lymphoma, although studies have not demonstrated a clear link. Their use can be limited by local adverse reactions such as burning and stinging.

About MM36

Medimetriks has sole, exclusive US rights to MM36. Discovered by Otsuka, MM36 is an investigational non-steroidal topical anti-inflammatory PDE-4 inhibitor in development for the potential treatment of atopic dermatitis. MM36 is hypothesized to exert anti-inflammatory action by inhibiting the production of cytokines and chemical mediators thought to cause the signs and symptoms of atopic dermatitis. In particular, MM36 exhibits highly selective inhibitory activity against PDE4 subtype B, which is an enzyme that may play a significant role in inflammation.

Otsuka Pharmaceutical is a global healthcare company with the corporate philosophy: "Otsuka – people creating new products for better health worldwide." Otsuka researches, develops, manufactures and markets innovative and original products, with a focus on pharmaceutical products for the treatment of diseases and nutraceutical products for the maintenance of everyday health.

In pharmaceuticals, Otsuka is a leader in the challenging area of mental health and also has research programs on several under-addressed diseases including tuberculosis, a significant global public health issue. These commitments illustrate how Otsuka is a "big venture" company at heart, applying a youthful spirit of creativity in everything it does.

Otsuka Pharmaceutical, which employs approximately 31,000 people worldwide, is a wholly owned subsidiary of Otsuka Holdings Co., Ltd., the holding company for the Otsuka Group that is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan. The Otsuka Group has business operations in 28 countries and regions around the world, with consolidated sales of approximately USD 11.9 billion in fiscal year 2015. Otsuka welcomes you to visit its global website at https://www.otsuka.co.jp/en.

About Medimetriks

Medimetriks Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is a leading independent branded Dermatology company focused on the development, licensing and commercialization of innovative prescription skincare brands. The Company is dedicated to addressing unmet physician and patient needs with unique therapies that advance patient care.

For more information, please visit: www.medimetriks.com
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release doesn’t give the study methods in strong detail, but it does describe it as a double blind, randomized clinical and placebo control trial, which suggests a high level of evidence. The published study appears to show a low risk of bias. The study also showed there was a dose response between the high, low and control doses for the primary outcome event (degree of improvement) and except for some discrepancies in the adverse events rates (higher in the low dose group than in the high dose or placebo groups) there was fairly good precision and the NNT of 6 is not unreasonable. It would have been beneficial to readers if the release had included some information about the age, gender and race of those being treated, as well as more details about the patient-reported improvements.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
AUGUSTA, Ga. (Jan. 2, 2018) - In just four months, high-doses of vitamin D reduce arterial stiffness in young, overweight/obese, vitamin-deficient, but otherwise still healthy African-Americans, researchers say.

Rigid artery walls are an independent predictor of cardiovascular- related disease and death and vitamin D deficiency appears to be a contributor, says Dr. Yanbin Dong, geneticist and cardiologist at the Georgia Prevention Institute at the Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University.

So researchers looked at baseline and again 16 weeks later in 70 African-Americans ages 13-45 - all of whom had some degree of arterial stiffness - taking varying doses of the vitamin best known for its role in bone health.

In what appears to be the first randomized trial of its kind, they found that arterial stiffness was improved by vitamin D supplementation in a dose-response manner in this population, they write in the journal PLOS ONE.

Overweight/obese blacks are at increased risk for vitamin D deficiency because darker skin absorbs less sunlight - the skin makes vitamin D in response to sun exposure - and fat tends to sequester vitamin D for no apparent purpose, says Dong, the study's corresponding author.

Participants taking 4,000 international units - more than six times the daily 600 IUs the Institute of Medicine currently recommends for most adults and children - received the most benefit, says Dr. Anas Raed, research resident in the MCG Department of Medicine and the study's first author.

The dose, now considered the highest, safe upper dose of the vitamin by the Institute of Medicine, reduced arterial stiffness the most and the fastest: 10.4 percent in four months. "It significantly and rapidly reduced stiffness," Raed says.

Two thousand IUs decreased stiffness by 2 percent in that timeframe. At 600 IUs, arterial stiffness actually increased slightly - .1 percent - and the placebo group experienced a 2.3 percent increase in arterial stiffness over the timeframe.

They used the non-invasive, gold standard pulse wave velocity to assess arterial stiffness. Reported measures were from the carotid artery in the neck to the femoral artery, a major blood vessel, which supplies the lower body with blood. The American Heart Association considers this the primary outcome measurement of arterial stiffness.

When the heart beats, it generates a waveform, and with a healthy heart and vasculature there are fewer and smaller waves. The test essentially measures the speed at which the blood is moving, and in this case, fast is not good, Raed says.

"When your arteries are more stiff, you have higher pulse wave velocity, which increases your risk of cardiometabolic disease in the future," says Raed.

The varying doses, as well as the placebo participants took, were all packaged the same so neither they or the investigators knew which dose, if any, they were getting until the study was complete. Both placebo and supplements were given once monthly - rather than daily at home - at the GPI to ensure consistent compliance.

Dong was also corresponding author on a study published in 2015 in the journal BioMed Central Obesity that showed, in this same group of individuals, both 2,000 and 4,000 IUs restored more desirable vitamin D blood levels of 30 nanograms per milliliter.

The 4,000 upper-limit dose restored healthy blood level quicker - by eight weeks - and was also better at suppressing parathyroid hormone, which works against vitamin D's efforts to improve bone health by absorbing calcium, they reported.

While heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, blacks have higher rates of cardiovascular disease and death than whites and the disease tends to occur earlier in life. The authors write that arterial stiffness and vitamin D deficiency might be potential contributors.

While just how vitamin D is good for our arteries isn't completely understood, it appears to impact blood vessel health in many ways. Laboratory studies have shown that mice missing a vitamin D receptor have higher activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, says Raed. Activation of this system increases blood vessel constriction, which can contribute to arterial stiffness. Vitamin D also can suppress vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, activation of garbage-eating macrophages and calcification formation, all of which can thicken blood vessel walls and hinder flexibility. Vitamin D also reduces inflammation, an underlying mechanism for obesity related development of coronary artery disease, says Raed.

Now it's time to do a larger-scale study, particularly in high-risk populations, and follow participants' progress for longer periods, Dong and Raed say. "A year would give us even more data and ideas," Raed adds.

Dong notes that pulse wave velocity and blood pressure measures are complimentary but not interchangeable. "We think maybe in the future, when you go to your physician, he or she might check your arterial stiffness as another indicator of how healthy you are," Raed says.

There were no measurable differences in weight or blood pressure measurements over the 16-week study period.

The Institute of Medicine currently recommends a daily intake of 800 IUs of vitamin D for those age 70 and older. For adolescents and adults, they recommend 4,000 IUs as the upper daily limit; 2,000 was a previous upper limit.

More than 80 percent of Americans, the majority of whom spend their days indoors, have vitamin D insufficiency or deficiency. Dong, an expert in vitamin D and a professor in the MCG Department of Population Health Sciences, says about 15 minutes daily in the "young" sun - between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. - but before your skin starts to get pink, is the best source of vitamin D.

Foods like milk, milk products like cheese and yogurt, fatty fish like mackerel and sardines, some greens like kale and collards and fortified cereals also are good sources. The researchers say a vitamin D supplement is an inexpensive and safe option for most of us.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does not make any bold claims about the efficacy of using vitamin D to treat arterial stiffness, but sticks to reporting the facts of the study as they are known. It cites the researchers calling for a larger study:
“Now it’s time to do a larger-scale study, particularly in high-risk populations, and follow participants’ progress for longer periods, Dong and Raed say. “A year would give us even more data and ideas,” Raed adds.”
The researchers essentially say that results are encouraging and the results were published in the journal PLOS ONE. The authors note that the connection between vitamin D and arterial stiffness “might be potential contributors” to heart disease in a certain subset of African Americans.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A therapy-animal trend grips the United States. The San Francisco airport now deploys a pig to calm frazzled travelers. Universities nationwide bring dogs (and a donkey) onto campus to soothe students during finals. Llamas comfort hospital patients, pooches provide succor at disaster sites and horses are used to treat sex addiction.

And that duck on a plane? It might be an emotional-support animal prescribed by a mental health professional.

The trend, which has accelerated hugely since its initial stirrings a few decades ago, is underpinned by a widespread belief that interaction with animals can reduce distress — whether it happens over brief caresses at the airport or in long-term relationships at home. Certainly, the groups offering up pets think this, as do some mental health professionals. But the popular embrace of pets as furry therapists is causing growing discomfort among some researchers in the field, who say it has raced far ahead of scientific evidence.

Earlier this year in the Journal of Applied Developmental Science, an introduction to a series of articles on “animal-assisted intervention” said research into its efficacy “remains in its infancy.” A recent literature review by Molly Crossman, a Yale University doctoral candidate who recently wrapped up one study involving an 8-year-old dog named Pardner, cited a “murky body of evidence” that sometimes has shown positive short-term effects, often found no effect and occasionally identified higher rates of distress.

Overall, Crossman wrote, animals seem to be helpful in a “small-to-medium” way, but it’s unclear whether the critters deserve the credit or something else is at play.

“It’s a field that has been sort of carried forward by the convictions of practitioners” who have seen patients’ mental health improve after working with or adopting animals, said James Serpell, director of the Center for the Interaction of Animals and Society at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine. “That kind of thing has almost driven the field, and the research is playing catch-up. In other words, people are recognizing that anecdote isn’t enough.”

Using animals in mental health settings is nothing new. In the 17th century, a Quaker-run retreat in England encouraged mentally ill patients to interact with animals on its grounds. Sigmund Freud often included one of his dogs in psychoanalysis sessions. Yet the subject did not become a research target until the American child psychologist Boris Levinson began writing in the 1960s about the positive effect his dog Jingles had on patients.

But the evidence to date is problematic, according to Crossman’s review and others before it. Most studies had small sample sizes, she wrote, and an “alarming number” did not control for other possible reasons for a changed stress level, such as interaction with the animal’s human handler. Studies also tend to generalize across animals, she noted: If participants are measurably soothed by one golden retriever, that doesn’t mean another dog — or another species — will evoke the same response.

Even so, media headlines are often about the happiness bounce. Hal Herzog, a Western Carolina University psychologist who has long studied human-animal interactions, recalls a 2015 study on the health benefits for children of having a pet dog. “Here’s a reason to get a puppy,” NBC announced. “Kids with pets have less anxiety.”

That’s actually not what the study concluded. The authors did find that children with dogs had lower anxiety based on screening scores than children without dogs. Still, they cautioned that “this study does not answer whether pet dogs have direct effects on children’s mental health or whether other factors associated with acquisition of a pet dog benefit their mental health.”

It was a classic case of conflating correlation and causation, which Herzog says is common. Cherry-picked positive results also are a problem, as he says happens in promotional materials from the Human-Animal Bond Research Initiative (HABRI). The pet-industry backed organization funds research on the topic.

“The number of papers I see that start out, ‘It is now well-established that there are health benefits from owning pets’ — that drives me crazy,” Herzog said. “Yes, there’s literature that supports that. But there’s also literature that doesn’t find that.”

HABRI Executive Director Steven Feldman takes a more positive view of the science while acknowledging that more research needs to be done. “Just like getting vegetables and getting exercise, I would say having animals in our lives is also an essential element of human wellness,” he said.

To many animal lovers and pet owners, the back-and-forth might sound horribly wonky. There’s something intuitive about the good feelings animals give us. Why over-analyze it?

Alan Beck does not disagree. Beck, who directs the Center of the Human-Animal Bond at Purdue University, cites one common theory for why animals might be therapeutic. It’s called the biophilia hypothesis, and it argues that humans evolved a built-in need to affiliate with other living beings.

“Throughout history, animals gave us some comfort. So if it works for you and me in a relatively normal environment, maybe it has a special role for someone who has a depression and stress disorder — that just makes sense,” he said. “The literature does show it’s not bad. And that’s just as important.”

Focusing too much on scientific support sometimes feels like a form of “physics envy,” Beck added, “where you try to quantify everything without appreciating it.”

But there are good reasons for rigorous research on animals and mental health. In 2012, the Department of Veterans Affairs said it would not cover costs of service dogs for veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder, citing “a lack of evidence to support a finding of mental health service dog efficacy.” The department is now in the midst of a multiyear study on the topic, which could lead to government funding for these pooches.

Another reason, the scientists say, is for the animals’ sake. Crossman pointed to a 2014 incident at Washington University in St. Louis as an example of animal therapy gone wrong. A bear cub brought to campus during finals week nipped some students, causing a rabies scare that almost ended with the animal being euthanized. More generally, Serpell said, the popular idea that pets make you happier “is not a harmless distortion. … If the public believes that getting an animal is going to be good for them, many times an unsuitable person will get an unsuitable animal, and it doesn’t work out well for either.”

The research is getting stronger, in part because funding is growing — from HABRI as well as from a public-private partnership between the National Institutes of Health and the Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition. Crossman’s recent study at the Yale Innovative Interactions Lab was among the work being supported.

It relied not just on the Labrador retriever Pardner but seven other certified therapy dogs. Several times a month over much of the past year, they hung out at the university for 15-minute sessions with children who had just finished two stressful tasks: spontaneously crafting stories and telling them to strangers, followed by doing math problems.

The strangers were the researchers, and their mission was to assess whether the kids, ages 10 to 13, would find their time with the dogs to be therapeutic. The study was designed to avoid some of the pitfalls that Crossman has seen elsewhere, which is why some of the 78 young participants got to play only with a fuzzy blanket — because tactile stimulation is known to reduce stress — and why others simply waited for the 15 minutes.

“Without the controls, the changes could be due to all kinds of things, like the fact that lots of time has passed,” Crossman said. “Kids are actually pretty good at coping.”

The children completed questionnaires to assess their mood and anxiety before and after; spit samples, to measure the “stress hormone” cortisol, were taken at three points. At the end, all the kids got a “junior scientist” certificate, lots of praise and an open play session with the dogs.

Crossman, who emphasizes that she is an animal lover, declined to reveal the findings before they’re published. But “hopefully” they will show that dogs can affect children’s stress, she said — before quickly offering a researcher’s clarification.

“I say ‘hopefully’ not just because I think it works or hope it does, but because these programs are used so widely,” she explained. “Kids are already participating in this on a huge scale. Ideally, the order goes the other way around: We test the idea, and then we implement.”

These states have the fattest pets — and they might surprise you

Long before they conquered the Internet, cats took over the world

A kitten nursery saves tiny lives in a city aiming to become ‘no kill’

Bear breaks into house, plays the piano but not very well
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story is focused on a field of research, rather than on any specific study. However, the story provides good background on the shortcomings of much of the relevant literature. For example, the story notes: “Most studies had small sample sizes…and an ‘alarming number’ did not control for other possible reasons for a changed stress level, such as interaction with the animal’s human handler.” It also discussed how media headlines often misstate correlation and causation, a problem we’ve discussed many times.
Given the nature of the story, and the scope and complexity of the field being discussed, this earns a Satisfactory rating. We also like that the story includes multiple links to additional material regarding the existing body of research.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
NEW YORK (Reuters Health) - A new study bolsters the case that daily aspirin may help protect against cancer, although the effect seems weaker than previously thought.

And the final chapter on the popular but controversial drug has yet to be written, experts say, because like earlier research the new work has considerable limitations.

“News about the cancer potential of aspirin use has been really encouraging lately,” said Dr. Michael Thun of the American Cancer Society, who worked on the study. “Things are moving forward, but it is still a work in progress.”

Medical guidelines in the U.S. already urge people to take low doses of aspirin to prevent heart disease if the predicted benefits outweigh the risk of side effects, or if they have already suffered a heart attack.

Whether those recommendations should be broadened to include cancer prevention is still up in the air, however.

Earlier this year, an analysis of previous clinical trials showed that people on aspirin were less likely to die of cancer than those not on the medication, with a 37-percent drop in cancer deaths observed from five years onwards.

The new report, published Friday in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, is based on real-life observations instead of experiments. It includes a decade’s worth of data from more than 100,000 men and women in the U.S., most over 60 and all of them non-smokers.

People who said they took daily aspirin - whether ‘baby’ or adult strength - had a 16-percent lower risk of dying from cancer than non-users overall, Thun and his colleagues found.

For men, the difference came out to 103 fewer cancer deaths a year per 100,000 people; for women, the number was 42.

The effect was strongest for gastrointestinal cancers, such as colon cancer and stomach cancer. But it didn’t seem to matter whether people had been on aspirin for more or less than five years.

Because the study wasn’t a clinical trial, it’s hard to know if the findings can be chalked up to aspirin or if something else is at play.

Still, Thun said the results would favor broadening the aspirin guidelines to include cancer prevention based on an individual risk-benefit assessment. But he added that it will take scientists a few years to mull over all of the existing evidence.

Other researchers are more skeptical. Dr. Kausik Ray of St. George’s University of London, who has studied aspirin, said the new study did not look at overall death rates or side effects such as serious stomach bleeds.

“This is not a drug without side effects, so what you have to look at is net benefit,” he told Reuters Health.

Earlier this year, Ray’s team published an analysis of previous aspirin trials showing the medication did not prevent deaths from heart disease or cancer, and was likely to cause more harm than good.

One of the problems with the new study as well as with previous aspirin trials, he said, is something called detection bias. People who develop stomach bleeding from aspirin are likely to get their bowels checked out by a doctor. As a result, doctors may find and remove tumors or precancerous polyps, which could prolong the patient’s life - the idea behind colon cancer screening.

So far, most aspirin trials have been designed to test the drug’s effect on heart disease. Ray called for trials that specifically check people for new cancers at given intervals to weed out the selection bias marring the previous research.

“I don’t think we have enough hard evidence suggesting everybody should be taking” aspirin, Ray said.

When it comes to cancer, the government-backed U.S. Preventive Services Task Force agrees. It discourages the use of aspirin to stave off colorectal cancer in people at average risk for the disease.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: This story put “considerable limitations” in the second sentence.  It also later described “detection bias.”  And it clearly pointed out:
“Because the study wasn’t a clinical trial, it’s hard to know if the findings can be chalked up to aspirin or if something else is at play.”
We wish the story hadn’t used the term “the effect was strongest” since this clearly suggests cause-and-effect was established by the study, which was not the case.  But because the caveats about limitations were early, strong, and throughout, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Imagine the way you might smell a rose. You'd take a nice big sniff to breathe in the sweet but subtle floral scent. Upon walking into a public restroom, you'd likely do just the opposite--abruptly limiting the flow of air through your nose. Now, researchers reporting in the Cell Press journal Current Biology on July 2 have found that people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) don't make this natural adjustment like other people do. Autistic children go right on sniffing in the same way, no matter how pleasant or awful the scent.

The findings suggest that non-verbal tests related to smell might serve as useful early indicators of ASD, the researchers say.

"The difference in sniffing pattern between the typically developing children and children with autism was simply overwhelming," says Noam Sobel of the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel.

Earlier evidence had indicated that people with autism have impairments in "internal action models," the brain templates we rely on to seamlessly coordinate our senses and actions. It wasn't clear if this impairment would show up in a test of the sniff response, however.

To find out, Sobel, along with Liron Rozenkrantz and their colleagues, presented 18 children with ASD and 18 normally developing children (17 boys and 1 girl in each group) with pleasant and unpleasant odors and measured their sniff responses. The average age of children in the study was 7. While typical children adjusted their sniffing within 305 milliseconds of smelling an odor, the researchers report, children on the autism spectrum showed no such response.

That difference in sniff response between the two groups of kids was enough to correctly classify them as children with or without a diagnosis of ASD 81% of the time. Moreover, the researchers report that increasingly aberrant sniffing was associated with increasingly severe autism symptoms, based on social but not motor impairments.

The findings suggest that a sniff test could be quite useful in the clinic, although the researchers emphasize that their test is in no way ready for that yet.

"We can identify autism and its severity with meaningful accuracy within less than 10 minutes using a test that is completely non-verbal and entails no task to follow," Sobel says. "This raises the hope that these findings could form the base for development of a diagnostic tool that can be applied very early on, such as in toddlers only a few months old. Such early diagnosis would allow for more effective intervention."

The researchers now plan to test whether the sniff-response pattern they've observed is specific to autism or whether it might show up also in people with other neurodevelopmental conditions. They also want to find out how early in life such a test might be used. But the most immediate question for Sobel is "whether an olfactory impairment is at the heart of the social impairment in autism."

Current Biology, Rozenkrantz et al.: "A Mechanistic Link between Olfaction and Autism Spectrum Disorder" http://dx.

Current Biology, published by Cell Press, is a bimonthly journal that features papers across all areas of biology. Current Biology strives to foster communication across fields of biology, both by publishing important findings of general interest and through highly accessible front matter for non-specialists. For more information please visit http://www. . To receive media alerts for Current Biology or other Cell Press journals, contact press@cell.com.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release clearly describes the study, including the study size, the use of a control group, and the composition of the study participants. The release could have been even stronger, however, if it had placed that information in context for readers. For example, the study evaluated 18 children diagnosed with ASD and 18 children without ASD. Is that a robust sample size for a study of this kind? Most readers likely won’t know. In addition, the symptoms of autism can range from mild to severely debilitating. Where were these children on that spectrum, and what does that say about the test’s usefulness for differentiating between normal children and those with mild impairment? The release tips toward a Satisfactory rating with its emphasis on the fact the test is not ready to be used clinically.  “The findings suggest that a sniff test could be quite useful in the clinic, although the researchers emphasize that their test is in no way ready for that yet.” Well said.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
A swollen lymph node on the neck was the only symptom Karen Anderson noticed.

The 47-year-old pre-school teacher from Eugene was stunned when her biopsy came back positive for melanoma –the most life-threatening form of skin cancer. Malignant cells had spread throughout her body.

Surgeons removed affected lymph nodes but within months tumors appeared in her liver, breast, skull and other lymph nodes. "My oncologist said this is going to kill you and you need to think about preparing for that," Anderson says.

Two years ago, she gained access to an experimental immune-enhancing treatment in clinical trials at Providence Cancer Center in Portland. Called ipilimumab, it unleashes an all-out immune system attack on cancer cells. At first, the injections caused only side-effects: widespread itching, fatigue, and diarrhea. Worse, Anderson says, "I could feel the tumors getting bigger. They felt hot to me."

Then after several months the tumors began to shrink. After one year, the once palpable tumors were no longer detectable in diagnostic scans. While far from a cure, the treatment is the first to improve survival in people with melanoma that has spread, or metastasized, says Dr. Walter Urba, director of cancer research at the Providence Cancer Center. Urba is a co-author of the

on ipilimumab published in the New England Journal of Medicine Saturday.

Success in a cancer as deadly and difficult to treat as advanced melanoma is raising hopes that the treatment may also prove useful in staving off other tumors, including lung and prostate cancer. Drug companies are racing to develop competing versions of the immune-enhancing therapy, an antibody produced through genetic engineering.

"I would not be here today without it," says Anderson, who is undergoing a second round of treatment for resurgent tumors. "It's given me time with my kids, my husband, my family – and it's been quality time."

Melanoma is a rare skin cancer, but accounts for most of the 66,000 annual deaths from skin cancer worldwide. If caught early, before cancer cells break off and spread, surgery can stop melanoma. But most people diagnosed after melanoma has metastasized die within a year.

"For years and years, we've been looking for an effective therapy," Urba says.

Ipilimumab, nicknamed Ippy, is one of the first antibody-based therapies that use the body's immune defenses to destroy cancer cells. The antibodies bind to a specific protein studding the surface of T cells, immune system cells that seek and destroy virus-infected and cancerous cells. The surface protein works like a switch, inactivating T cells after a few days to prevent the immune system from running amok and destroying healthy tissue. The antibodies temporarily jam the switch, allowing T cells to continue attacking cancer tissue for weeks or months – for as long as patients continue to receive injections of the engineered antibody.

More than 600 melanoma patients took part in the ipilimumab clinical trial at 125 cancer centers in 13 countries. All patients had inoperable cancers with widespread tumors after conventional treatment. Some patients received ipilimumab alone, others it combined with a cancer vaccine called gp100, and a third group received only the cancer vaccine.

Ipilimumab appeared to double survival compared with the gp100 vaccine alone. After one year, nearly half of patients given ipilimumab alone or in combination remained alive, compared with one quarter of patients given only the vaccine. After two years, 24 percent of patients treated with ipilimumab were alive, 22 percent of patients treated with the combination, while survival dropped to 14 percent among patients treated with the vaccine alone.

"Some of the people are now out 44 months and still remain free of disease," Urba says.

Serious side effects also became clear. Nearly two-thirds of patients on ipilimumab experienced side effects caused by over-active immunity, such as severe itching, intestinal irritation and diarrhea. Researchers linked 14 deaths to the study drugs, half caused by immune-system reactions.

Still, the study stands as "a major landmark in cancer immunotherapy," says Dr. Bernard Fox, president of the International Society for Biological Therapy of Cancer. He says the results highlight the potential for using the same approach to treat other cancers. Already, early studies in patients with lung cancer and prostate cancer have produced positive, though inconclusive results.

"There is no reason it can't be applied to any of the common tumor types," Urba says. "They all have antigens on their surface that T cells can recognize." Ongoing trials are testing ipilimumab with other cancer drugs, in different doses and against different cancers.

Drug company Bristol-Myers Squibb told investors the drug could gain regulatory approval as early as next year and become available to cancer patients in 2012. Ipilimumab was developed by Medarex, a New Jersey company owned by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Other drug companies are at work on competing versions of the immune-enhancing antibody therapy.

For now, federal regulators have authorized

to people who have serious or immediately life-threatening, inoperable melanoma that has spread, who have no alternative treatment options, and whose physicians believe the drug is appropriate. Providence Cancer Center is the only site in Oregon offering compassionate use of the drug. The Northwest's other participating centers are the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance and Swedish Cancer Institute in Seattle, Providence Cancer Center in Spokane, and Multicare Health System in Tacoma.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: Good job explaining the nationwide study and the local participation. 
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
EMBARGOED FOR RELEASE: 11 A.M. (ET) TUESDAY, AUGUST 16, 2016

Media Advisory: To contact Paul D. Miller, M.D., call 303-925-4514 or email millerccbr@aol.com. To contact editorial co-author Anne R. Cappola, M.D., Sc.M., email Abbey Anderson at Abbey.Anderson@uphs.upenn.edu.

To place an electronic embedded link to this study and editorial in your story These links will be live at the embargo time: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.11136 http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.11032

Among postmenopausal women with osteoporosis at risk of fracture, daily injection of the drug abaloparatide for 18 months significantly reduced the risk of new vertebral and nonvertebral fractures compared with placebo, according to a study appearing in the August 16 issue of JAMA.

Osteoporosis is associated with substantial social, economic, and public health burdens. Based on 2010 U.S. Census data, a study estimated the prevalence of osteoporosis among women 50 to 69 years of age at 3.4 million. It has been estimated that the lifetime risk of osteoporotic fracture for a 60-year-old woman is 44 percent. Additional therapies are needed for prevention of osteoporotic fractures. As a result of its mechanism of action, it has been hypothesized that the drug abaloparatide, a synthetic peptide, would have a more pronounced anabolic (i.e., bone growing) action on bone compared with the osteoporosis drug teriparatide.

Paul D. Miller, M.D., of the Colorado Center for Bone Research, Lakewood, Colo., and colleagues randomly assigned postmenopausal women with osteoporosis to receive daily injections for 18 months of placebo (n = 821); abaloparatide (n = 824); or teriparatide (n = 818). The trial was conducted at 28 sites in 10 countries.

Among 2,463 women (average age, 69 years), 1,901 completed the study. New vertebral fractures occurred less frequently in the active treatment groups vs placebo: in 0.58 percent (n = 4) of participants in the abaloparatide group; in 0.84 percent (n = 6) of participants in the teriparatide group; and in 4.22 percent (n = 30) of those in the placebo group. The estimated event rate for nonvertebral fracture was lower with abaloparatide vs placebo: 2.7 percent in the abaloparatide group; 3.3 percent in the teriparatide group; and 4.7 percent in the placebo group.

Bone mineral density (BMD) increases were greater with abaloparatide than placebo. Incidence of hypercalcemia (the presence of abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood) was lower with abaloparatide (3.4 percent) vs teriparatide (6.4 percent). Overall, there were no differences in serious adverse events between the treatment groups.

“Further research is needed to understand the clinical importance of risk difference, the risks and benefits of abaloparatide treatment, and the efficacy of abaloparatide vs other osteoporosis treatments,” the authors write.

: This study was funded by Radius Health. Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, etc.

Editorial: Osteoporosis Therapy in Postmenopausal Women With High Risk of Fracture

“Ultimately, which therapy is selected for osteoporosis treatment may be less important than identifying and initiating an approved treatment,” write Anne R. Cappola, M.D., Sc.M., of the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, and Associate Editor, JAMA, and Dolores M. Shoback, M.D., of the University of California, San Francisco, in an accompanying editorial.

“The bar is high for any preventive treatment—in the efforts to prevent a fracture that may or may not ever occur, prescribers do not want to prescribe a therapy that causes a new problem. The way forward for fracture prevention involves not only the development of better therapies to prevent fracture and easier delivery systems but also improved adoption of existing osteoporosis therapies for patients with prior fractures and minimization of adverse effects, particularly those associated with long-term use.”

: Both authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and none were reported.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a nice, succinct job explaining how the study was constructed, how many people participated, and other important details.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 25, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- A low-carbohydrate diet helps people shed as many pounds as a low-fat diet plus the weight-loss drug orlistat does, and the low-carb plan may be better at helping lower blood pressure, researchers report.

Their study, published in the Jan. 25 issue of the Archives of Internal Medicine, found that both diets helped participants lose almost 10 percent of their body weight.

"Weight loss was similar but substantial in both groups we studied, but blood pressure improved more in the low-carb dieters," said study author Dr. William Yancy Jr., an associate professor of medicine at Duke University Medical Center and a staff physician at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Durham, N.C.

"There are options out there. Pick a diet you think you could stick to better, and work with your physician to help you target the right intervention for you," he advised. Two other studies in the same issue of the journal look at the effectiveness of the anti-hypertension DASH diet and a physician-supervised plan.

Obesity is a significant contributor to many illnesses, including heart disease, stroke, diabetes and many cancers, according to an editorial in the same journal by Dr. Robert Kushner of Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine. More than one-third of American adults are obese, and the incidence of obesity has gone up 140 percent over the past decade, Kushner notes.

Yancy's study included 146 overweight or obese adults who were randomly assigned to a low-carbohydrate diet or orlistat with a low-fat diet. The average age of the study participants was 52 and the average body-mass index was 39 (30 and over is considered obese). Orlistat is marketed as Xenical, a prescription medication, and Alli, available over the counter.

The low-carb diet began with a carbohydrate intake of less than 20 grams of carbohydrates a day. The group taking orlistat received a 120-milligram dose of the drug three times daily and got less than 30 percent of their calories from fat.

Over 48 weeks, the low-carbohydrate group lost 9.5 percent of their body weight, while the orlistat group lost 8.5 percent. "Good" cholesterol (HDL) and triglyceride levels improved in both groups. LDL, or "bad" cholesterol, was only reduced in the orlistat group. Insulin and glucose markers improved only in the low-carb group, and there was a significant drop in blood pressure in the low-carb group compared to the orlistat group -- systolic blood pressure (the top number) dropped by 5.9 mm Hg on the low-carb diet vs. 1.5 mm Hg for the orlistat group. Similar reductions were seen for diastolic blood pressure.

Yancy said the blood pressure and cholesterol drops might have been even more impressive if people had stayed on their medications, but as they lost weight and normalized these readings, the doctors took them off blood-pressure and cholesterol drugs.

Two other studies in the same issue of the journal looked at the effects of the DASH diet and a physician-supervised plan.

Researchers compared the DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet alone and in combination with exercise and weight management on blood pressure. The researchers found that combining the DASH diet with weight management and exercise resulted in a 16.1 mm Hg drop in systolic blood pressure compared to 11.2 mm Hg on the DASH diet alone. Additionally, those in the exercise, weight management and DASH plan lost an average of 19 pounds over four months vs. less than one pound for the DASH diet alone.

The third study compared an Internet weight-management program with a physician-managed program for extremely obese people that included a liquid diet component, followed by a structured diet, behavioral counseling and diet medications. The more intensive intervention was more successful with 31 percent losing more than 5 percent of their body weight, compared to just 9 percent of the Internet group.

"There are many paths to weight loss," said registered dietitian Karen Congro, director of the Wellness for Life Program at The Brooklyn Hospital Center in New York City. What often makes the difference in whether or not a diet is successful, she said, is whether or not there's a counseling and support component to the plan.

And, she said, these studies show that you don't necessarily need to get to your "ideal body weight" to make substantial improvements to your health. Losing 5 percent to 10 percent of your body weight can make positive changes in blood pressure, cholesterol and glucose control.

"If it can make you a healthier person, then a diet is a success," said Congro.

For advice on selecting a weight-loss plan, visit the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story does a pretty good job of explaining the basic study design and what changes the researchers observed in the two groups. However, it could have done more to tell us about the diets that produced these changes. The major problem with most diet plans is that people can’t stick with them over time. The story provides no information regarding how many people dropped out of the study in each group, which would be an important measure of how easy these diets are to follow for the typical consumer. In addition, the story states that participants were "assigned" to a low-carb or low-fat diet, but says next to nothing about what participants actually ate during the study.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Dr. Mozaffarian agreed that, because the evidence is based on observational studies and clinical trial data, it is not definitive, but he added, “It’s the best evidence we have.” As for the study’s finding that total mortality could be cut by 17 percent, he said, “While one can argue over the precise size of benefits, even if the benefit is only one-half or one-quarter as large, it still greatly outweighs the risk.”

The report from the Institute of Medicine tells the government that much more research is needed. Dr. Malden C. Nesheim, chairman of the institute’s committee and a provost emeritus at Cornell, said, “We are quite cautious because the studies we looked at are not controlled for all the variables, and we can’t distinguish between the effects from omega-3’s or replacement of other foods in the diet.”

The National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration had requested the institute’s report because it said consumers were confused about how much and what kind of fish they should eat. The two studies, which conflict in important aspects, seem unlikely to provide much clarity. “The high degree of certainty in one report and the extreme caution in the other,” said Rebecca Goldberg, a senior scientist with Environmental Defense, an advocacy group, “will make people more confused than ever.”

To the surprise of Institute of Medicine officials, NOAA sponsored the hastily called press conference at which the Harvard report was released, even though that study conflicted with the one prepared by the institute. “We’re just trying to make consumers feel good,” said William T. Hogarth, assistant administrator for fisheries of the National Marine Fisheries Service, part of NOAA.

Both reports have come under criticism from environmental groups and from the Consumers Union. “In addition to being concerned about the failure of the JAMA and I.O.M. reports to address the risks of mercury in tuna,” said the consumer organization, “we are also concerned that both reports dismiss concerns about PCB’s in most fish.”

“These reports are urging Americans to eat more seafood as if it were a crisis,” Dr. Goldberg said. “According to NOAA’s own statistics, per capita consumption of seafood has risen from 14.8 pounds in 2001 to 16.6 pounds in 2004.”

Jane Houlihan, the research director of the Environmental Working Group, another advocacy group, said, “The Harvard study reads like an advertisement for the seafood industry.”

Both studies reinforce advice from the Food and Drug Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency in 2004, to eat about six ounces of fish a week, preferably high in omega-3’s, with a caveat for women of childbearing age and children under 12 not to eat swordfish, shark, tile fish or king mackerel and to limit their intake of albacore (white meat) tuna to six ounces a week to avoid mercury. For those who eat more fish, both reports advise eating a variety of species to reduce the level of contaminants.

“Once again pregnant women are being told it’s O.K. to eat tuna,” Ms. Houlihan said. “The reality is, 90 percent of women would exceed government’s level for a safe dose of mercury if they ate six ounces of albacore tuna every week as the F.D.A., E.P.A and now I.O.M. recommend.”

Dr. Nestle finds the situation so confusing “no rational person can possibly figure out how to make sense of it,” she said. “Fortunately, Environmental Defense and Monterey Bay Aquarium, who specialize in both health and environmental fish issues, provide advisory cards for choosing fish, and no one can manage this without one.”

The Environmental Defense list is at oceansalive.org and the Monterey Bay Aquarium’s is at mbayaq.org/cr/seafoodwatch.asp.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story explains briefly and accurately the quality of evidence to support the claims of cardioprotection (a mix of controlled trials and observational studies), and in so doing illustrates why it is so difficult to draw definitive conclusions about the health effects of fish consumption.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Jan. 2, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A small study suggests that deep brain stimulation, which is currently being investigated as a treatment for general depression, may also help patients with bipolar disorder.

There are some caveats. The surgery necessary to allow deep brain stimulation is extremely expensive. And for now, the research is preliminary, so it's too early to know for sure if the treatment is appropriate to be used for any kind of depression.

Still, the study suggests that brain stimulation "not only just helps patients who haven't been able to recover from depression, but it seems to be associated with the absence of relapses. They're not only getting better, they're staying better," said study co-author Dr. Helen Mayberg, a professor in both the departments of psychiatry and behavioral sciences, and neurology, at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta.

In deep brain stimulation, surgeons insert wires into the brain that allows a specific region to be continuously hit with an electronic pulse. The level of stimulation is controlled by a pacemaker-like device implanted in the chest.

Deep brain stimulation has been around for more than 20 years, Mayberg said, and is commonly used to treat Parkinson's disease. The cost of the surgery is about $50,000, she said.

Previous research by Mayberg and others suggested that deep brain stimulation had potential as a treatment for depression. The St. Jude Medical Neuromodulation company, which has provided consulting fees to Mayberg and some of the other study authors, is currently recruiting patients for a study that could pave the way for its approval as a treatment for depression, Mayberg said.

The new study, which appears online Jan. 2 in the Archives of General Psychiatry, began with 10 patients with depression and seven with bipolar disorder -- a condition that causes severe mood swings and is also known as manic depression. They all received deep brain stimulation for 24 weeks after going through four weeks either with or without stimulation.

Most of the patients continued to receive the treatment over two years, although researchers temporarily turned it off in three of them as part of the study before realizing that doing so caused their depression to return.

The researchers found that 18 percent of patients went into remission after 24 weeks, 36 percent (of 14 patients) after one year. After two years, of the 12 patients still in the study, seven patients (58 percent) were in remission.

"The number of patients who got better increased over time, but it's not quite clear as to why," Mayberg said. The workings of deep brain stimulation as a whole are a mystery, although Mayberg said it may work by changing the brain's rhythms.

Dr. Samuel James Collier, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Austin, predicted that even if deep brain stimulation turns out to be an effective treatment for depression, it'll be far from the first line of defense.

"Medications and ECT -- electroconvulsive therapy -- are clearly safer, better tolerated, and do not embody a large surgical risk," Collier said. "I can't think of a scenario where deep brain stimulation would be considered even remotely before medications and ECT were exhausted."

Still, he said, it's important to note that "we seem to be making progress and hopefully those who are suffering the most can find solace in that and not give up hope."

For now, research continues. If patients are interested in deep brain stimulation treatment, they should try to get into the study that's ongoing, Mayberg said.

For more about deep brain stimulation, visit the U.S. National Library of Medicine.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story cautiously explains the evidence and the reasons for the optimism around the evidence. It shows that the study is in a very small group of people — just 17. But it also shows that the study followed them for two years.
However, while providing some of the important caveats, it fails to note that there were no control subjects.  While the results may appear encouraging, they are by no means definitive without a control group.
Nonetheless, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this one.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Bottom Line: For adults coming to the emergency department for arm or leg pain due to sprain, strain, or fracture, there was no difference in pain reduction after 2 hours with ibuprofen-acetaminophen vs three comparison opioid-acetaminophen (paracetamol) combinations.

Why The Research Is Interesting: The United States is facing an opioid epidemic with almost 500,000 individuals dying from opioid overdoses since 2000. Despite the epidemic, opioid analgesics remain a first-line treatment for moderate to severe acute pain in the emergency department. The combination of ibuprofen and acetaminophen may represent an effective non-opioid alternative.

Who: 416 patients (ages 21 to 64 years) with moderate to severe acute extremity pain in two urban emergency departments were randomly assigned to receive

What (Study Measures): The between-group difference in decline in pain two hours after taking the study drugs.

How (Study Design): This was a randomized clinical trial (RCT). Randomized trials allow for the strongest inferences to be made about the true effect of an intervention such as a medication or a procedure. However, not all RCT results can be replicated because patient characteristics or other variables in real-world settings may differ from those that were studied in the RCT.

Authors: Andrew K. Chang, M.D., M.S., of Albany Medical College, Albany, New York, and coauthors

Results: After 2 hours pain was less in all participants, without any important difference in effect between the four groups.

Study Limitations: The results apply only to pain after two hours. About 1 in 5 patients required additional medication to control their pain.

Study Conclusions: There were no important differences in pain reduction after 2 hours with ibuprofen-acetaminophen or opioid-acetaminophen combination pills in emergency department patients with acute extremity pain. The findings suggest that ibuprofen-acetaminophen is a reasonable alternative to opioid management of acute extremity pain due to sprain, strain, or fracture, but further research to assess longer-term effect, adverse events and dosing is warranted.

The following related elements also are available on the For The Media website:

The editorial, "Opioid vs Nonopioid Acute Pain Management in the Emergency Department," by Demetrios N. Kyriacou, M.D., Ph.D., Senior Editor, JAMA, Chicago; Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago.

For more details and to read the full study, please visit the For The Media website.

Editor's Note: Please see the article for additional information, including other authors, author contributions and affiliations, financial disclosures, funding and support, etc.

Want to embed a link to this study in your story?: Link will be live at the embargo time http://jamanetwork.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release does a pretty good job of describing the study and explaining the strengths (and weaknesses) of randomized clinical trials like this one. It would have been a little stronger if it had explained how pain was measured. The one error we’ll point out is that the release refers to the study population as consisting of 416 patients. The paper makes clear that five of those patients were excluded from the analysis because they had already taken analgesics before treatment at the emergency room, meaning that the relevant study population was actually 411 patients. It’s an easy mistake to make, but it’s a mistake.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, June 28, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A new drug for type 2 diabetes causes significantly less weight gain and may carry lower risks for hypoglycemia (low blood sugar), heart attack and stroke than standard medications, a new study indicates.

Researchers in Germany noted that the new drug, linagliptin (Tradjenta), is intended for use in patients that do not fare well with metformin, the most common first-line drug used to treat the disease.

Patients with type 2 diabetes may stop responding to metformin over time. Others who do not respond to metformin alone are given a second drug to help them maintain normal blood sugar levels. The researchers noted that which drug they should be prescribed is unclear.

The researchers pointed out that most patients are prescribed a class of drugs called sulphonylureas to supplement metformin. However, these drugs can sometimes lead to hypoglycemia and weight gain, which increases the patients' risk for heart attack and stroke.

To compare the effects of linagliptin to glimepiride (the most commonly used sulphonylurea), the researchers conducted a double-blind study over the course of two years. The study, which was funded by linagliptin's maker, Boehringer Ingelheim, involved 1,500 people from 16 countries with type 2 diabetes. None of the patients had responded to metformin alone.

Although the effectiveness of the drugs were similar, the study showed the side effects of linagliptin were much less severe than those of glimepiride. The researchers found that 7 percent of patients on linagliptin experienced hypoglycemia, compared to 38 percent of patients treated with glimepiride.

The patients on linagliptin also had fewer heart attacks and strokes compared to those being treated with glimepiride.

The researchers argued that since linagliptin allows the body to increase the amount of insulin it produces in a glucose-dependent way, the risk for hypoglycemia may be significantly lower.

And since hypoglycemia "can have substantial negative clinical consequences" in terms of risk for death, illness, mental function and poor quality of life, preventing it is crucial, study co-author Baptist Gallwitz, of Tubingen University Hospital, said in a news release.

The study authors pointed out linagliptin was licensed in 2011 and this is the first long-term study examining its safety and effectiveness. They added more research is needed to confirm their findings.

One expert said patients and doctors may still have to balance the superiority of linagliptin against its higher cost in comparison to older drugs.

The new study provides more evidence that drugs like linagliptin "are just as good as the old standby sulfonylurea therapies, with the added benefits of inducing fewer hypoglycemic events, causing less weight gain, along with a likely decrease in cardiovascular events," said Dr. Stuart Weiss, an endocrinologist at NYU Langone Medical Center and clinical assistant professor at the NYU School of Medicine, New York City.

But millions of Americans suffer from type 2 diabetes, so "cost issues favoring sulfonylureas may be the only reason for preferring continued sulfonylurea use," he added. The results of a larger, ongoing study currently underway may help resolve the issue of whether the newer drug is worth the extra money, Weiss said.

The study was published online June 27 in The Lancet.

The American Diabetes Association provides more information on type 2 diabetes.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: There’s a good description of the basic components of the study’s design. “To compare the effects of linagliptin to glimepiride (the most commonly used sulphonylurea), the researchers conducted a double-blind study over the course of two years. The study, which was funded by linagliptin’s maker, Boehringer Ingelheim, involved 1,500 people from 16 countries with type 2 diabetes. None of the patients had responded to metformin alone.”
In addition, this study is longer than most prior studies in this area which have only been over the course of 3-6 month rather than 2 full years, and therefore provides better evidence, over a longer timeframe, than prior work.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Feb. 1, 2010 -- Twelve weeks of fish oil pills made teens at high risk of psychosis much less likely to become psychotic for at least one year.

The finding comes from a placebo-controlled clinical trial that enrolled 81 young people -- average age 16 -- teetering on the brink of psychosis.

A year after entering the study, 11 of the 40 teens treated only with placebo pills developed a psychotic disorder. This happened to only two of 41 teens who began the year with 12 weeks of fish oil capsules rich in omega-3 fatty acids.

No other intervention, including psychiatric drugs, has achieved as much for so long after treatment stopped. Moreover, antipsychotic drugs tend to have serious side effects, including weight gain and sexual dysfunction. Fish oil pills have no serious side effects.

The study suggests that to prevent one case of psychosis, four high-risk young people must be treated. That's the same level of efficacy seen with antipsychotic medications, note study researcher G. Paul Amminger, MD, of the University of Vienna, Austria, and colleagues.

"The finding that treatment with a natural substance may prevent or at least delay the onset of psychotic disorder gives hope that there may be alternatives to antipsychotics for the prodromal phase [symptoms leading up to psychosis onset]," Amminger and colleagues suggest.

Earlier studies have suggested that omega-3 fatty acids can alleviate clinical depression and other psychiatric disorders, although there have been mixed results.

It's not clear whether the fish oil pills help people with established psychosis. Despite having worrisome symptoms, none of the teens in the Amminger study had ever had a full-blown psychosis.

It's also not clear how fish oil might prevent psychiatric disorders.

Amminger and colleagues note that people with schizophrenia tend to have low levels of omega-3 fatty acids, suggesting that the mental illness could be linked to a defect in the ability to process fatty acids. There's also evidence that fatty acids interact with chemical signaling in the brain.

Particularly relevant to the Amminger findings is the suggestion that omega-3 fatty acids protect brain cells from oxidative stress.

Amminger and colleagues warn against over-interpretation of their findings. It may be that fish oil works better in young people with pre-psychotic conditions than in older people with more established psychiatric disorders. They do, however, strongly urge further research.

The study appears in the February issue of Archives of General Psychiatry.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story did a nice job describing the study methods, specifically pointing out that half the teens and young adults received a placebo pill and half received a fish oil pill. It also mentioned that the results of this small trial should be interpreted with caution and additional studies are needed to determine if the same results can be seen in people with established psychosis, as well as those who are older.   
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
TUESDAY, Aug. 31, 2010 (HealthDay News) -- Women who carry genetic mutations that boost their odds of breast and ovarian cancer can live longer and reduce their cancer risk by having preventive surgery, a new study suggests.

The surgery in question is drastic: removal of the breasts or ovaries before any signs of cancer have arisen.

However, "what our findings show is that women who choose to have these surgeries will reduce their risk of dying of breast or ovarian cancer by about 70 to 80 percent, which is pretty profound," said study senior author Dr. Timothy Rebbeck, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.

The findings are published in the Sept. 1 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

The 22-center trial, one of the largest of its kind, studied nearly 2,500 women who were found to have inherited mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes.

Women who carry these mutations have a lifetime risk of breast cancer of anywhere between 56 percent to 84 percent, according to the researchers, whereas the risk for ovarian cancer ranges from 36 percent to 63 percent for BRCA1 mutation carriers and 10 percent to 27 percent for BRCA2 mutation carriers. By contrast, the lifetime risk of breast cancer among women generally is about 12 percent, and for ovarian cancer, it's less than 2 percent.

Roughly half of the women in the study had undergone either mastectomies (surgery to remove their breasts) or salpingo-oophorectomies (surgery to remove the ovaries and fallopian tubes) between 1974 and 2008, in order to proactively lower their risk of cancer. The women were followed for an average of about 3.5 years.

During the follow-up period, no breast cancer events occurred in the women who underwent mastectomies, while 7 percent of the women in the group who didn't undergo surgery were diagnosed with breast cancer.

In addition, women who had their ovaries removed lowered their risk of ovarian and breast cancer, and also lived longer than women who didn't have the surgery. For example, over 6 years of follow-up, no ovarian cancer cases were seen among BRCA2 mutation carriers who underwent salpingo-oophorectomy, compared with 3 percent of carriers who did not undergo the procedure, the researchers report.

"One of the main messages of our study is that salpingo-oophorectomy should be part of any management plan for any woman who is found to have these genetic mutations," said Rebbeck. "There really isn't anything else that can reduce a woman's risk by this much."

"These findings really emphasize how important it is for all women with a family history of early breast or ovarian cancer to undergo genetic testing," said Dr. Virginia Kaklamani, co-author of an editorial that accompanied the study. "I see women all the time who get the genetic test only after they're diagnosed with cancer," said Kaklamani, who is director of translational breast cancer research at the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, in Chicago.

Kaklamani added that she hoped the findings would encourage more women to ask their primary care physicians whether they are candidates for genetic counseling.

"This is a very important study because it gives us more information in order to counsel women at risk," said Dr. Daniel Silver, assistant professor of medicine at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School. Silver added that women who are found to carry one of these genetic mutations face "a very complex set of considerations, so the more hard facts you can give them, the better."

According to Rebbeck, doctors usually recommend that women who test positive for the genes have their ovaries removed at around age 35, but are okay with putting it off until age 40 if they haven't finished having children. He said the surgery today is often done in an outpatient setting, with the use of laparoscopes, which limits scarring and shortens a patient's recovery time.

Find out more about the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes at the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: 1clip_filelist.xml" rel="File-List"/>



The story does not make clear that this study was observational and not a randomized controlled trial comparing the treatment options available to the participants. Nevertheless, because the study behind this story is a large, high-quality research endeavor, we’ll give the story the benefit of the doubt on this criterion.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Newswise — Boston, Mass – Physicians at Massachusetts Eye and Ear have, for the first time, induced a sense of smell in humans by using electrodes in the nose to stimulate nerves in the olfactory bulb, a structure in the brain where smell information from the nose is processed and sent to deeper regions of brain. Reporting online today in International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology, the research team describes their results, which provide a proof of concept for efforts to develop implant technology to return the sense of smell to those who have lost it.

“Our work shows that smell restoration technology is an idea worth studying further,” said corresponding author Eric Holbrook, MD, Chief of Rhinology at Mass. Eye and Ear and associate professor of otolaryngology at Harvard Medical School. “The development of cochlear implants, for example, didn’t really accelerate until someone placed an electrode in the cochlea of a patient and found that the patient heard a frequency of some type.”

Smell loss, or anosmia, has an estimated prevalence of 5 percent of the general population. While some cases of anosmia may be treated by caring for an underlying cause (often nasal obstruction, in which odors can’t reach the nerves of the olfactory system due to swelling, polyps or sinus disease), other cases involving damage to the sensory nerves of the nose (i.e. head injury, viruses and aging) are much more complex. There are currently no proven therapies for these cases.

Our sense of smell not only contributes to our enjoyment of life, but also to our daily safety and well being. We rely on our sense of smell to make us aware of smoke in detecting a fire, natural gas leaks and to avoid eating rotten food. In the elderly, of whom there are estimates that greater than 50 percent of the population over the age of 65 has experienced smell loss, it can be difficult to get proper nutrition, as the sensation of flavor is closely tied to the sense of smell, and as flavor diminishes, appetite decreases in this population.

A Cochlear Implant for the Nose

Motivated by work conducted by research colleagues at Virginia Commonwealth University’s School of Medicine, Mass. Eye and Ear physicians wanted to address the question of whether electrical stimulation of the olfactory bulb could induce the sense of smell in human subjects.

The findings described in the International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology report demonstrate this feasibility. In the report, the researchers describe endoscopic procedures to position electrodes in the sinus cavities of five patients with an intact ability to smell. Three patients described sensations of smell (including reports of onions, antiseptic, sour and fruity aromas) as a result of the stimulation.

This breakthrough in human patients opens the door for a “cochlear implant for the nose” to be developed — though the study authors caution that the concept of an olfactory stimulator is more challenging than existing technologies. The most successful neuroprosthesic device in the world, cochlear implants have been on the market for more than three decades to electrically stimulate the auditory nerve to restore hearing in people with profound hearing loss.

“There’s currently so little that we can do for these patients, and we hope to eventually be able to reestablish smell in people who don’t have a sense of smell,” Dr. Holbrook said. “Now we know that electrical impulses to the olfactory bulb can provide a sense of smell — and that’s encouraging.”

In addition to Dr. Holbrook, authors on the International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology study include co-first author Sidharth V. Puram, MD, PhD, of Washington University School of Medicine, Reiner B. See, MD, and Aaron G. Tripp, of Massachusetts General Hospital, and Dinesh G. Nair, MD, of Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

About Massachusetts Eye and Ear 

Massachusetts Eye and Ear, founded in 1824, is an international center for treatment and research and a teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School. A member of Partners HealthCare, Mass. Eye and Ear specializes in ophthalmology (eye care) and otolaryngology–head and neck surgery (ear, nose and throat care). Mass. Eye and Ear clinicians provide care ranging from the routine to the very complex. Also home to the world’s largest community of hearing and vision researchers, Mass. Eye and Ear has pioneered new treatments for blindness, deafness and diseases of the head and neck. Our scientists are driven by a mission to discover the basic biology underlying these conditions and to develop new treatments and cures. In the 2018-2019 "Best Hospitals Survey," U.S. News & World Report ranked Mass. Eye and Ear #4 in the nation for eye care and #6 for ear, nose and throat care. For more information about life-changing care and research at Mass. Eye and Ear, please visit our blog, Focus, and follow us on Twitter and Facebook.
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The release notes the small sample size (five people), that all five participants had an intact sense of smell, and that only three of the people reported sensations of smell stemming from the electrode stimulation. That’s enough to earn it a satisfactory rating here. However, as noted above, it fails to answer what would appear to be a threshold question. If the work is held up as a proof of concept meriting additional research for the potential development of a prosthetic sense of smell; AND the proof of concept was done by using electrodes on nerves in a person’s nose; AND all of the volunteers in the proof-of-concept study had healthy nerves in their nose; BUT the people any prosthetic could be used on are people with nerve damage; then what, if anything, does this study tell us? Would the proof of concept even work in patients whose anosmia is caused by nerve damage? That seems like a fundamental question that needs to be answered before even exploring the feasibility of developing relevant technology, and it’s not addressed here.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
Thyroid hormones administered to female rats with high blood pressure led to encouraging cardiac improvements, according to a study in the American Journal of Physiology led by NYIT College of Osteopathic Medicine researcher Martin Gerdes.

In the study entitled "Long-term physiological T3 supplementation in hypertensive heart disease in rats," aging female rats with hypertension progressing to heart failure were treated for one year (half their lifetime) with a low oral dose of the active form of thyroid hormone, T3. While their high blood pressure was not affected, cardiac health improved.

High blood pressure is a major contributor to a form of heart failure that affects the way heart relaxes between contractions. About half of the human patients with heart failure suffer from this particular condition, known as diastolic heart failure. The majority of those patients are elderly women with high blood pressure. Importantly, there are currently no effective treatments for diastolic heart failure.

"This low dose of thyroid hormone safely restored depressed cardiac tissue T3 levels to normal while largely preventing the accumulation of collagen, or scar tissue, resulting from sustained high blood pressure," said Gerdes. "Thus, T3 treatment inhibited the major cause of stiffening of the heart in hypertension. The rats experienced overall improvement in contractile proteins and heart function too."

Gerdes has published 32 animal studies showing a link between improvements in thyroid hormone levels and heart health in rats and mice.

"The challenge now is to determine if humans benefit the same way," said Gerdes. "If we can improve heart disease outcomes in patients by restoring normal thyroid function in the heart, we could save lives along with billions of dollars in health care expenses."

In 2014, a study in Molecular Medicine showed that administering low doses of a thyroid hormone to rats with diabetes helped restore hormone levels in their hearts and prevented deterioration of heart function, adverse gene changes, and pathology. Earlier, a study in the Journal of Cardiac Failure found that thyroid hormone replacement therapy in rats significantly reduced the incidence of atrial fibrillation. A 2013 study in The Journal of Translational Medicine showed thyroid hormone treatment administered to rats at the time of a heart attack led to a significant reduction in the loss of heart muscle cells and improvement in heart function.

Gerdes has long argued that medical opinion on thyroid treatment for patients with heart disease is largely shaped by outdated studies that used toxic doses of thyroid hormones.

"What we have tried to do here is show the effect of safe doses of thyroid hormones and we're seeing amazing results in multiple studies, with dramatic improvements in heart function, gene expression, and collagen levels, just by restoring depressed thyroid levels in the heart," said Gerdes. "The studies demonstrate that we should be able to implement a similar, safe treatment and monitoring program for use in human clinical trials. The experts once warned that Beta blockers were too dangerous to use in heart failure patients. But, they were proven to be wrong and these life-saving drugs are now standard therapy for heart failure treatment. I predict the same will eventually be true for thyroid hormones in a large subpopulation of cardiac patients. We are simply talking about restoring normal thyroid hormone balance in heart disease, not over-stimulating the heart."
QUESTION: Does the news release seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: First, let’s give kudos to the release for clearly stating in the headline and lead sentence that this was an animal study. News releases almost never take that simple step to clarify what kind of evidence we’re talking about. So that alone merits a Satisfactory rating here.
Of course, we can quibble with the release’s description of the study. It tells readers “aging female rats with hypertension progressing to heart failure were treated for one year (half their lifetime) with a low oral dose of the active form of thyroid hormone, T3.” But how large was the study? Did they examine 3 rats? 30? 300? Was there a control group? Did the researchers vary dosage across the experimental group? What is a “low” dose?
But this is a minor concern in the description of a study about rats.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
(Reuters Health) - - People were less likely to go to the hospital with heart attacks or strokes after several counties in New York State restricted the use of trans fats, according to a new study.

Trans fats raise bad cholesterol, lower good cholesterol and ultimately increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes. They’re found naturally in some foods but are often manufactured and added to processed foods to improve taste and texture.

“New York City was progressive and they enacted restrictions on trans fats, but no one looked to see if this made measurable changes to outcomes,” said study lead author Dr. Eric Brandt, of Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut.

New York City limited the use of trans fats starting in July 2007. The restrictions applied to food purchased outside of stores, such as at restaurants, street vendors and bakeries, in the city’s five counties. Other New York counties took similar actions after New York City’s measure was enacted.

Previous research found that death from cardiovascular disease declined 4.5 percent within a year after counties enacted trans fat restrictions, the researchers write in JAMA Cardiology. No study looked at non-fatal cardiovascular issues like hospitalizations due to heart attacks and strokes, however.

For the new study, the researchers compared data on people hospitalized between 2002 and 2013 for heart attacks or strokes in counties that did or didn’t restrict trans fats.

Altogether they had data on 3.3 million people in 25 counties without trans fat restrictions and 8.4 million people in 11 counties with restrictions.

In 2006, there were 753 hospital admissions for heart attack or stroke per 100,000 people in counties that never enacted restrictions compared to 726 per 100,000 people in counties that put restrictions in place.

While admissions for heart attacks and strokes fell after 2002 in all the counties, the drop was more substantial in those that enacted trans fat restrictions, the authors found.

After three years or more, the combined rate of hospitalizations for heart attacks or strokes was about 6 percent lower in the counties with trans fat regulations.

Admissions for heart attacks were nearly 8 percent lower in counties with restrictions. Similarly, admissions for strokes were about 4 percent lower in counties with restrictions, but that finding could be due to chance.

Brandt told Reuters Health that New York City was also pushing other public health initiatives around the same time. Those included clean air initiatives and showing calorie counts on restaurant menus.

When they removed New York City data to make sure those other factors weren’t driving the findings, the pattern didn’t change.

“We still found the same thing,” Brandt said.

Still, the study can’t say the trans fat restrictions caused fewer admissions in those counties.

Brandt and colleagues write that in 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) removed manufactured trans fats from its list of safe food additives. By 2018, those fats will be nearly eliminated from American diets, they add.

“There has been a lot of looking into whether trans fats are harmful,” said Brandt. “Here we find on a population level when we restrict them, it benefits society by reducing heart attacks and strokes.”

The findings suggest the FDA’s action will lead to health benefits across the country, he added.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story gives the basics on the study design, and lets readers know that the study couldn’t provide a definitive cause-and-effect relationship between a trans fat ban and fewer hospitalizations. We’re also told that other public health efforts could have contributed, such as clean air initiatives and citywide calorie counts on menus.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
THURSDAY, July 20, 2017 (HealthDay News) -- A laser treatment can reduce spots in people's vision known as "floaters," a new study finds.

"Floaters often arise as the vitreous -- a gel-like substance that fills the eye -- contracts and pulls away from the back of the eye," explained ophthalmologist Dr. Naomi Goldberg, who reviewed the new research. She works at the Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital in New York City.

Floaters become more common with age, and although some people simply get used to them, others are bothered by them or their vision is impaired.

The new research was led by Dr. Chirag Shah and Dr. Jeffrey Heier of Ophthalmic Consultants of Boston. They explained that, currently, there are three management options for floaters: patient education and observation; surgery; and a laser procedure known as YAG vitreolysis.

However, Shah and Heier said there are few published studies on the laser treatment's effectiveness in treating floaters.

The new study involved 52 patients with floaters who received one session of either the YAG laser treatment or a "sham" placebo laser treatment.

Six months after treatment, 54 percent of patients in the YAG group reported significantly greater improvement in floater-related visual disturbances, compared with only 9 percent of those in the placebo group.

Nineteen patients (53 percent) in the YAG group reported significantly or completely improved symptoms, compared with none of the patients in the placebo group, the researchers added.

The patients in the YAG group also had improvements in several other measures, including general vision and independence, compared with those in the placebo group, the findings showed.

There were no differences between the two groups in harmful side effects, according to the study, which was published July 20 in JAMA Ophthalmology.

A limitation of the study was its small size and short follow-up period, the researchers said. "Greater confidence in these outcomes may result from larger confirmatory studies of longer duration," the study authors wrote.

For her part, Goldberg said that although "there was significant improvement in patients' symptoms following treatment, and no significant complication was seen," these findings are early and "it is difficult to predict the long-term safety of this laser procedure."

The U.S. National Eye Institute has more on eye floaters.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story explains that this was a randomized clinical trial at a single research center that compared a group of patients receiving the actual laser treatments against a smaller group receiving a “sham” treatment, or placebo. The story goes farther by saying that it was a small study — only 52 patients — and a short follow-up of only six months.  It also adds that, “”Greater confidence in these outcomes may result from larger confirmatory studies of longer duration,” the study authors wrote.”
This is a strong point of the story.
<|endoftext|>
<|startoftext|>
MONDAY, Oct. 15, 2012 (HealthDay News) -- A prescription medication originally developed to treat epilepsy may help obese adults shed weight when combined with routine nutritional counseling, researchers say.

Patients who took 400 milligrams of the anti-seizure drug zonisamide daily for a year lost nearly 7.5 pounds more on average than those assigned to dietaryand lifestyle changes alone, the new study found. But they also suffered more side effects than patients not taking the medication.

"The question was to see if more weight loss could be achieved if we provided decent quality lifestyle intervention, mostly dietary counseling, along with this medication," said study lead author Dr. Kishore Gadde, director of the Obesity Clinical Trials Program at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C.

"And the answer was yes," Gadde said.

The research, funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health, appears online Oct. 15 in the journal Archives of Internal Medicine.

For obese men and women who can't control their weight through diet and lifestyle changes, nonsurgical options are limited, the study authors noted. Just a few prescription medications are approved in the United States for long-term treatment of obesity, including orlistat (brand name Xenical) and lorcaserin hydrochloride (Belviq).

Gadde and colleagues set out to follow up on a 16-week investigation they conducted in 2003 that had indicated that zonisamide (Zonegran) at a dosage of 400 milligrams a day might offer an alternative.

Between 2006 and 2011 the study team randomly assigned more than 200 obese men and women to one of three groups. One group took 200 milligrams of zonisamide daily, another got 400 mg of zonisamide daily and one received a dummy pill. The participants' average age was 43, and their average body-mass index (BMI) was nearly 38. BMI is a calculation of body fat based on height and weight, and a BMI of more than 30 is considered obese. None had diabetes.

All study participants followed their treatment plan for one year. During this time, they all also received monthly individualized nutritional counseling, which Gadde described as "not intensive," to help them reduce their overall caloric intake.

Those on the higher-dose zonisamide protocol fared the best in terms of overall weight loss, while the lower-dose regimen was not much more effective than the placebo.

Although nearly 55 percent of those on the higher-dose medication shed 5 percent or more of their pre-study weight, that figure was 34 percent among the lower-dose group and 31 percent among the non-medication participants.

But patients in both drug groups faced a higher risk for side effects, including diarrhea, headache, fatigue, nausea/vomiting, concentration and memory difficulties, anxiety, and depression-related symptoms.

The authors said such side effects were typically "mild." They concluded that the higher-dose zonisamide showed promise as a weight-loss aid, but advised clinicians to carefully weigh the pros and cons on a patient-by-patient basis.

"There's no medicine that is a panacea for obesity," cautioned Gadde. "The important thing to keep in mind is that although we diagnose obesity on the basis of a mathematical formula -- a BMI of 30 and up -- the basis for obesity may differ from one individual to another."

Psychological factors or lifestyle factors may play a role, he said. "But for about a third [of patients], biological issues are at play, such as not easily experiencing satiety signals from the gut to the brain, which senses what your energy intake has been," he said. "And for those people, medication can help."

Lona Sandon, a registered dietitian and assistant professor of clinical nutrition at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, agreed.

Caution is vital when using any drug that has been approved for one condition for another, Sandon said.

"But for many people, this kind of drug might absolutely be of great help, by doing something that helps the regulation of these appetite hormones and the regulatory pathway," she said.

For more on obesity, visit the U.S. National Institutes of Health.
QUESTION: Does the story seem to grasp the quality of the evidence? 
EXPLANATION: The story provided good detail on the study methods. Here’s one example, “Between 2006 and 2011 the study team randomly assigned more than 200 obese men and women to one of three groups. One group took 200 milligrams of zonisamide daily, another got 400 mg of zonisamide daily and one received a dummy pill. The participants’ average age was 43, and their average body-mass index (BMI) was nearly 38. BMI is a calculation of body fat based on height and weight, and a BMI of more than 30 is considered obese. None had diabetes.” We would have liked to have seen some critical analysis about any possible limitations for a study like this. For example, even the researchers explained:
“A notable limitation of this trial is that most patients did not have significant weight-related comorbidities. At baseline, patients had normal blood pressure, lipid levels, and glycemic measures. Reduction in risks associated with obesity is most demonstrable when patients with risk factors are enrolled. This is a consideration for future investigation.”
<|endoftext|>
